X???1
CHAPTER XII: LAND DEVELOPMENT AND USE
Article
1. CONSTRUCTION HOURS AND PERMITS
2. INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE WITH APPENDICES
(2012 EDITION)
3. NATURAL PRESERVE
4. PRIVATE ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE
5. STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE ADMINISTRATION
AND ENFORCEMENT
6. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
7. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???2
X???3
ARTICLE 1: CONSTRUCTION HOURS AND PERMITS
State Law Reference: Public Act 359 of 1947, as amended.
XII-1.00. Working hours.
No person shall cause, permit or engage in the erection, construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any road, highway, utility line, building or structure or the excavating or filling of land or the changing of the topography of any premises in the Charter Township of Plymouth between sunset of one day and sunrise of the next succeeding day; provided, however, that repairs to any road, highway, utility line, building, structure or land reasonably necessary to the same for the protection of the public health and safety against a clear and present danger may be conducted or occur at any hours.
XII-1.01. Exceptions.
Upon application in the form and payment of the fee as the Township Board may determine by resolution from time to time, a person may petition the Township Board for an exception to the otherwise applicable restrictions of this ordinance. Upon review of the application, the Township Board may grant an exception permit which shall specify the location of the work to be performed, the nature of the permitted work and the hours and dates of the permitted work. The Township Board shall grant the exception permit only after giving due consideration to the location, nature of work and requested hours and days of work in relationship to the surrounding land uses and occupations of land, so as not to adversely affect by noise, light, vibration or smell such neighboring property and the users thereof, and to the ability of the performance of the work in a reasonable and orderly manner without such exception be granted.
XII-1.02. Owner defined.
An “owner” of property for purposes of this ordinance shall be prima facie evidence that the person, whether natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, governmental entity or corporation, set forth as the owner on the current tax rolls of the Charter Township of Plymouth, as certified by the Township Treasurer. A person exercising actual control over the use of any property, whether an owner, lessee, renter or possessor of property shall be as liable as the “owner” and subject to prosecution under this article.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???4
XII-1.03. Penalties.
Any person, firm, association, co-partnership, corporation or other entity, who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be penalized as provided in the General Provisions of the township code. Each day that the violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
XII-1.04. Appearance tickets.
A police officer, the Building Official of the Charter Township of Plymouth, or any inspector of the Department of Buildings and Code Enforcement, or the Code Enforcement Officer of the Charter Township of Plymouth, upon reasonable cause to believe an owner or a person has committed an offense under this article may issue and serve an appearance ticket upon such owner or person.
X???5
ARTICLE 2: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE WITH APPENDICES (2012 EDITION)
State Law Reference: Public Act 359 of 1947, as amended.
[Effective November 30, 2014 – Amendment 12 to Ordinance 1016]
XII-2.00. Code Adopted. The 2012 Edition of the International Fire Code with Appendices is adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the Charter Township of Plymouth for regulating the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the Charter Township of Plymouth subject to the following changes and additions:
XII-2.01. Changes in the Code. The following sections and subsections of the 2012 Edition of the International Fire Code are hereby amended or revised as set forth. Subsequent section numbers used in this Chapter shall refer to the like numbered sections of the 2012 Edition of the International Fire Code:
101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the Charter Township of Plymouth and are hereby referred to as such or as the “Code”.
109.3. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate used under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
111.4 . Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
XII-2.02. Notice; opportunity to correct.
If a violation of this Chapter is noted, a Code Enforcement Officer may notify the owner of record and/or the occupant of the property of the violation. Such notice shall specify the violation and may specify a time within which corrective action should be completed. This notice may be served personally or by mail. A notice of violation is not required prior to issuing a Uniform Law Citation charging the owner/occupant of the property with a violation of this Chapter.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???6
X???7
ARTICLE 3: NATURAL PRESERVE
State Law Reference: Public Act 359 of 1947, as amended, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended.
XII-3.00. Title of the ordinance.
This ordinance shall be known as the Natural Preserve Ordinance of the Charter Township of Plymouth.
XII-3.01. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Charter Township of Plymouth shall enforce the provisions of this ordinance and shall enforce all rules and regulations relating to any natural preserve within the Charter Township of Plymouth.
XII-3.02. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any duly adopted rule or regulation governing conduct in an area designated a natural preserve within the Charter Township of Plymouth.
XII-3.03. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall apply in all areas designated natural preserves within the Charter Township of Plymouth.
(A) Property:
(1) Trees, shrubbery, lawns.
(a) No person shall willfully damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark of any tree or plant, or attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant in an area designated a natural preserve;
(b) No person shall climb any tree, or walk, stand, or sit upon railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes within an area designated a natural preserve.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???8
(2) Wild animals, birds, etc.
(a) No person shall attempt to harm or injure, kill, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; no person shall remove or have in his or her possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any animal, reptile or bird in an area designated a natural preserve.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, or attempt to feed any animal or bird any known noxious substances in an area designated a natural preserve.
(B) Sanitation:
(1) Pollution of waters. It shall be unlawful to throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any area designated a natural preserve or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will result in the pollution of the waters.
(2) Refuse and trash. No person shall throw or deposit litter, refuse or trash in any area designated a natural preserve within the Charter Township of Plymouth except in public receptacles and in a manner that the refuse and trash will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the natural preserve or upon any street or public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all litter, refuse and trash shall be carried away from the natural preserve by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere in accordance with the laws of the Charter Township of Plymouth and the State of Michigan. No person shall dump, deposit or leave in any natural preserve any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash.
(C) Behavior:
(1) Domestic animals. No person shall allow a dog, horse or any other domestic animal to enter an area designated a natural preserve.
(2) Fires. Its shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire in an area designated a natural preserve. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper or other flammable material within any area designated a natural preserve.
(3) Vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or attempt to enter an area designated a natural preserve with a bicycle, motorcycle, car or any other vehicle.
XII-3.04. Procedure for designation as natural preserve.
The owner of property, the description of which falls within the definition of “natural preserve”, as set forth herein, may apply for natural preserve status in the following manner:
Natural Preserve
X???9
(A) (1) The property owner must impose building and use restrictions, reservations, covenants, obligations or conditions upon the land, specifying that they shall run with the land and be a burden on and benefit to the land in perpetuity.
(2) These building and use restrictions, reservations, covenants, obligations or conditions must be recorded with the Register of Deeds and be in a manner consistent with the natural preserve as set forth herein.
(3) The property owner must then submit a request to the Charter Township of Plymouth for approval by the Township Board of Trustees as a natural preserve.
(4) The Township Board of Trustees shall approve any request for a natural preserve designation if the subject property and building and use restrictions meet the requirements of this ordinance. Any denial of a request may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) “Natural preserve” shall be defined as an area that:
(1) Generally appears to be affected primarily by the forces of nature, with human imprint substantially unnoticeable;
(2) Is substantially without human habitation; and,
(3) Contains features of ecological, geographical, scientific, educational, scenic, or historical value.
XII-3.05. Natural preserve areas.
The following areas within the Charter Township of Plymouth have been accepted by the township as a natural preserve area:
(A) Miller Woods - The legal description is as follows:
Part of the Southwest 3 of Section 29, T. 1 S., R. 8 E., Plymouth Township, Wayne County, Michigan described as:
Commencing at the Southwest corner of said Section 29 running thence along the South line of said Section also being the centerline of Powell Road S. 89 degrees 58’ 30” E. 556.16 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING; thence N. 01 degrees 29’ 36” E. 559.29 feet; thence S. 89 degrees 36’ 43” E. 749.36 feet; thence 00 degrees 16’ 00” W. 593.68 feet; and thence N. 89 degrees 58’ 30” W. 762.20 feet along the South line of said Section 29 to the POINT OF BEGINNING. Containing 10.3 acres, more or less. Subject to the rights of the public in the Southerly 60 feet in Powell Road and subject to an easement over the Southerly 80 feet for the Michigan Bell Telephone Company.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???10
XII-3.06. Violation and penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this Code shall be punished as provided in the General Provisions of the code of ordinances of the Charter Township of Plymouth. Each day that the violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
X???11
ARTICLE 4: PRIVATE ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
State Law Reference: Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended.
XII-4.00. Purpose.
(A) It is the intent of this article to set minimum standards for the construction and maintenance of private roads in the Charter Township which are not intended, now or in the future, to be dedicated to the public; and to provide penalties for the violation hereof.
(B) The requirements of this article shall apply to those vehicular accessways which, by definition of this article, may be classified as private roads and may be required to obtain site plan approval under the Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance such as multiple family projects, cluster housing projects, etc., as well as private roads which may be created as a result of the division of lots and/or parcels.
XII-4.01. Definitions.
“Private Road”, for the purpose of this article only, shall mean a privately owned and maintained roadway providing access to more than one residence upon which persons other then the owners thereof may also travel and whereby public and private vehicles may be requested from time to time by the owners, to use the roadway to provide services such as fire protection, waste collection, common carrier delivery services and other public and private services which utilize heavy trucks.
XII-4.02. Construction standards - pavement, drainage and easement requirements.
(A) All private roads shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) standards specifications for construction.
(B) Pavement, drainage and easement requirements are as follows:
(1) If the private road services two to four residences one of the following minimum construction standards must be utilized.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???12
(a) An asphalt roadway of minimum width of 20 feet, with a minimum surface thickness of 1 ½” MDOT Mixture 36A and 1 ½” MDOT Mixture 13A, and laid on an eight-inch minimum thick base course, placed in two compacted four-inch layers of MDOT specification 22A or equivalent, as approved by the Township Engineer. Road drainage shall be obtained as described in Paragraph 1e below.
(b) A concrete roadway, consisting of Portland Cement Concrete, of minimum width of 20 feet, with six-inch plain concrete MDOT Grade P1 placed on prepared subgrade. Pavement jointing shall be according to Portland Cement Association’s recommendations.
(c) Full depth asphalt roadway, of minimum width of 20 feet, consisting of two inches MDOT Mixture 36A wearing course placed over two courses of three and one-half inches each, MDOT Mixture 13A placed over a prepared subgrade.
(d) Access roads with a fire hydrant must provide a minimum width of 26 feet along the entire length of the road for a distance of 20 feet on either side of the hydrant unless otherwise approved by the Township Board
(e) Notwithstanding the above construction standards, with the approval of the Township Board, the asphalt or concrete roadway may be a minimum of 16 feet with two foot load-bearing shoulders. Asphalt and concrete surfaces shall meet the above specifications (1a-c), and shoulders shall be constructed of gravel or an equivalent material capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds.
(f) Drainage for the above sections shall be provided by concrete curb and gutter, or shoulder and open ditch.
1. Concrete curb and gutter shall be MDOT detail C-4 with concrete mixture MDOT Grade P1.
2. Minimum grade shall be 0.50%, maximum grade 6.00%. Crown for all roads shall be 2.00%.
3. Shoulders shall be three feet wide by a minimum four inches thick MDOT 23A aggregate, on each side of road. Ditch section shall be seven feet wide with centerline of ditch no more than 20 inches below center line of road. Two foot load-bearing shoulders provided under the 16 foot pavement option (43.030.B.1.d) may be included as part of the above-required three foot shoulders for drainage.
(g) The above minimum specifications shall not be construed as a substitute for sufficient pavement thickness where traffic conditions and/or soil conditions require more substantial pavement designs. Design shall be according to the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards. Regardless of the material chosen, the design engineer shall furnish a complete design analysis of the pavement section chosen to confirm the adequacy of the design and to demonstrate that the design meets or exceeds the minimum requirements specified.
Private Road Construction and Maintenance
X???13
(h) The applicant must provide a layout plan of sufficient detail to show how each parcel shall be serviced by utilities: (i) the private easement for the roadway shall be a minimum of 60 feet wide in order to provide space for surface drainage, construction and maintenance of public utilities, including but not limited to water and sewer. However, easements shall be wider than 60 feet if necessary to comply with standards of the most recently adopted version of the International Fire Code and its Appendices, (ii) if public utilities are not required to occupy the easement, a minimum easement width of 30 feet is required; however, easements shall be wider than 30 feet if necessary to comply with standards of the most recently adopted version of the International Fire Code and its Appendices.
(2) If the private road services five or more residences, then the following minimum construction standards must be utilized:
(a) An asphalt roadway of minimum width of 26 feet, with a minimum surface thickness of 1 ½” MDOT Mixture 36A and 1 ½” MDOT Mixture 13A and laid on an eight inch minimum thick base course, placed in two compacted four inch layers of MDOT specification 22A or equivalent, as approved by the Township Engineer. Road drainage shall be obtained as described in subsection (e) below.
(b) A concrete roadway, consisting of Portland cement concrete, of minimum width of 26 feet, with six-inch plain concrete MDOT Grade P1 placed on prepared subgrade. Pavement jointing shall be according to Portland Cement Association’s recommendations.
(c) Full depth asphalt roadway, of minimum width of 26 feet, consisting of two inches MDOT Mixture 36A wearing course placed over two courses of three and one-half inches each, MDOT Mixture 13A placed over a prepared subgrade.
(d) Notwithstanding the above construction standards, with the approval of the Township Board, an asphalt or concrete roadway may be a minimum of 22 feet with two foot load-bearing shoulders. Asphalt and concrete surfaces shall meet the above specifications (subsections (2)(a)-(c)), and shoulders shall be constructed of gravel or an equivalent material capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds.
(e) Drainage for the above sections shall be provided by concrete curb and gutter, or shoulder and open ditch.
1. Concrete curb and gutter shall be MDOT detail C-4 with concrete mixture MDOT Grade P1.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???14
2. Minimum grade shall be 0.50 percent, maximum grade 6.00 percent. Crown for all roads shall be 2.00 percent.
3. Shoulders shall be three feet wide by a minimum four inches thick MDOT 23A aggregate, on each side of road. Ditch section shall be seven feet wide with centerline of ditch no more than 20 inches below center line of road. Two foot load-bearing shoulders provided with the 22-foot pavement option (Section XII-4.02(B)(2)(d)) may be included as part of the required three foot shoulders for drainage.
(f) These minimum standards are not to be construed as substitutes for good engineering design for private roads where traffic loads, horizontal alignment, vertical alignment, soil conditions, intersections and other site features warrant the use of roadway standards for state or county roads. The designs shall be prepared by a licensed engineer analyzing the conditions as listed above, but not limited to those above, to determine adequate pavement thickness, width and alignment. Regardless of the material chosen, the design engineer shall furnish a complete design analysis of the pavement section chosen to confirm the adequacy of the design and to demonstrate that the design meets or exceeds the minimum requirements specified.
(g) The private easement for the roadway shall be a minimum of 60 feet wide in order to provide space for construction and maintenance of public utilities, including but not limited to sewer and water. However, easements shall be wider than 60 feet, if necessary to comply with the standards of the most recently adopted version of the International Fire Code and Appendices.
(h) In case of multiple family, cluster housing, etc., a separate easement for private roadways may not be required. This aspect will be reviewed by the Township Engineer or consultant, as well as the Township Fire Chief, during the site plan review process and recommendations will be made to the Planning Commission. In all cases, access shall be provided as required by the most recently adopted version of the International Fire Code and Appendices.
(3) Site drainage. All pavement and adjacent properties shall be drained in a manner that conforms to the grading, drainage and surface standards of the Charter Township of Plymouth. Further, the drainage methods used shall be consistent with the Wayne County Storm Water Management Ordinance.
(4) Vertical clearance. The vertical clearance above all access roads shall be a minimum height of 13 feet and six inches and maintained as such.
(5) Design requirements. Including the standards above, all access roads shall meet the following requirements to be in compliance with the township fire code:
Private Road Construction and Maintenance
X???15
Length
Min. Pavement Width
Turnaround Required
0 - 150 ft.
20 ft.
None.
151 - 500 ft.
20 ft. unless a hydrant is present, the width shall be 26 ft. for a distance of 20 ft. on either side of the hydrant
Turnaround required from the following:
1. 120 ft. hammerhead;
2. Y turn; or
3. 96 ft. pavement diameter cul-de-sac
501 - 750 ft.
26 ft.
Turnaround required from the following:
4. 120 ft. hammerhead;
5. Y turn; or
6. 96 ft. pavement diameter cul-de-sac
Over 750 ft.
Special Approval Required
XII-4.03. Testing.
(A) The project owner/developer shall secure the services of an independent testing laboratory for the quality control testing for all backfill and earth work compaction density control and all sampling and testing of concrete, asphalt and aggregate.
(B) Before a certificate of occupancy (temporary or final) is issued for a project, owner/developer of the property must submit certified copies of all test results, plus a certification from a registered civil engineer certifying the following:
(1) All subgrades have proper compaction and have been established at proper design grade.
(2) All utilities within the road proper and/or within close proximity of the pavement area have been compacted to the specifications set forth by the project designer and also in accordance with Charter Township of Plymouth standards.
(3) All aggregate base courses are of specified materials, depth and compaction.
(4) All asphalt base courses have been installed at proper temperature, thickness and compaction.
(5) All asphalt surface courses have been applied at proper temperature, thickness and compaction.
(6) All concrete paving areas have been installed to proper thickness and all standard tests, such as slump and strength tests, have been run and are acceptable.
(7) All control joints and expansion joints, necessary and required, have been properly installed.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???16
XII-4.04. Maintenance standards; maintenance agreement.
(A) Maintenance of private roads including, but not limited to filling chuck holes, regarding, repaving, resurfacing and the removal of snow shall be the sole responsibility of abutting property owners.
(B) Owners or developers of property to be serviced by a private road shall execute an agreement to provide for the continued maintenance of the road which document shall be binding upon future owners of the property and shall be deemed an obligation running with the land. The document shall be provided prior to the land split forwarded to the county for recording. The obligation to provide the document shall be a condition of any land split approval.
XII-4.05. Maintenance obligation; maintenance by township; costs and expenses.
(A) Each owner of property to be serviced by a private road shall participate equally in the cost of maintenance.
(B) If the owners fail to properly maintain the road, the township has the right, but not the duty, to do so and may charge the owners for all costs and expenses incurred.
(C) Payment of the charges shall be due upon written demand by the township to the owners at the address set forth on the tax rolls.
(D) In addition to other methods of collection, the township shall have the right to place the assessment on the township tax roll and to collect the assessment in the same manner as any property tax or assessment.
XII-4.06. Site plan required.
If a private road will be required to service one or more parcels which are to be created by the division of land for building purposes, a site plan shall be required to be submitted in conjunction with the land split application. The site plan shall show, as a minimum, existing grades, proposed road grades, proposed house grades, yard setback lines, road location, road design (vertical, horizontal and cross section), soil conditions and any other data the township or its representative deems necessary to evaluate the proposal. No split or land division shall be approved until the above-referenced site plan is approved by the township or its representative.
Private Road Construction and Maintenance
X???17
XII-4.07. Time of construction.
No certificate of occupancy (temporary or final) shall be issued to any parcel which is served by a private road until the full road intended to service all parcels has been installed and approved.
XII-4.08. Street signs.
The abutting property owners served by the private road shall be responsible for installing and maintaining a street sign properly identifying the name of the private road and the fact that the road is private. All street signs shall be in accordance with the latest standards of Wayne County for size, type, materials, location and construction. All private street names shall be approved by the Township Fire Chief and Township Police Chief prior to installation of the sign.
XII-4.09. Scope.
The article shall be deemed to include and apply to all projects that have not received final approval as of the date of adoption of this ordinance.
XII-4.10. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in the General Provisions of the township code. Each day that the violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???18
X???19
ARTICLE 5: STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
State Law Reference: Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended.
XII-5.00. State Construction Code.
This ordinance shall be known as the Charter Township of Plymouth State Construction Code Administration and Enforcement Ordinance.
XII-5.01. Administration and Enforcement: State Construction Code.
Pursuant to Section 8b (M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b) of the State Construction Code, the Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Plymouth does hereby assume responsibility for administration and enforcement of the State Construction Code within the Charter Township of Plymouth.
XII-5.02. Enforcing Agency Designation; State Construction Code.
Pursuant to Section 8b(6) (M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6)) of the State Construction Code, the Building Official of the Charter Township of Plymouth is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Charter Township of Plymouth under the State Construction Code.
XII-5.03. Township Attorney: State Construction Code.
Pursuant to Section 8b(2) (M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(2)) of the State Construction Code, the Township Attorney, as the chief legal officer for the Charter Township of Plymouth, may issue complaints and warrants and prosecute for violations of the State Construction Code with the same power and authority as for prosecuting local ordinance violations.
XII-5.04. Code Enforcement Officer: State Construction Code.
Pursuant to Section 8b(11) (M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(11)) of the State Construction Code, the Charter Township of Plymouth Enforcement Officer, whose authorities and duties are established by Ordinance 91, is hereby authorized to investigate violations of the State Construction Code, serve notices of violation of the State Construction Code; serve appearance tickets or uniform law citations as authorized by state statute; appear in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of any code violations; prepare cases for prosecution for violations of the State Construction Code and other State
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???20
Construction Code enforcement duties as may be delegated by the above described enforcement agency/building official.
XII-5.05. Retention of Fines; State Construction Code.
The Charter Township of Plymouth elects to retain any fines imposed upon conviction for violation(s) of the State Construction Code upon prosecution of persons under this ordinance and Section 23(3) (M.C.L.A. § 125.1523(3)) of the State Construction Code.
XII-5.06. Violation and Penalty.
Unless otherwise provided, any person, corporation, partnership or any other legal entity who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
X???21
ARTICLE 6: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
State Law Reference: Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended (The Subdivision Control Act), Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended.
Section 1: General Provisions
XII-6.00. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Township Subdivision Regulations.”
XII-6.01. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the Charter Township of Plymouth in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the community. These regulations are specifically designed to:
(A) Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the community, consistent with orderly growth policies;
(B) Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with proper relation to major thoroughfares adjoining subdivisions and public facilities;
(C) Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability;
(D) Assure adequate provisions for water, drainage and sanitary sewer facilities and other health requirements;
(E) Plan for the provision of adequate recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities.
XII-6.02. Legal basis.
This article is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted by the Land Division Act, Act 288 of 1967, as amended.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???22
XII-6.03. Scope.
This article shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision in the process of approval for which tentative approval of the preliminary plat has been granted by the township prior to February 15, 1970, provided that the final plat is approved by the Township Board on or before January 1, 1971, except for the further dividing of lots. Nor is it intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreements or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the township is a party. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions or any other ordinance of this township, the provisions of this article shall control.
XII-6.04. Administration.
The approval provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the Township Board in accordance with the Land Division Act.
XII-6.05. Schedule of fees.
The schedule of fees for review of plats shall be established by resolution of the Township Board.
Section 2: Definitions
XII-6.06. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ALLEY. A public thoroughfare or service right-of-way not more than 30 feet wide and not less than 20 feet wide at the rear or side lines of property and affording only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
BLOCK.
(1) A block shall include the property having frontage on the one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets or between the nearest street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development.
(2) In case of a cul-de-sac street, a block shall include the property on one side of the street lying between the one intercepting street and the extension of the center line of the cul-de-sac street through the property facing the turn-around at the closed end of the street.
Subdivision Regulations
X???23
BOARD. The Township Board of the Charter Township of Plymouth.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to a street right-of-way line, shore of a lake, edge of a stream or river bank established on a parcel of land or on a lot for the purpose of prohibiting construction of a building between the line and a right-of-way, other public area or the shore of a lake or the edge of a stream or river bank.
CLERK. The Township Clerk of the Charter Township of Plymouth.
COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the Charter Township of Plymouth.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The Comprehensive Plan shall mean the Comprehensive Plan for the Charter Township of Plymouth as adopted by the Township Planning Commission.
CROSS-WALKWAY (PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY). Right-of-way dedicated to public use which crosses a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
EASEMENT. A specific area of land over which liberty, privilege or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some other particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes and which shall be designated as a “public” or “private” easement, depending on the nature of the user.
FLOOD PLAIN. That area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, water course, lake or other similar body of water which will be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for that region.
GREENBELTS. A strip or parcel of land, privately restricted or publicly dedicated as open space located between incompatible uses for the purpose of protecting and enhancing the residential environment.
IMPROVEMENTS. Any structure incident to servicing or furnishing facilities for a subdivision such as grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters, driveway approaches, sidewalks, crosswalks, watermains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, lagoons, slips, waterways, lakes, bays, canals and other appropriate items with appurtenant construction.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. A planned industrial area designed specifically for industrial use providing screened buffers, wider streets and turning movement and safety lane roadway improvements, where necessary.
LAND DIVISION ACT OF SUBDIVISION CONTROL ACT. Act 288, P.A. 1967, State of Michigan (560.101 et seq.)
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???24
LOT. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described and fixed in a recorded plat.
(1) LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.
(2) LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured on a line perpendicular to the lot depth line and passing through the intersection of the lot depth line and the building setback line.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Open space or recreational use set aside for the use of the owners of lots participating in a unit development of residential lots; the space may include private recreational facilities such as golf courses or swimming pools, historic building sites, parks, parkway areas, ornamental parks, extensive areas with tree cover, low land along streams or areas of rough terrain which have natural features worthy of scenic preservation.
OUTLOT. When included within the boundary of a recorded plat means a lot set aside for purposes other than building site, park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use.
PARCEL or TRACT. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the Subdivision Control Act.
PARKING SPACE. An area surfaced by use of either bituminous, oil aggregate, stabilized gravel or equivalent, enclosed or unenclosed, not less than ten feet wide by 20 feet long for each auto or motor vehicle together with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of a motor vehicle.
PLANNING COMMISSION ACT. The words “Planning Commission Act” as used herein shall mean Public Act 33 of 2008, (M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3811 et seq.), as amended, which is made a part hereof by this reference.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A plan designed to guide the development of housing subdivisions which incorporate privately owned, open, common areas and provide for the creation of means of maintaining the common properties.
PLAT. A map or chart of a subdivision of land.
(1) TENTATIVE PRELIMINARY PLAT. An informal map or sketch drawn to scale indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision showing the existing features of the site and its surroundings.
(2) FINAL PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision of land submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration.
(3) FINAL PLAT. A map of all or a part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the final preliminary plat of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act and this ordinance and made up in final form ready for approval and recording
Subdivision Regulations
X???25
by the County Register of Deeds.
PROPRIETOR, SUBDIVIDER or DEVELOPER. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any recorded or unrecorded ownership interest in land. The proprietor is also commonly referred to as the owner.
PUBLIC RESERVATION. A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public use and made available for public use and acquisition.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing to the public under federal, state or municipal regulations electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation or water.
REPLAT. The process of changing or the map or plat which changes the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the outlot is not a replat.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley, walkway or other public purposes.
STREET. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place or however otherwise designated. A street includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.
(1) FREEWAY. Those streets designed for high speed, high volume through traffic, with completely controlled access, no grade crossings and no private driveway connections.
(2) PARKWAY. A street designed for noncommercial, pleasure oriented traffic moving at moderate speeds between and through scenic areas and parks.
(3) ARTERIAL STREET. Those streets of considerable continuity which are used or may be used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
(4) CONNECTOR STREET. Those streets used to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including principal entrance streets to large residential developments.
(5) CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street of short length having one end terminated by a vehicular turnaround and not extended into adjoining property.
(6) MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic and not carrying through traffic.
(7) MINOR STREET. A street which is intended primarily for access to abutting properties.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???26
(8) STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of streets.
SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease for more than one year or of building development where the act of division creates five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area or five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL ACT or LAND DIVISION ACT. Public Act 288 of 1967, State of Michigan. (M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.)
ZONING ORDINANCE. The words “Zoning Ordinance” as used herein shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of the Charter Township of Plymouth.
Section 3: Procedure for the Preparation of Filing of Plats
XII-6.07. Pre-preliminary procedure.
(A) Purpose. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the proprietor may meet informally with the Commission in order that he or she may become familiar with these regulations and with the proposals of the Comprehensive Development Plan as they affect the area in which his or her proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor shall investigate and become aware of the following:
(1) The zoning of the area;
(2) Adequacy of existing schools and public open space;
(3) Relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing streets and thoroughfares and any proposed street widenings;
(4) Availability of utilities;
(5) Diversification in relationship of various buildings, structures and open space under a Residential Unit Development Plan.
Subdivision Regulations
X???27
(B) Requirements. The proprietor may then submit to the Commission pre-preliminary plans and data to include the following:
(1) General subdivision information;
(2) Sketch plan showing the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch may be made directly on a print of the survey or on the topographic survey.
(C) Review. The Commission may review the pre-preliminary plans and related data and offer any information which will aid the proprietor in preparing a tentative preliminary plat.
XII-6.08. Tentative preliminary plat procedure.
(A) Application. An application, in writing, shall be submitted to the Clerk at least 15 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting along with 15 copies of the tentative preliminary plat at a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and other related data.
(B) Fees. At the time of filing, the proprietor shall deposit with the Clerk such sums of money as shall be required for engineering services in relation to all preliminary plat work in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges as established by resolution of the Township Board as required under Section XII-6.05.
XII-6.09. Tentative preliminary plat requirements.
The plat shall show the subdivision’s entire development scheme, including the area for immediate development and including the following:
(A) General layout of streets, blocks and lots;
(B) Existing conditions, location of all sound eight inch or greater trees other than elms and characteristics and zoning of the land on and adjacent to and on land within 200 feet of the proposed plat;
(C) Any general area set aside for schools, parks and other community facilities;
(D) A letter from the surveyor concerning the general feasibility of the land for subdividing;
(E) Proof of ownership of the land proposed to be subdivided as may be required by the Board of Commission.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???28
XII-6.10. Procedure.
(A) Submittal. The proprietor shall submit the 15 copies of the tentative preliminary plat to the Clerk 15 days before the next meeting of the Commission and the Clerk shall place the tentative plat on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Commission for review.
(B) Plat review. The Commission or Subdivision Committee of the Commission shall review the plat in reference to the Comprehensive Development Plan, the Zoning Ordinance and the standards of this ordinance and the most appropriate use of the land.
(C) Technical review. The Commission shall transmit copies of the tentative plat to the Township Engineer and Planning Consultant for their technical review and to the Township Department and the School Board for review and recommendations.
(D) Hearing. Any plat submitted to the Commission shall contain the name and address of the applicant or his or her authorized representative to whom notice of a public hearing shall be sent and no plat shall be acted on by the Commission without affording a hearing thereon, as provided in Section 71 of Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended. On request of the Commission, the Clerk shall send notice by registered or certified mail to the proprietor and to owners of land immediately adjoining the property to be platted of the time and place the plat will be considered by the Commission. The notice shall be sent not less than five days before the date fixed for the hearing.
(E) Action on the plat. Following review of the tentative preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations and negotiations with the proprietor on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him of her, the Commission shall within 45 days act thereon as submitted or modified.
XII-6.11. Approval of the tentative preliminary plat.
(A) Requirements. Before recommending approval of a tentative preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision, the Commission shall find that the land covered by the proposed subdivision is suitable both for development and the type of development proposed in that:
(1) It can be safely used for building purposes without danger from flood or from any other menace to health or safety, as determined by the Township Engineers;
(2) It can be served economically with public facilities and services as in the opinion of the Commission or other particular agencies concerned (i.e., Township Engineer, County Health Department, Superintendent of Schools, Water and Sewer Departments or districts having jurisdiction, etc.) are required by the type of development (residential, commercial or industrial) and the circumstances of the particular case.
Subdivision Regulations
X???29
(B) Disapproval. If the tentative preliminary plat is disapproved by the Commission, it shall make recommendations to the Board and record the reasons in the minutes of the meeting. A copy of the minutes and a copy of the tentative preliminary plat shall be forwarded to the Board and the proprietor.
(C) Conditional approval. If the Commission recommendation is a conditional approval, the tentative preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the board until such conditions are satisfied by the proprietor and the minutes shall so state the conditions and its reasons therefore and so notify the proprietor in writing.
(D) Approval. If the tentative preliminary plat meets the approval of the Commission, it shall then be submitted to the Board for its approval. Plans approved by the Commission and Board shall bear the signature of the Chairman of the Commission and the Clerk and one copy shall be filed in the Office of the Township Engineer, one copy in the file of the Commission and one copy returned to the proprietor.
(E) Board approval. The Board, within 90 days from the date of filing, shall approve and note its approval on the copy of the tentative preliminary plat to be returned to the proprietor or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for approval.
(F) Approval confers right to proceed with final preliminary plat. Should the Board approve the tentative preliminary plat, it shall be deemed to confer upon the proprietor the right to proceed with the preparation of the final preliminary plat.
(G) Approval is not approval of final preliminary plat. The approval of the tentative preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final preliminary plat. It shall be deemed as approval of the layout of the tentative preliminary plat, which will act as a guide in the preparation of the final preliminary plat.
(H) Time effective. Tentative approval of the Board shall be effective for a period of one year. The final preliminary plat shall be submitted within one year after approval of the tentative preliminary plat; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for, in writing, and granted by the Board.
XII-6.12. Requirements for final preliminary plat approval.
(A) Submittal. The proprietor shall submit 15 copies of the final preliminary plat on a topographic map to the Clerk at least 15 days before a meeting of the Commission. The proprietor shall also submit a written application for approval of the final preliminary plat.
(B) Size and scale. The final preliminary plat may be on paper and shall not be less than 24 inches by 36 inches at a scale of not less than 1” to 100’.
(C) Information required. The following shall be shown on the final preliminary plat or submitted with it:
(1) The name of the proposed subdivision;
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???30
(2) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider and the surveyor preparing the plat;
(3) Location of the subdivision, giving the number of section, township and range, and the name of the township and county;
(4) The names of abutting subdivisions;
(5) Statement of intended use of the proposed plat, such as: residential, single family, two-family and multiple housing; commercial, industrial; recreational; or agricultural. Also, proposed sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry and other non-public uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. Also, any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public uses;
(6) A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent development;
(7) A location map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area;
(8) The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the adjacent tracts;
(9) Streets, street names, right-of-way and roadway widths;
(10) Lot lines, lot numbers and the total number of lots;
(11) Contours shall be shown on the final preliminary plat at five-foot intervals where slope is greater than 10% and two-foot intervals where slope is 10% or less;
(12) All sound trees, other than elms, eight-inch caliper or greater;
(13) Proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers, watermains and their respective profiles or indicate alternative methods;
(14) Fifteen copies of proposed protective covenants and deed restrictions;
(15) Right-of-way easements, showing location and purpose and, where underground utilities are installed or required, it shall be the proprietor’s responsibility to provide easements acceptable to utilities for water, sanitary, storm, gas, electric, telephone and street lighting service. These easements shall be recorded on the plat as private easements for public utilities or easements provided by separate instrument.
(D) Preliminary engineering plans. The subdivider shall submit three sets of preliminary engineering plans for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other required public improvements. The engineering plans shall contain enough information and detail to enable the Planning Commission to make preliminary determination as to conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable township regulations and standards.
Subdivision Regulations
X???31
XII-6.13. Distribution to authorities.
(A) The proprietor shall submit copies of the final preliminary plat to the following authorities which may be concurrent or consecutive at the option of the proprietor and before, after or concurrent with approval by the Board.
(B) Three copies to the Engineer or Chairman of the Wayne County Road Commission.
(C) Three copies to the County Drain Commission.
(D) Three copies to the Department of State Highways, if any of the proposed subdivision includes or abuts a state trunk line highway or includes streets or roads that connect with or lie within the right-of-way of state trunk line highways.
(E) Two copies to the Conservation Department for information purposes, if the land proposed to be subdivided abuts a lake or stream or abuts an existing or proposed channel or lagoon affording access to a lake or stream where public rights may be affected.
(F) Copies of the cover letters mailed with the above final preliminary plats shall be sent to the State Treasurer.
(G) Two copies to the Water Resources Commission of the Department of Conservation, if any of the subdivision lies wholly or in part within the flood plain of a river, stream, creek or lake.
(H) Two copies to the Health Department having jurisdiction, if public water and public sewers are not available and accessible to the land proposed to be subdivided.
(I) Two copies to the County Plat Board.
(J) Two copies to the public utilities serving the area.
(K) Two copies to the School Board for informational purposes.
XII-6.14. Approval or denial by authorities.
The various authorities shall, within 30 days of receipt of the final preliminary plat, approve or reject the plat as provided for in Sections 111 to 119 of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???32
XII-6.15. Approval of the final preliminary plat.
(A) General procedure. The proprietor shall submit to the Clerk a certified list showing all authorities to whom a copy of the final preliminary plat was submitted as required by Public Act 288 of 1967.
(1) The proprietor shall submit all approved copies of the final preliminary plat to the Clerk after all necessary approvals have been secured from the various authorities.
(2) The Clerk shall notify the Commission when all plats and information regarding the final preliminary plat is complete.
(3) The Commission shall consider and review the final preliminary plat.
(4) Plat at its next meeting or within 15 days from the date of submission and recommend approval or rejection to the Board and, if rejected, state the reasons.
(5) Board Action. The Board, at its next meeting or within 20 days from the date of submission, shall consider and approve it if the proprietor has met all conditions laid down for approval of the final preliminary plat.
(6) The Clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing and, if rejected, to give the reasons. The Clerk shall note all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which minutes shall be open for inspection.
(7) Final preliminary plats thus approved by the Board permits the Proprietor to proceed to make an accurate survey of the property and prepare the final plat.
(B) Approval not acceptance of subdivision. The approval of the final preliminary plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision.
(C) Time effective. Approval of final preliminary plat under this section shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of two years from date of approval the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the Board in writing. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the Board to the other approving authorities.
(D) Construction commencement. No installation or construction of improvements shall be commenced before the final preliminary plat has received final approval nor before the engineering plans have been approved by the township and other governmental agencies having jurisdiction. Provided, however, where the Board finds that an undue hardship would otherwise result, it may, by resolution, grant permission to the proprietor to proceed with installation or construction of certain improvements in accordance with approved engineering plans for off-site improvements when the improvements are contained in easements granted to the township.
Subdivision Regulations
X???33
XII-6.16. Final plat procedure.
When the final plat has been approved by the Drain Commissioner and the County Road Commissioners, the proprietor shall submit to the Clerk one true copy on polyester film of the plat and 12 additional paper prints of the plat together with the filing and recording fee of $20.
(A) Conformity to final preliminary plat. The final plat shall conform substantially to the final preliminary plat as approved and shall be prepared and presented in accordance with the provisions of the Land Division Act, as amended, or succeeding Acts and show the following:
(1) The plat shall make reference to any private restrictions which shall accompany the plat and shall contain proper acknowledgment of proprietor and mortgagees and land contract purchasers accepting the platting restrictions and which shall be in proper form for recording. These restrictions shall include a section requiring that rear and side yard drainage be maintained in accordance with the grades established on the approved development plan.
(2) In addition to the above, the Commission will require a statement from the proprietor indicating:
(a) Ownership of the property proposed to be subdivided as evidenced by an abstract of title certified to date or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance.
(b) The private restrictions to be imposed upon the property after subdividing in form for recording.
(c) The proprietor of a plat shall furnish with the engineering drawings a plan for electric lighting and telephone, including overhead and underground services. The easements for the services shall be provided in the plat and approved by the utilities.
(B) Planning Commission action. The Commission shall examine the final plat for compliance with the final preliminary plat and required changes thereof and shall approve or disapprove the plat at the next regular meeting or within 20 days after submission thereof to it, provided the proprietor for the Commission’s approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period.
(1) Should the Commission find that the final plat does not conform substantially to the previously approved final preliminary plat, or that it is not acceptable, the Commission shall recommend to the Board that the final plat be disapproved and returned to the proprietor with a letter expressing its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
(2) If the Planning Commission’s recommendation is not received within the time period referred to herein, the Board shall consider the plat approved by the Commission and shall take action thereon.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???34
(C) Board action on final plat. The Board shall review the plat and shall approve or disapprove the plat at the next regular meeting or within 20 days of the submission, unless this time requirement is waived in writing by the proprietor.
(1) As a condition to approval of the final plat, the Board shall require a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond running to the Charter Township of Plymouth for the full cost to insure the performance of any contract relative to development of open space and any required improvements within the time limit specified in the contract after approval of the plat; provided, that the township shall rebate to the proprietor as work progresses amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project. In addition, the Board shall have received a certificate from the Wayne County Road Commission that the proprietor has complied with one of the following alternatives:
(a) All improvements have been installed in accordance with requirements of the Wayne County Road Commission;
(b) A security deposit has been filed with the Board of Wayne County Road Commission to guarantee the improvements after the approval of the plat.
(2) Upon the approval of the final plat by the Board, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the Subdivision Control Act. Two prints of the final plat shall be presented to the Clerk, one copy to the Township Engineer, one copy to the Planning Consultant, one copy to the Assessors Office and one copy to the Department of Buildings and Safety. The five polyester film copies shall be forwarded to the Clerk of the County Plat Board along with the filing fee.
Section 4: Subdivision Design Standards
XII-6.17. Streets and roads.
All subdivisions shall be in harmony with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance.
XII-6.18. General.
The standards set forth in this ordinance shall be minimum standards for streets, roads and intersections. All streets shall be dedicated to public use.
XII-6.19. Location.
(A) Street location and arrangements. When a major street plan has been adopted, subdivision streets shall be required to conform to the plan.
Subdivision Regulations
X???35
(B) Local or minor streets. The streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic.
(C) Street continuation and extension. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Commission and the Board.
(D) Stub streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to make provision for the future projection of streets into adjacent areas.
(E) Relation to topography. Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and reasonable gradients.
(F) Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted to areas of detached single or two-family residences.
(G) Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street, the township may require:
(1) Marginal access streets approximately parallel to each side of the right-of-way, not less than 35 feet in width;
(2) Such other treatment as it deems necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
(H) Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sacs shall not be more than 600 feet in length. Special consideration shall be given to longer cul-de-sacs under certain topographic conditions or other unusual situations. Cul-de-sacs shall terminate with an adequate turn-around with a minimum radius of 60 feet for right-of-way.
(I) Half streets. Half streets shall generally be prohibited except where unusual circumstances make it essential to the reasonable development of a tract in conformance with these regulations and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be dedicated within the tract.
(J) Private Streets. Private streets and roads shall be prohibited.
XII-6.20. Specifications.
(A) Street rights-of-wav roadway widths. Street and road rights-of-way and roadway widths shall conform to the adopted Major Street Plan and the rules of the County Road Commission and the State Department of Highways.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???36
Street Types
R.O.W. Widths
Alley
24 feet
Boulevards
86 feet
Cul-de-sac streets
60 feet
Terminated with a 120 foot diameter turn-around
Loop streets
110 feet
Terminated with a 120 foot diameter turn-around
Major thoroughfares
120 feet
Marginal access streets
35 feet
Minor streets
60 feet
Secondary thoroughfares
86 feet
(B) Grades. Curves and sight distance. Standards for maximum and minimum grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall comply with the standards of the Wayne County Road Commission.
(C) Street alignment.
(1) Horizontal alignment. When street lines deflect from each other by more than ten degrees in alignment, the centerlines shall be connected by a curve with a minimum radius of 500 feet for arterial streets, 300 feet for collector streets and 150 feet for local or minor streets. Between reverse curves on minor streets, there shall be a minimum tangent distance of 100 feet and on collector and arterial streets 200 feet.
(2) Vertical alignment. Minimum sight distances shall be 200 feet for minor streets and 300 feet for collector streets.
XII-6.21. Intersections.
(A) Angle of intersection. Streets shall intersect at 90 degrees or closely thereto and in no case at less than 80 degrees.
(B) Sign triangles. Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of another vehicle when each is 125 feet from the center of the intersection.
(C) Number of streets. No more than two streets shall cross at any one intersection.
Subdivision Regulations
X???37
(D) “T” intersections. Except on arterials and certain collectors, “T” type intersections shall be used where practical.
(E) Centerline offsets. Slight jogs at intersections shall be avoided. Where jogs are unavoidable, street centerlines shall be offset by a distance of 125 feet or more.
(F) Vertical alignment of intersection. A nearly flat grade with appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat section shall be carried back 50 to 100 feet each way from the intersection. An allowance of 2% maximum intersection grade in rolling and 4% in hilly terrain will be permitted.
XII-6.22. Pedestrian crosswalks.
(A) Crosswalks. Right-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks, not less than 12 feet wide in the middle of long blocks shall be required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to schools, parks or shopping areas.
(B) Sidewalks.
(1) In subdivisions located in R-1, R-2 and R-1-S Zoning Districts, sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets, including side streets.
(2) In subdivisions located in R-1-E and R-1-H Zoning Districts, sidewalks are required along the lots in the subdivision abutting upon arterial and collector streets.
XII-6.23. Easements.
(A) Rear and side lot easements. Easement across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide, usually six feet dedicated from each lot or parcel, except side lot easements three feet wide granted for street lighting dropouts. These easements should be direct and continuous from block to block.
(B) Street lighting easements. Underground lines for the street lighting system within a subdivision shall be installed in easements which shall be provided in the plat and approved by the utility.
(C) Drainageway easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage-way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the water course and the further width for construction on both as will be adequate for the purpose and as shall be approved by the Wayne County Drain Commission and/or Township Engineer. (The drainage easement or land within a public easement for major power transmission lines shall not be considered a part of the minimum required lot area but shall be considered in computing density under the Unit Development Plan.) Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???38
XII-6.24. Monuments.
Monuments shall conform to and shall be placed as required by the Land Division Act, as amended. The township shall, in addition, require a surveyor’s certificate guaranteeing the rechecking and replacement of monuments and bringing them to grade after sidewalks are in place.
XII-6.25. Blocks.
(A) Residential blocks. Residential blocks shall not be less than 240 feet wide, they shall not be less than 660 feet long nor more than 1,400 feet long. Where lots are 2 acre or more in size, blocks up to 1,800 feet long may be approved.
(B) Commercial blocks. Business and commercial blocks shall not be less than 300 feet wide or less than 400 feet long.
XII-6.26. Lots.
(A) Conform to zoning. The lot width, depth and area shall not be less than the particular district requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, except where outlots are provided for some permitted purpose.
(B) Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
(C) Width related to length. Narrow deep lots shall be avoided. The depth of a lot generally shall not exceed 1-1/2 times the width as measured at the building line.
(D) Corner lots. Corner lots shall be platted at least 15 feet wider than the minimum width permitted by the Zoning Ordinance to permit appropriate building setback from both streets or orientation to both streets. Lots abutting a pedestrian mid-block crosswalk shall be treated as corner lots.
(E) Uninhabitable areas. Lands subject to flooding or otherwise deemed by the Planning Commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential purpose or for uses that may in the judgment of the Planning Commission increase the danger to health, life or property or increase the flood hazard. The land within a subdivision shall be set aside for other uses, such as parks or other open space.
(F) Back-up-lots. Lots shall back into such features as freeways, arterial streets, shopping centers or industrial properties, except where there is a marginal access street provided. The lots shall contain a landscaped easement along the rear at least 20 feet wide in addition to the utility easement to restrict access to the arterial street, to minimize noise and to protect outdoor living areas. Lots extending through a block and having frontage on two local streets shall be prohibited.
Subdivision Regulations
X???39
(G) Lot frontage. All lots shall front upon a publicly dedicated street. Variances may be permitted for approved planned community unit developments.
(H) Lot division. The division of a lot in a recorded plat is prohibited, unless the division complies with the requirements of Article VI.
(I) Division of unplatted parcels.
(1) The division of an unplatted parcel of land into two, three or four lots shall require recommendation by the Commission and the approval of the Board prior to taking such action. All applications shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by a drawing of the proposed division.
(2) No building or occupancy permit shall be issued in such cases until the Board has approved the division of the land.
XII-6.27. Planting strips.
(A) Planting strips may be required to be placed next to incompatible features such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial uses or industrial parks to screen the view from residential properties. The screens shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance requirements for plating distances and type of trees and shrubs and shall not be a part of the normal roadway right-of-way or utility easement.
(B) Where marginal access streets are provided, an eight foot greenbelt, meeting the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be required in the area between the access street and the arterial street and shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
XII-6.28. Reserve strips.
(A) Reserve strips-private. Privately-held reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.
(B) Reserve strips-public. A one-foot reserve strip may be placed at the end of the “stub” of “dead-end” streets which terminate at subdivision boundaries and between half-streets. These reserves shall be deeded in fee simple to the township for future street purposes.
XII-6.29. Public sites and open spaces.
(A) Public uses. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown on the Comprehensive Development Plan is located in whole or in part within a subdivision, a suitable area for this purpose may be dedicated to the public or reserved for public purchase.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???40
(B) Natural features. Existing natural features which add value to residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall be preserved, insofar as possible, in the design of the subdivision.
XII-6.30. Large scale developments.
(A) Modification. This ordinance may be modified in accordance with Article VIII in the case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a complete community or neighborhood, consistent with the Comprehensive Development Program which provides and dedicates adequate public open space and improvements of the circulation, recreation, education, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated.
(B) Neighborhood characteristics. A community or neighborhood under this provision shall generally be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and contain or be bounded by major streets or natural physical barriers as necessary and shall contain reserved areas of sufficient size to serve its population for schools, playgrounds, parks and other public facilities. The reserves may be dedicated.
Section 5: Subdivision Improvements
XII-6.31. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to establish and define the public improvements which will be required to be constructed by the proprietor as conditions for final plat approval and also to outline the procedures and responsibilities of the proprietor and the various public officials and agencies concerned with the administration, planning design, construction and financing of public facilities, and to further establish procedures for assuring compliance with these requirements.
XII-6.32. Responsibility for plans.
It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of every proposed subdivision to have prepared by a registered engineer a complete set of construction plans (except telephone, electric and television utility plans and specifications and improvements), including profiles, cross-sections, specifications and other supporting data for the hereinafter required public streets, utilities and other facilities. The construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved with the final preliminary plat and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible public agencies shown. All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with their standards or specifications.
Subdivision Regulations
X???41
XII-6.33. Procedure.
When construction has been completed at the time of filing the final plat, one complete copy of as-built engineering plans of each required public improvement shall be filed with the Clerk coincident with the filing of the final plat. Other requirements and procedures in the submittal of final plat shall be as provided in Section XII-6.16.
XII-6.34. Required public improvements.
Every proprietor shall be required to install the following public and other improvements in accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows:
(A) Monuments. Monuments shall be set in accordance with the Subdivision Control Act and the rules of the State Department of Treasury.
(B) Streets and alleys. All streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the Wayne County Road Commission.
(C) Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be required on all neighborhood access streets and minor streets and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the Wayne County Road Commission.
(D) Installation of utilities. Utilities (except electric, telephone and gas) shall be located in accordance with the rules adopted by the Board. Sanitary sewer house connections shall be brought to the property line.
(E) Driveways. All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the Wayne County Road Commission or the Department of State Highways.
(F) Storm drainage.
(1) An adequate storm drainage system, including necessary storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances, shall be required in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision shall be established by the Township Engineer or County Drain Commissioner.
(2) Construction shall follow the specifications and procedures established by the County Drain Commission. All proposed storm drainage construction plans for proposed plats shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
(3) Road drainage shall meet the requirements of the Wayne County Road Commission.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???42
(G) Water supply system.
(1) When a proposed subdivision is to be served by a public water supply system, fire hydrants and other required water system appurtenances shall be provided by the proprietor.
(2) If there is no existing or accessible public water supply system, the subdivider may be required to install a water supply system for the common use of the lots within the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of Public Act 451 of 1994. The system provided shall be turned over to the township for operation and maintenance.
(3) Individual wells may be permitted in accordance with the requirements of the County Health Department.
(H) Sanitary sewer system.
(1) When a proposed subdivision is to be serviced by a public sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewers and other required appurtenances thereto shall be provided by the proprietor. Sewer systems shall comply with the requirements of Public Act 451 of 1994.
(2) If there is no existing or accessible public sewer system, a sewer system for the common use of the lot owners may be required to be provided by the proprietor if feasible in the judgment of the Planning Commission with the advice of the Township Engineer and County Health Department and shall comply with the requirements of Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended. The system provided shall be turned over to the township for operation and maintenance.
(3) Where it is determined, in the judgment of the Commission with the advice of the Township Engineer and the County Health Department, that a subdivision cannot be economically connected with an existing public sewer system or that a public sewer system cannot be provided for the subdivision itself, then approved individual septic tanks shall comply with the requirements of the County Health Department.
(4) However, where studies by the Commission or the Township Engineer indicate that construction or extension of sanitary trunk sewers to serve the property being subdivided appears probable within a reasonably short time (up to three years), sanitary sewer mains and house connections shall be installed and tapped.
(I) Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate locations at each street intersection in accordance with the requirements of the Wayne County Road Commission.
(J) Sidewalk and crosswalk.
(1) Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street.
(2) Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with the township engineering requirements.
Subdivision Regulations
X???43
(K) Street trees. Street trees of a variety and size in accordance with the standards adopted by the Wayne County Road Commission shall be planted between the street curb and sidewalk. The location of street trees shall be approved by the Wayne County Road Commission.
(L) Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all distribution lines for telephone, electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout the residential subdivided area, except for major thoroughfare right-of-way and except for main supply lines, perimeter feed lines and necessary surface facilities. The conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead lines may also be permitted upon written recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning Commission and the approval where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, design and character of the subdivision. All facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor.
(M) Yard grading and drainage. All subdivisions shall be graded in such a manner as will avoid, as far as possible, the ponding of storm water in the rear yards of a subdivision. The plans for grading and drainage shall meet the requirements of the township regulations and shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
(N) Greenbelts. A 20-foot greenbelt conforming to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be required.
XII-6.35. Optional public improvements.
(A) Recreational. Where a school site, neighborhood park, recreation area or public access to water frontage as previously delineated or specified by official action of the Planning Commission, is located in whole or part in the proposed subdivision, the township may request the reservation of the open space for school, park and recreation or public access purposes.
(B) Requirements for street lighting. Street lighting service by underground conductors may be provided throughout the residential subdivision in conformity with engineering standards and construction practices prescribed by the utility furnishing such service and the Michigan Public Service Commission.
(C) Street lighting. Street lights may be required to be installed at intersections only throughout the subdivision. In these cases, a subdivider shall conform to the requirements of the township and the public utility providing the lighting.
(D) Parks and open space. Parks and open spaces may be dedicated to the township subject to the approval of the Township Board.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???44
XII-6.36. Guarantee of completion of improvements required by the township.
(A) Financial guarantee arrangements; exceptions. In lieu of the actual installation of required public improvements, the Board, on recommendation of the Commission, may permit the proprietor to provide a financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination of the following arrangements for those requirements which are over and beyond the requirements of the County Road Commission, County Drain Commissioner or any other agency responsible for the administration, operation and maintenance of the applicable public improvement. The Commission may recommend and the Board may waive financial guarantees of performance under this ordinance for sidewalks, street lights or street trees. In case these improvements are specified, completion shall be required prior to the issuance of occupancy permits.
(B) Performance or surety bond.
(1) Accrual. The bond shall accrue to the township, covering construction, operation and maintenance of the specific public improvement.
(2) Amount. The bond shall be in an amount equal to the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specific public improvement, including contingencies as estimated by the Board.
(3) Term Length. The term length in which the bond is in force shall be for a period to be specified by the Board for the specific public improvement.
(4) Bonding or Surety Company. The bond shall be with a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Michigan, acceptable to the Board.
(5) The escrow agreement shall be drawn and furnished by the Board.
(C) Cash deposit. Certified check. Negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit.
(1) Treasurer, escrow agent or trust company.
(a) A cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, such surety acceptable by the Board, shall accrue to the township.
(b) These deposits shall be made with the Township Treasurer or deposited with a responsible escrow agent or trust company, subject to the approval of the Board.
(2) Dollar value. The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be equal to the total estimated cost of construction of the specific public improvement, including contingencies as estimated by the Board.
(3) Escrow time. The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be for a period to be specified by the Board.
Subdivision Regulations
X???45
(4) Progressive payment. In the case of cash deposits or certified checks, an agreement between the Board and the subdivider may provide for progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit to the extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvement, in accordance with a previously entered into agreement.
(D) Transfer of subdivision ownership. When the proprietorship of a subdivision changes through the sale of property before all improvements have been completed and accepted by the Wayne County Road Commission and the township, the original proprietor shall be held liable for completion of the improvements and any damage that may be incurred by contractors, unless the original proprietor in his or her contract of sale shall specifically transfer the obligation for completion of improvements, cleanup, and damages incurred to the new proprietor of the subdivision. The original proprietor shall notify the Township Board in writing within ten days of the transfer that the original bonds have been transferred to the new proprietor.
XII-6.37. Condition of Township approval of final plat-financial guarantees.
With respect to financial guarantees, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall be conditioned on the accomplishment of one of the following:
(A) Improvements completed. The construction of improvements required by this ordinance shall have been completed by the proprietor and approved by the Board;
(B) Acceptable surety. Surety acceptable to the Board shall have been filed in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond.
XII-6.38. Special agreements.
A special agreement shall be entered into between the proprietor and the Board when street trees and street lights have been required by the Board.
XII-6.39. Inspection of public improvements under construction.
Before approving a final plat and construction plans and specifications for public improvements, an agreement between the proprietor and the Board shall be made to provide for checking or inspecting the construction and its conformity to the submitted plans.
XII-6.40. Penalty in case of failure to complete the construction of a public improvement.
In the event the proprietor shall, in any case, fail to complete the work within the period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for the completion of public improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the Board to proceed to have the work completed. In order to accomplish this, the Board
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???46
shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating the cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or negotiable bond which the subdivider may have deposited in lieu of a surety bond or may take the steps as may be necessary to require performance by the bonding or surety company and as included in a written agreement between the Board and the subdivider.
Section 6: Division of Land in Recorded Plats
XII-6.41. Basis for control.
Subject to the provisions of Section 263 of the Land Division Act, as amended, (M.C.L.A. § 560.263), the following provisions shall control the partitioning or dividing of lots, outlots or other parcels of land in a recorded plat.
XII-6.42. Partitioning permitted.
Land may be unconnected from one lot, outlot or parcel and added to another lot, outlot or parcel upon application to and approval of the Township Supervisor after review by the Planning Director. The fact of the division shall be noted upon the Township Assessment roll and thereafter the enlarged lot, outlot or parcel shall be considered to be a single lot, outlot or parcel for the assessment and all other purposes. No division shall be permitted unless the remainder of the lot, outlot or parcel from which the part was taken meets the minimum requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance, including requirements as to width, area and open space.
XII-6.43. Partitioning into two or more lots.
(A) The lot, outlot or parcel may be divided into two or more lots but not more than four separate lots out lots or parcels upon application to and approval by the Township Supervisor after review by the Planning Director. A survey showing the proposed division prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor and including a proper legal description of each separate lot, outlot or parcel proposed shall be forwarded to the Planning Director for review. The Township Supervisor may thereafter approve the partitioning and shall notify the Township Assessor of the fact of a division, which shall be noted upon the Township Assessment roll and thereafter the divided portions of the lot, outlot or parcel shall be considered to be separate lots, outlots or parcels for the assessments and all other purposes.
(B) No division shall be permitted unless each of the parts into which lot, outlot or parcel is to be divided meets the minimum requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance including requirements as to width, area and open spaces. In these cases where water, sewers or other services have been installed within the plat by special assessment and the lot proposed to be divided has been assessed therefor, no division shall be permitted unless the applicant agrees in writing to pay into the special assessment district an additional amount to be determined by the Board representing the increased share of the cost of the special assessment district which shall be borne by the divided lot, outlot or parcel due to increased benefits received by the lot, outlot or parcel when divided into two, three or four lots, outlots or parcels.
Subdivision Regulations
X???47
Section 7: Enforcement
XII-6.44. Submission to and approval by the Board required.
No plat shall be transmitted to any county or state-approving authority for official action as required by the State Platting Procedure until the plat shall have, in the first instance, been approved by the Board in accordance with the regulations of this article and Section 148 of the Land Division Act, as amended.
XII-6.45. Plat approval deemed amendment.
Every plat approved by the Commission shall, by virtue of the approval, be deemed to be an amendment of, an addition to or a detail of the Comprehensive Plan and a part thereof.
XII-6.46. Metes and bounds platting.
The description of any lot or parcel in a plat of a subdivision, filed hereinafter, by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer is a violation of these regulations.
XII-6.47. Sales contrary to requirements.
(A) No person shall sell or convey any lot in any plat by reference thereto until the plat has been duly recorded in the Office of the County Register of Deeds.
(B) Any sale of lands subdivided in violation of the provisions of the Land Division Act, as amended, shall be voidable at the option of the purchaser thereof and shall subject the seller thereof to the forfeiture of any and all consideration received or pledged therefor together with any damages sustained by the purchaser thereof, recoverable in an action of law.
XII-6.48. Public water and sewer service.
Public sewer or water service shall not be provided for any dwelling or other structure located on a plat subdivided or sold in violation of these regulations, excepting that the service may be installed in any structure when deemed necessary by the Health Department for the protection of the public health.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???48
XII-6.49. Fees.
The proprietor shall pay a fee to the Township Treasurer at the time a tentative preliminary plat is filed with the Township Clerk. The fee shall be established by resolution of the Township Board and shall cover the cost for the examination and inspection of the plat and the land proposed to be subdivided, engineering and the other applicable development charges. This fee does not include the fee for filing and recording fee as required in Section XII-6.16.
Section 8: Variances
XII-6.50. Permitted variances.
When the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured provided, that the variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan or these regulations. No variance shall be granted unless the Planning Commission finds:
(A) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land;
(B) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner;
(C) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated;
(D) That the variance will not violate the provisions of the State Subdivision Control Act.
XII-6.51. Planned unit development variance.
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the Planning Commission in the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a neighborhood unit which, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated and which also provide covenant or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.
Subdivision Regulations
X???49
XII-6.52. Application for variance.
Application for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the proprietor at the time when the tentative preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the commission, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the Planning Commission in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for the development shall include covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
XII-6.53. Variances subject to conditions.
In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
Section 9: Penalties
XII-6.54. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in the General Provisions of the township code. Each day that the violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. The land owners, tenant, proprietor, builder, public official or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains the violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Board or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this ordinance or of the Land Division Act.
Section 10: Amendments
XII-6.55. Procedures.
The Township Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this article in the manner prescribed by Public Act 33 of 2008 (M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3831 et seq.), as amended. A proposed amendment, supplement or repeal may be originated by the Township Board, Planning Commission or by petition. All proposals not originating with the Planning Commission shall be referred to it for a report thereon before any action is taken on the proposal by the Township Board.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???50
X???51
ARTICLE 7: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
State Law Reference: Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended (The State Construction Code Act).
XII-7.00. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the township is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the township under Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The township assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the Act throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting this article.
XII-7.01. Code appendix enforced.
Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) or Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the township.
XII-7.02. Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled “Wayne County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions) Flood Insurance Study” and dated February 2, 2012 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26163C0020E, 26163C0038E, 26163C0039E, 26163C0045E, 26163C0185E, 26163C0201E, 26163C0202E, and 26163C0210E, and dated February 2, 2012 are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the “Flood Hazards” section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code.
XII-7.03. Violation And penalty.
Unless otherwise provided, any person, corporation, partnership or any other legal entity who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Land Development and Use
X???52

X?1
CHAPTER X: WATER AND SEWER
[Effective as of October 2, 2014 – Amendment 10 to Ordinance 1016]
Article
1. CROSS-CONNECTION
2. EMERGENCY WATER USE REDUCTION
3. WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?2
X?3
ARTICLE 1: CROSS-CONNECTION
State Law Reference: Public Act 733 of 2002, as amended, Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, Public Act 399 of 1976, as amended, Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended.
X-1.00. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, provide for supervision and control over the public water supply, prohibit certain cross-connections, provide for the administration and fees applicable to regulating and inspecting and for the elimination and prevention of prohibited cross-connections. This article does not and is not intended to supercede other laws or ordinances governing plumbing or the public water supply system; rather, the intent is to supplement other controls.
X-1.01. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply when the following terms are utilized in this article:
BACKFLOW. Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow or the flow of any foreign liquids, gasses or other substances into a potable water system from any source other than the intended one.
CROSS-CONNECTION. A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow could occur.
PUBLIC WATER or PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. The water or water supply system of the Charter Township of Plymouth Water and Sewer Department.
SAFE AIR GAP. The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to which public water is furnished which shall not be less than two times the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe but shall not be less than one inch and need not be more than 12 inches.
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY. A water supply system maintained in addition to a public water supply, including, but not limited to, water systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of Public Act 98 of 1913, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 325.201 to 325.214, or water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other than an approved storage facility.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?4
SUBMERGED INLET. A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow.
WATER UTILITY. A governmental unit, municipal or private corporation, association, partnership, or individual engaged in furnishing water to the public for household or drinking purposes.
X-1.02. Compliance.
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with the existing laws, ordinances and rules, including:
(A) Public Act 733 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 338.3511 et seq., as amended.
(B) Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq., as amended.
(C) This article.
(D) Rules regulating acceptable protection against cross-connections adopted from time to time by the Township Board.
(E) Public Act 399 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 325.1001 et seq., as amended, and rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality under the authority thereof.
(F) Wayne County Environmental Health Code, Articles I, II and IX, effective September 1, 1977, as amended.
(G) Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.12701 to 333.12715 and rules by the Michigan Department of Community Health and Michigan Department of Environmental Quality under the authority thereof.
X-1.03. Prohibitions.
Prohibited cross-connections are the following:
(A) A cross-connection shall not be made between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply;
(B) A cross-connection shall not be made by submerged inlet;
(C) A cross-connection shall not be made between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary waste or chemical contaminant;
Cross-Connection
X?5
(D) A cross-connection shall not be made between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a contaminant;
(E) A backflow shall constitute a prohibited cross-connection;
(F) A reasonably foreseen potential backflow shall constitute a prohibited cross-connection.
X-1.04. Corrections.
(A) A user of public water shall obtain written approval by the water utility or authorized inspection agency of any proposed corrective action or protective device before using it or installing it.
(B) The total time allowed for completion of the necessary corrections shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time required to obtain and install equipment. If the cross-connection has not been removed after a reasonable period of time, the water utility shall physically separate the public water supply from the on-site piping system in such a manner that the two systems cannot again be connected by any unauthorized person.
(C) All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the water utility and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the water utility shall be qualified to perform testing, and individuals shall certify the results of the testing.
X-1.05. Secondary sources.
When a secondary water source is used in addition to a public water supply system, exposed public water and secondary water piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe may be traced readily in its entirety. If piping is so installed that it is impossible to trace it in its entirety, it will be necessary to protect the public water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
X-1.06. Private water storage tanks.
A private water storage tank supplied from a public water supply system shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and approved for potable water usage.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?6
X-1.07. Utility count of employees.
The employees or agents of the Water Utility and the employees or agents of the Wayne County Public Health Department, as may be designated from time to time by the Supervisor or the Township Board, shall be the persons authorized to inspect and enforce this article and shall be defined as the authorized inspection agency.
X-1.08. Inspections.
(A) The employees or agents of the authorized inspections agency shall have the right to enter upon any property served by a connection to the public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the plumbing system or piping systems for cross-connections.
(B) The owner, lessee or occupant of any property served by public water shall promptly furnish to the employees or agents of the authorized inspection agency all information which may be requested concerning the plumbing system or piping systems on the property.
(C) The refusal to permit entry as provided in (A) or to furnish information as provided in (B) shall prima facie constitute the property as containing prohibited cross-connections.
X-1.09. Discontinuance of service.
The water utility may discontinue water service to any customer, user or property served by or containing a prohibited cross-connection. Public water supply to the discontinued customer, user or property shall not be restored until the authorized inspection agency shall certify a prohibited cross-connection no longer exists and until all charges and fees of the public water supply and of the authorized inspection agency have been fully paid.
X-1.10. Unsafe water.
Any water outlet which could be used for potable water purposes and which is not supplied by public water or by an approved potable system shall be labeled in a conspicuous manner as “water unsafe for drinking”. The owner, lessee or occupants of property upon which a water outlet is located or any of them shall be individually responsible for creating and maintaining the presence of the label.
X-1.11. Fees.
The owner, lessee or occupant of property inspected for compliance with the provisions of this article or any of them shall pay to the township a fee set by resolution of the Board of Trustees for the inspection.
Cross-Connection
X?7
X-1.12. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in the General Provisions of the township code. Each day that the violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?8
X?9
ARTICLE 2: EMERGENCY WATER USE REDUCTION
State Law Reference: Public Act 359 of 1947, as amended.
X-2.00. Title; Authorization.
This article shall be known as the emergency water use reduction ordinance and shall read as follows:
(A) Every person, firm, or corporation whose premises are supplied by water by the Charter Township of Plymouth shall be subject to the provisions of this article, and to all rules and regulations of the Public Works Manager pertaining to use of township water.
(B) It shall be lawful for the Public Works Manager, or his or her designate, to enter upon the premises of any person using township water to install meters for measuring water used and to inspect the meters and other fixtures and appurtenances pertaining to the water works system.
(C) Code Enforcement Officers of the Charter Township of Plymouth and police officers of the Charter Township of Plymouth are hereby authorized to issue ordinance violation notices and/or ordinance violation citations to any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article or any rule or regulation duly adopted in pursuance of this article.
X-2.01. Conditions.
The following are conditions warranting declaration of a water use reduction emergency:
(A) A prolonged drought or other system-wide heavy demand period that results in supply facilities, including system pump stations and reservoirs, being operated at their optimum capacity with no apparent means immediately available to adequately maintain flows and residual pressure throughout the system.
(B) Any emergency condition that may arise which will negatively affect operating flows and residual pressures in any substantial portion of the township water system for any appreciable length of time.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?10
X-2.02. Announcing Declaration.
Upon declaration of a water use reduction emergency by the City of Detroit Water and Sewer Department, the Michigan Department of Public Health, or the Charter Township of Plymouth, the Charter Township of Plymouth shall announce the declaration by use of public radio or television and newspapers with normal operating range covering the community. The Public Works Manager or his or her designate shall implement whatever reductions are necessary to meet the water reduction requirements.
X-2.03. Prohibition of Water Use During Water Use Reduction Emergency.
(A) Upon the declaration of a water use reduction emergency as outlined in Sections X-2.01 and X-2.02 above, every person, firm, or corporation whose premises are supplied with water by the Charter Township of Plymouth shall refrain from watering or using water provided by the Charter Township of Plymouth in any way prohibited by the Water Use Reduction Emergency declaration. The prohibition shall remain in effect 24 hours per day, seven days per week until the township has declared an end to the water use reduction emergency or the township determines that a limited prohibition will be sufficient to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
(B) The Public Works Manager or his or her designate may provide exceptions to Section X-2.03(A) where necessary to prevent imminent financial loss to a water user.
X-2.04. Penalty.
Any person who shall willfully violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and the costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or engagement in community service, or any combination of the fine, imprisonment or community service, plus any costs involved in shutting off the water.
X?11
ARTICLE 3: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
State Law Reference: Public Act 178 of 1939, as amended, Public Act 342 of 1939, as amended, Public Act 185 of 1957, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., Public Law 92-500, as amended.
SECTION I
X-3.01. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ratify and affirm the water and sewer system of the Charter Township of Plymouth by providing water and sewer benefits and services to persons and property within the township and to further protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare.
X-3.02. Definitions.
In construing this article, the terms and words hereinafter defined, unless the context clearly establishes otherwise, shall be given the following meaning:
INFILTRATION. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections and foundation drains) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface run-off, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
SYSTEM. The township water and sewer system and all sewage disposal or water supply and distribution facilities or both owned, operated or maintained by the township, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, combined sanitary and storm sewers, storm sewers, watermains and lines, wells and all works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage or storm waters or the supply, treatment and distribution of water.
TOWNSHIP. The Charter Township of Plymouth;
TOWNSHIP BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the township.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?12
WATER BONDS or SEWER BONDS. Any and all bonds issued by the township for paying the cost of construction, maintenance or operation of the system.
WATER CONTRACT or SEWER CONTRACT. Any and all contracts executed by and between the township and any other governmental entity or agency for the purpose of effecting the uses and purposes of the system.
X-3.03. Fiscal Year System.
The system shall have an operating or fiscal year commencing on January 1 of each year and ending on December 31 of the same year.
X-3.04. Water Rates.
(A) Consumption rates. The consumption rate shall be set by Township Board resolution.
(B) Service charge. In addition to the consumption charges, a quarterly and monthly service charge shall be assessed based on meter size as set by Township Board resolution.
(C) Minimum water rates. Minimum rates shall be charged in addition to the appropriate service charge and capital charge as set by Township Board resolution.
(D) Water tap charge.
(1) The township water tap charge includes the total cost of installation of water service, including labor, materials, inspection fee and meter. The work is performed by the township and relates to the size of service. The water tap charge shall be set by Township Board resolution.
(2) The water tap charge is determined by the road width of the property address requesting service with the following exceptions:
(a) In the event the property is a corner lot with service available on either side, the charge will be the less of the two charges, if there is a difference.
(b) For properties that are located on boundary roads of Charter Township of Plymouth, the charge will be based on the applicable rate for a 0-60’ road if the watermain is on the same side of the road.
(c) Water taps to the system which involve pipe sized other than 3/4” or 1” are allowed upon application to the Water and Sewer Department and the cost of the installation shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant in accordance with the application.
Water and Sewer System
X?13
(E) Water benefit charges.
(1) Water benefit charges shall consist of two parts: a trunk and transmission fee and use factor fee.
(a) A use factor fee for water-capital shall be set by Township Board resolution. The number of units charged is determined by the use factor schedule in Section X-3.055.
(b) Water trunk and transmission fee for taps to the water system shall be set by Township Board resolution.
(2) (a) The use factor fee and the trunk and transmission fee for existing single family residences may be paid in time payments. The payments must be paid on a quarterly basis within a five year period. A 12% average annual interest charge will be applied to the outstanding debt.
Illustration:
$1,000 debt + ($1,000 x 12% x 5 years x .5) = $1,000+ $300= $1,300
(b) The payments will be referred to as water debt service. No discount on principal, will be allowed for early payment of debt.
(3) Water benefit charges for all new construction shall be paid in full when making application to connect and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit by the township, except as provided in subsection (4).
(4) A subdivider or developer may pay the use factor fee based upon the use factor fee for each unit of the subdivision or development prior to the start of the development, or may pay such use factor fee in time payments. If a subdivider or developer chooses to pay such use factor fee in time payments, one-third of the use factor fee (the “initial use factor fee”) shall be paid prior to the start of the development. The remainder shall be the “installment balance” and shall be paid to the township by the developer or subdivider on a per unit basis at the time of application for a building permit. If modifications in a subdivision or development are approved after payment of the initial use factor fee which change the total number of units in the subdivision or development for which use factor fees are payable, the subdivider or developer shall pay any increased use factor fees immediately as a condition of the approval of the change, and any decrease in use factor fees payable shall be credited against the final amount due on the installment balance.
(F) Fire line detector check. Any building served with a fire line shall have a meter for detection of water used for purposes other than fire use. The meter shall be purchased from the township and the cost for the meter shall be as set by Township Board resolution. If toxic materials are used in the fire lines for the prevention of freezing or any other condition, an approved backflow preventor must be installed. The detector check meter must be installed by the Township Water Department. The necessary piping and apertures must be installed before meter installation. The following meter sizes are required for the stated fire line size:
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?14
Fire Line Size
Detector Check Meter Size
4”
3/4”x5/8”
6”
3/4”x5/8”
8”
1”
10”
1-1/2”
(G) Capital charges and special rates. In addition to the foregoing charges, a capital charge as set by Township Board by resolution shall be assessed based on the water service size.
(H) Construction water charges.
(1) for use of water on a temporary basis during construction a fee schedule based on service size shall be set by Township Board resolution.
(2) The construction water permit would be valid for a period of six months.
(I) Other charges. Charges for hydrant use, hydrant meter deposit, hydrant permit, hydrant wrench deposit, inspection of disconnects (done by others), inspection of water tap regular and overtime hours, inspection of sewer tap regular and overtime hours, turn on/turn off charge regular and overtime hours, water disconnect at main, and sewer lead disconnect shall be set by Township Board resolution.
X-3.050. Sewer System Rates.
(A) Sewer disposal use rates.
(1) The rates shall be levied on each lot or parcel of land, building, premises now or hereafter having any connection with the sanitary sewers of the system. The rates shall be billed along with the water bill and shall be based on the quantity of water used therein (if there is such a meter).
(2) The sewage disposal rate shall be set by Township Board resolution stated in gallons of metered water. The sewage disposal rate, during the billing months of October, November and December shall be reduced by 25% for residential users only.
(B) Minimum sewage rates. The minimum monthly and quarterly sewage use rates shall be set by Township Board resolution.
(C) Single residences unmetered water. For single residences having an unmetered water supply, the rate shall be set by Township Board resolution and for each trailer in a trailer court having an unmetered water supply, the rate shall be set by Township Board resolution.
Water and Sewer System
X?15
(D) Special rates. Where sewage disposal service is furnished to users other than single residences and trailers which are not connected to the water system, or if connected to the water system no meter is used to measure the quantity of water used, or in cases where the users make use of large (more than the average amount for residences/trailers similarly situated) quantities of water which may be discharged into storm sewers or for other miscellaneous users of water for which special consideration should be given, special sewage disposal rates may be fixed by the Township Board by resolution. The special rates will depend on the sewer use regulations including all changes of the Waste Control Division as prepared by the Board of Wayne County Road Commissioners and the Wayne County Board of Public
Works and will be a minimum of those charged by Wayne County plus 50% overhead.
(E) Sewer benefit charges.
(1) Sewer benefit charges shall consist of two parts: a trunk and transmission fee and use factor fee.
(a) The sewer trunk and transmission fee for connections into the sewer system shall be based on water service size and shall be set by Township Board resolution.
(b) In the event the applicant has no water service, assume the following for payment purposes:
Residential: 3/4” service
Commercial and industrial: 1” service
(c) A use factor fee for sewer installations shall be set by Township Board resolution. The number of units charged shall be as determined by the use factor schedule in Section X-3.055.
(2) (a) The use factor fee and the trunk and transmission fee for existing single family residences may be paid in time payments. The payments must be paid on a quarterly basis within a five year period. A 12% average annual interest rate shall be applied to the outstanding debt.
Illustration:
$1,000 debt + ($1,000 x 12% x 5 years x .5) = $1,000 + $300 = $1,300
(b) The payments will be referred to as Sewer Debt Service. No discount on principal will be allowed for early payment of debt.
(3) Sewer benefit charges for all new construction shall be paid in full when making application to connect and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit by the township, except as provided in subsection (4).
(4) A subdivider or developer may pay the use factor fee based upon the use factor fee of each unit of the subdivision or development prior to the start of the development, or may pay the use factor fee in time payments. If the subdivider or developer chooses to pay the use factor fee in time payments, one-third of the use factor fee (the “initial use factor fee”) shall be paid prior to the start of the development. The remainder shall be the installment balance” and shall be paid to the township by the
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?16
developer or subdivider on a per unit basis at the time of application for a building permit. If modifications in a subdivision or development are approved after payment of the initial use factor fee which change the total number of units in the subdivision or development for which use factor fees are payable, the subdivider or developer shall pay any increased use factor fees immediately as a condition of the approval of the change, and any decrease in use factor fees payable shall be credited against the final amount due on the installment balance.
X-3.055. Use Factor Schedule.
(A) Use factor units for the fees enumerated in Sections X-3.04 and X-3.050 will be calculated as follows:
Apartments
0.60 units per apartment dwelling unit
Auto car wash
10.00 units per production line
Auto car wash (self serve)
2.50 unit per stall
Auto dealers (new cars)
0.30 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Barber shops
1.00 unit plus 0.10 unit per chair
Bars
1.70 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Beauty shops
1.00 unit plus 0.15 unit per booth/chair
Bowling alleys (excluding bar or restaurant)
1.00 unit plus 0.10 unit per lane
Churches
0.10 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Cleaners
1.00 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Clinics
1.00 unit plus 0.50 unit per examining room
Convalescent homes
1.00 unit plus 0.50 unit per bed
Factories / Manufacturing
0.50 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Fitness center / health club without showers & pool
0.30 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Fitness center/ health club with showers & pool
2.00 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Fraternal organizations
2.00 unit per dwelling
Funeral homes
2.50 unit per dwelling
Grocery store & supermarkets
0.30 unit per 1,000 sq. ft
Hospitals
1.00 unit plus 0.75 per unit per bed
Hotels and motels (not including restaurants, bar or pools)
0.70 unit per room
Water and Sewer System
X?17
Laundry (self serve)
5.00 unit per 1,000 sq. ft
Multiple family residence
1.00 unit per dwelling unit
Office buildings
0.15 unit per 1,000 sq. ft
Public schools (without pool)
0.20 unit per classroom
Research and engineering
0.20 unit per 1,000 sq. ft
Restaurants
1.70 unit per 1,000 sq. ft. including kitchen
School daycare
0.60 unit per classroom
Service stations
1.00 unit plus 0.15 unit per pump
Single family residence
1.00 unit per dwelling
Stores ( Other than specifically listed)
0.25 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Storage / Warehouse Facilities
0.10 unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
Swimming pools (residential excluded)
3.00 unit per 1,000 sq. ft. of pool and service building/locker area
Theaters (inside)
1.00 unit plus 0.01 unit per seat
Trailer parks
0.60 unit per trailer space
Uses in industrial zoned areas excepting areas for: A) research and engineering uses, or B) approved special uses or planned unit developments.
0.25unit per 1,000 sq. ft.
(B) When primary uses contain other secondary uses the total factor shall be the summation of the applicable separate factors, (e.g.: bowling alley factor + bar factor + restaurant factor = total factor). Use factors for uses that do not, in the township’s opinion, fit the descriptions listed above will be determined by the Township Board.
X-3.056. Transition Rules For Water and Sewer Benefit Charges Amendments.
Amended water and sewer benefit charges shall apply to all new construction for which benefit charges have not yet been paid. If benefit charges for a single family residence, subdivision or development have been paid in part and an installment balance remains, the fees for the installment balance shall be calculated in the same manner as the initial payment; provided, however, that modifications in a subdivision or development, and additions to a building or structure after the effective date of the amendatory ordinance shall be assessed benefit charges as provided for in the amendatory ordinance.
X-3.060. Industrial Waste Control (I.W.C.) Charge, Residential Unit Defined.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?18
A monthly industrial waste control (IWC) charge as set by resolution by the Township Board shall apply to all non-residential customers, except those customers exempted from the IWC charge by the City of Detroit Water and Sewer Department (DWSD), for the purposes of affecting the cost of the industrial waste control surveillance program. A residential unit shall be defined as any structure designed and used for year-round habitation where average occupancy by the same person or persons was longer than two consecutive months during the previous year. Nonresidential units shall include any sewered premises which do not meet the above description. The monthly charge shall not be applied on the basis of any meter which services solely residential users or which is used solely for fire protection purposes.
X-3.061. Sewer Connection Rates.
(A) For any connection by an existing single family residence, the charge will be set by Township Board resolution.
(B) Charges for establishments other than existing single family residences shall be based on street right-of-way width and shall be set by Township Board resolution.
(1) Street right-of-way is determined by the property address. In the event the property is a corner lot with service available on either side, the charge will be the lesser of the two charges, if there is a difference.
(2) For properties located on boundary roads of Charter Township of Plymouth, the charge shall be based on the applicable rate for a 0-60’ road, if the sanitary sewer is on the same side of the street.
(3) If there is no riser available thereby necessitating installation under a roadway, the only charge shall be the inspection fee.
X-3.062. Rate Appeals.
The Township Board may establish special charges or fees to meet special circumstances when, in its judgment, the application of the rates herein provided would be inequitable.
X-3.063. Water and Sewer Applications.
All water and sewer applications, agreements and/or permits shall be arranged for and signed and all tap connection and benefit charges shall be paid prior to the issuance of electrical, plumbing and/or building permits.
Water and Sewer System
X?19
X-3.064. Billings.
(A) Bills for debt service rates (where payable in installments) and sewage disposal use rates shall be made as separate items on the water bills for those premises served by the sewers of the system which have connections to the watermains or the system and separate bills for the rates and charges for those applicable shall be prepared for premises having no connections to watermains.
(B) Bills may be rendered monthly and/or quarterly, in the discretion of the township, during each operating or fiscal year and shall represent charges for the period immediately preceding the date of rendering the bill. The bills shall be mailed to the address of the premises unless the township, is otherwise notified by the property owner of the premises and shall be mailed sufficiently in advance of the next billing date so as to be received by the addressee no later than the first day of the new billing period and the bills shall be due and payable on the due date as billed from the date thereof except when the due date is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which case the succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday shall be the final day of payment without penalty and for all bills not paid when due and payable, a penalty of 5% of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto. Waivers may be granted for good cause by the Department of Public Works Manager as authorized by the Township Supervisor. All benefit charges payable pursuant to prior ordinances, which charges are still owing as of the effective date of this article, shall continue and be payable in the same manner as provided in the prior ordinances and the same to such extent are hereby saved from repeal by the adoption of this article.
X-3.065. Enforcement.
(A) Pursuant to Public Act 178 of 1939, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 123.161 et seq., the charges for water service and sewage disposal service prescribed by this article furnished to any premises shall be a lien thereon effective immediately upon the distribution of water or furnishing sewage disposal service to the premises. Any charges, delinquent for six months or more, shall have an administrative fee as set by Township Board resolution added thereto and that total amount shall be certified annually prior to September 1 of each year by the official or officials in charge of collection thereof to the Township Supervisor, who shall enter same upon the next tax roll against the premises to which services shall have been rendered and the charges shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed upon such premises and the enforcement of the lien therefore provided that, in all cases when a tenant is responsible for the payment of any such charge and the Township Board is so notified in writing, such notice to include a true copy of the legally executed lease of affected premises, then no charge shall become a lien against the same premises from and after the date of tendering an affidavit pursuant to the requirements of M.C.L.A. § 123.165, to the Township Supervisor or his or her authorized or her agent. In the event of filing of the notice, no further service shall be rendered to the premises until a cash deposit in an amount to be set by Township Board resolution shall have been deposited with the township as security for the payment of the charges.
(B) In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the collection of charges for water service and/or sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by the township by discontinuing the water service and/or the sewage disposal service to the premises from and after the date the charges are past due and payable. Restoration and continuation of service shall not be made until payment in full of all past due charges, penalties and interest for the service are paid. There shall also be a charge for
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?20
termination and restoration (turn on/turn off) all of which charges, penalties, interest and fees shall be set by Township Board resolution.
X-3.066. Prohibition of Free Service.
No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. But service so furnished by the system shall be paid for in accordance with the foregoing schedule of rates or any revision thereof in compliance with the provisions of this article. The township shall pay from its general funds or from the proceeds of taxes which it is authorized to levy within the constitutional limits the water rates and sewage disposal rates here set forth for any connections serving the township or any of its departments or agencies.
X-3.067. Interior Meters - Basements or Cellars.
No building or structure shall be constructed, extended, repaired or altered in a manner as to construct, extend, repair or alter a basement or cellar unless sufficient design and installation of plumbing systems are provided showing water meter installation and location in that portion of the basement or cellar close to the system main water lines and in an easily accessible, clean, dry space which will accommodate the water meter in a horizontal position by a combination of elbows, valve gates and templets between the inlet and the outlet pipes and which will provide a minimum of 6” clearance between all portions of water meter, templets and valve gates and the closest abutting immovable object. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Department unless the building plans are in compliance with the foregoing requirements. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the Department of Building Inspection unless the completed building or structure is in compliance with the foregoing requirements and the water meter has been installed and is in operating condition. A bypass assembly may be required for any meter installation 1-1/2” or larger.
X-3.068. Interior Meters.
No basement or cellar. No building or structure shall be constructed, extended, repaired or altered without a basement or cellar being a part thereof, unless sufficient design and installation of plumbing systems are provided for water meter installation and location in an easily accessible, clean, dry space impervious to freezing which will accommodate the water meter in a horizontal position by a combination of elbows, valve gates and templets between the inlet and the outlet pipes and which will provide a minimum of 6” clearance between all portions of the water meter, templets and valve gates and the closest abutting immovable object, with the express exception that no water meter shall be located in a crawl space. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Department unless the building plans are in compliance with the foregoing requirements. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Department unless the completed building or structure is in compliance with the foregoing requirements and the water meter has been installed and is in operating condition.
X-3.069. Exterior Meter Readers.
Water and Sewer System
X?21
Whenever the Township Water and Sewer Department has been unable to obtain three consecutive quarterly readings of the water meter located on any premises, an outside meter reader shall be installed at actual cost to the property owner or tenant, as the case may be, and such charge shall be collected and subject to collection enforcement in the same manner as hereinbefore provided for water service and sewage disposal charges, provided that consecutive readings shall mean actual readings of the water meter by the Township Water and Sewer Department, its employees and agents or by the customer as evidenced by authorized return mail customer water meter reading cards received by the Township Water and Sewer Department in time for billing.
X-3.069-1. Disclaimer of Warranties and Liability.
The township, its agents and employees exclude all implied warranties and warranties of merchantability, warranties of third persons as to the design, operation, function, maintenance or installation of the total or component parts of the water service and maintenance or installation of the total or component parts of the water service and sewage disposal system and shall not be liable for damages arising from or occurring as a result of the design, operation, function, maintenance, or installation of the total or component parts of the water service and sewage disposal systems.
X-3.069-2. Funds.
The gross revenues of the system are hereby ordered to be set aside as collected into a separate depository account of the Water and Sewer Fund, designated as the operation and maintenance account. These revenues shall be used exclusively for the operation and maintenance and improvement of the water supply and sewer disposal systems. A separate accounting shall be maintained of any of the gross revenue received by the system which are reserved for specific restricted purposes. In addition, the Township Board may from time to time designate that certain monies be earmarked for an account established to restrict assets of the Water and Sewer Fund for specifically identified uses or to comply with the terms of contractual agreements.
X-3.069-3. Connection.
(A) No connections shall be made to any of the water or sewer mains or lines of the system without a permit for the same having been issued by the Township Water and Sewer Department.
(B) No connection shall be made to any of the sanitary sewer mains or lines of the system which shall cause, by reason thereof, the storm water or surface drainage waters to be introduced into the sanitary sewers.
(C) Upon the Township Board determining that the character or quantity of any sewage emanating or outflowing from any building or premises shall impose an unreasonable burden upon the sanitary sewers of the system, the person, firm or corporation responsible therefore or owning or using the building or premises shall forthwith cease and desist from causing or permitting the sewage to be
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?22
emptied into the system.
(D) No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit the happening or threatened occurrence of any act or the forbearance of any act which shall constitute a present or imminent danger to the transmission of the potable water or effluent by the system, including, without limitation the property, appliances, instruments, structures and appurtenances thereof, and the violation of these provisions shall constitute a public nuisance and be enjoined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(E) No person shall damage, deface or destroy any meter serving the system or any property of the system.
(F) No person shall cause or permit to be introduced into the water supply of the system any contaminant or foreign substance of water.
(G) No person shall introduce new inflow sources to the separate sanitary sewer system.
(H) No person shall construct combined sewers in the township.
(I) No person shall allow any new building sanitary wastewater connection to contain footing drain and/or roof leader wastewater contributions.
(J) Agents and employees to the system shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any premises or structures served or reasonably believed to be served by connection to the watermains or lines of the system for the purpose of inspecting the mains, lines, connection or pipes and, on request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property or structure shall furnish any pertinent information regarding such mains, lines, connections or pipes. Refusal of the information or the access, when requested, shall constitute a violation of this article and a misdemeanor.
X-3.069-4. Sump Pump Collection Systems.
(A) Minimum construction requirements. All sump pump collection systems in the township shall be constructed according to the following minimum requirements:
(1) The sump pump collection systems shall be constructed with 8” minimum diameter pipe ABS composite (Truss) or PVC pipe;
(2) All sump pump collection systems shall be connected to the storm sewer systems only;
(3) All sump pump collection systems shall be placed in drain easements and/or public utility easements;
(4) All sump pump collection systems shall be connected with 2” minimum diameter PVC pipe connected to the sump pump discharge;
Water and Sewer System
X?23
(5) All sump pump collection systems shall be constructed with a minimum of three feet of cover over the pipe with a minimum slope of .30%;
(6) All clean-outs must be placed at a maximum of 300-foot intervals and also at the up-stream ends of the system;
(7) All sump pump collection systems shall be constructed with a minimum of two-foot diameter access structures at all pipe intersections.
(B) Review and approval procedures. The determination of the acceptability of the proposed sump pump collection system will be made in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. The procedures are as follows:
(1) At the time of the review and an approval of the preliminary plat, or final site plan, the applicant shall indicate in general the method or methods of handling the sump pump water discharge.
(2) The foregoing information will be reviewed by the Township Engineer in accordance with sound engineering principles. The Township Engineer shall make its written recommendation to the township prior to the review by the Planning Commission of the preliminary plat or site plan submitted for final approval.
(3) At the time of the final approval of the preliminary plat by the Township Board with the recommendations, if any, of the Planning Commission, or the final site plan approval by the Planning Commission, the acceptability of the proposed sump pump collection system shall be determined.
(4) Residential projects other than plats or site plans approved by the Planning Commission shall be reviewed by the Building Department and the Department of Public Works for compliance and determination of the acceptability of the proposed sump pump collection system.
(C) Prohibited discharges. The discharge of water from sump pumps which results in any of the following conditions shall be considered to be to the detriment of the general public health, safety and welfare and shall be prohibited:
(1) Discharges onto public or private streets, parking lots, walks, bike paths or pedestrian/vehicular travel ways which would occur on a regular basis and/or cause the formation of ice or slippery conditions during the winter months.
(2) Discharges onto lawn areas, including drainage swales, which result in the area being incapable of proper maintenance or which would cause the pooling of water and the promotion of the breeding of mosquitoes or other insects.
(3) Any discharge not outletting to a suitable storm sewer or waterway which as a result of ground water or other conditions causes the sump pump to cycle on a continuous basis without influence from precipitation.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?24
(D) Existing sump pump systems. Discharges from existing sump pump collection systems which create or cause to create situations outlined in Section X-3.069-4(C) above shall be defined as prohibited discharges and subject to correction. The following are possible remedies which shall be required to correct existing prohibited discharges:
(1) The connection of the sump pump discharge line to an appropriate storm sewer or drainage ditch adjoining the property by means of an underground 2” minimum diameter pipe in conformance with Township Building and Plumbing Codes.
(2) The connection of the sump pump discharge line to a dry well constructed on the property by means of an underground 2” minimum diameter pipe in conformance with Township Plumbing and Building Codes. Dry wells will be permitted only in soil conditions where the discharge water will percolate into the ground without adversely impacting adjoining properties. In general, dry wells will be constructed of perforated pipe 24” in diameter set vertically in the ground and surrounded by a minimum of 6” of stone on the sides and bottoms. The minimum depth of the dry well shall be 48” and a suitable lid shall be placed on top which may be covered with earth.
(3) In areas where soils are not suitable for dry wells or where an existing storm sewer or drainage ditch does not adjoin the property, the owner may be required to obtain permission from adjoining land owners to gain access to a suitable outlet. Remedies in this situation will be reviewed and prescribed by the Township Engineer and Chief Building Official.
(4) Property owners utilizing remedies encompassing more than one property owner may attempt to establish a special assessment district for all benefitted property owners in a manner and in accordance with Michigan law.
X-3.069-5. Water Conservation Devices; Non-Contact Wastewater.
(A) All structures served by the township sanitary sewer system which are hereafter constructed or altered shall be equipped with water conservation devices which meet the following standards:
(1) Water closets - two and one-half gallons per flush or less.
(2) Urinals - one gallon per flush or less.
(3) Showers - two gallons per minute or less.
(4) Indoor Faucets - two gallons per minute or less.
(B) All non-contact wastewater generated by a structure shall be directed to a storm drain. Non-contact wastewater is rainwater, surface water, condensate, cooling water or similar liquid waste.
Water and Sewer System
X?25
X-3.069-6. Additional Authority.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the township from entering into additional contracts with the county under the provisions of Public Act 342 of 1939, as amended, or Public Act 185 of 1957, as amended, for the acquisition, construction and financing of additional sewers or sewage disposal facilities or for water distribution improvement or facilities and use of revenues derived from additional projects for the payments of any obligations incurred thereby.
X-3.069-7. Books and Records.
The books and accounts of the system shall be kept in the manner provided by statute. The books and accounts shall be audited not less than annually by a certified public accountant, designated by the Township Board, and a certified copy of the audit shall be filed with the Township Clerk and made available for public inspection during regular business hours of the Office of the Township Clerk.
X-3.070. Industrial Surveillance Permit Fee.
Annual industrial surveillance permit fees for Class D. Permits shall be as set by Township Board resolution.
SECTION II
X-3.25. Industrial Waste Surcharge and Industrial Waste Pretreatment - Discharge to Detroit Water and Sewer Department.
The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article on behalf of the Charter Township of Plymouth. The Charter Township of Plymouth hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this article, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and federal law.
X-3.26. Purpose.
(A) The purpose of this division is the protection of the environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the Charter Township of Plymouth and enabling the Charter Township of Plymouth to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), and the general pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R. part 403.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?26
(B) The objectives of this division are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the users of the system and the community at large;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and,
(4) To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system.
(C) This division provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit and Charter Township of Plymouth wastewater collection and treatment system through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties.
X-3.27. Authority.
By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the Charter Township of Plymouth by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. §1251 et sea; the 1963 Constitution of the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 323.1 et seq.; M.S.A. 3.521 et seq.; the 1997 Township Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. E.P.A. v. City of Detroit, et al. Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No.77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the Board of Water Commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this division shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW.
X-3.28. Definitions.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section and unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
Water and Sewer System
X?27
ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
(1) Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a corporation, who is either (a) the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or, (b) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or,
(2) A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. (See X-3.31)
AVAILABLE CYANIDE. The quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion (CN); hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq); and the cyano-complexes of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury and silver, determined by E.P.A. method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a standard method or approved under 40 C.F.R. 136.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts, initiated and implemented by a user, which can or does lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control, and may include technical and economic considerations.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quality of dissolved oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods.
BOARD. The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
BYPASS. The intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.17.]
CENTRALIZED WASTE TREATMENT (CWT) FACILITY. Any facility that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker truck, trailer/roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment including (a) a facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off-site, and (b) a facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?28
CITY. The City of Detroit.
COMPATIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. Wastewater that is produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Pollutants which can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A collection of individual samples which are obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403, Appendix E.]
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. The information which would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. (See Section X-3.31)
CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has been officially designated as the Control Authority by the State of Michigan under the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a).]
COOLING WATER. The non-contact water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the exchange of heat.
DAYS. Consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this article.
DEPARTMENT. The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and authorized employees of the Department.
DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Michigan.
DIRECTOR. The Director of the Detroit Department of Water and Sewerage, or the Director’s designee.
DISCHARGER. A person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works.
Water and Sewer System
X?29
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or ADMINISTRATOR or E.P.A. ADMINISTRATOR. The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the E.P.A.
FACILITY. A location which contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable.
FATS, OILS or GREASE (FOG). Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE. A composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream.
GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d).
INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable but excludes single family and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and,
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?30
MAY. Permissive.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the E.P.A. in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
NEW SOURCE.
(1) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to the source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: (a) the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located; or (b) the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered;
(2) Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or,
(3) Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or operator has: (a) begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: (1) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or (2) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b) entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section.
PASS THROUGH. Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns.
Water and Sewer System
X?31
pH. The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter.
POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into water.
POLLUTION. The introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(r).].
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. All national categorical pretreatment standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b), and the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), including the discharge prohibitions specified in Section X-3.29.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including:
(1) Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature;
(2) Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or,
(3) The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?32
QUANTIFICATION LEVEL. The measurement of the concentration of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant.
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE. Any sample of wastewater, which accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled. REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLES shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
SANITARY WASTEWATER. The portion of wastewater that is not attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site non-commercial consumption.
SHALL. Mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE. Any violation which meets one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC =1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the Department determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority;
(5) Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date;
(6) Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due date;
(7) Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or,
Water and Sewer System
X?33
(8) Any other violation or group of violations which the Department determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS. Any user of the POTW who:
(1) Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling water;
(2) Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards;
(3) Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations of this division;
(4) Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this division as determined by the Department;
(5) Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or,
(6) Is found by the City of Detroit or the Charter Township of Plymouth to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW’s effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW.
SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended.
STANDARD METHODS. Methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, “Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants” or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. 136, “Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants.” Where these two references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 shall be followed.
STATE. The State of Michigan.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?34
STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL). The total suspended matter which floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods.
TOTAL PCB. The sum of the individual analytical results for each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being treated as zero.
TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS. The sum of the individual analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l.
TOWNSHIP. The Charter Township of Plymouth.
TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or regulations.
TRADE SECRET. The whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto.
UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with limits imposed under this division or with national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER. Any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.
WASTEWATER or WASTESTREAM. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, storm water, and cooling water.
Water and Sewer System
X?35
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS. Permits issued by the Department in accordance with Section X-3.31 of this article.
WATERS OF THE STATE. Groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes.
(B) For purposes of this section, the following acronyms shall have the meanings designated by this section:
(1) BMR - Baseline monitoring report
(2) BOD- Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(3) C.F.R. - Code of Federal Regulations
(4) E.P.A. - Environmental Protection Agency
(5) FOG - fats, oil or grease
(6) l - liter
(7) mg - milligrams
(8) mg/l - milligrams per liter
(9) NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(10) POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(11) RCRA -Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq
(12) SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
(13) SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
(14) TSS - total suspended solids
(15) U.S.C. - United States Code
X-3.29. Discharge prohibitions.
(A) General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?36
standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW:
(1) Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140?F or 60?C using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
(2) Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities, which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshlings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones;
(3) Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than 11.5 units;
(4) Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
(5) Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair;
(6) Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW’s effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the Consent Judgment in U.S. E.P.A. v. City of Detroit et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit;
(8) Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater being discharged;
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 150?F or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104?F (40?C);
Water and Sewer System
X?37
(10) Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug;
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations;
(12) Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or,
(13) Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to cause interference with the POTW.
(B) Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following limitations:
(1) Compatible pollutants: See Appendix C.
(2) Non-compatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
mg/l
Arsenic (As)
1.0
Cadmium (Cd)
See Appendix C
Chromium (Cr)
25
Copper (Cu)
2.5
Cyanide (available)
1.0
Iron (Fe)
1,000
Lead (Pb)
1.0
Nickel (Ni)
5.0
Silver (Ag)
1.0
Zinc (Zn)
7.3
Total Phenolic Compounds
1.0 or see Appendix B
(3) All limitations are cased on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user’s discharge, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
(a) The limitation for total PCB is non-detect. Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. E.P.A. Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 Dgm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?38
compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with 56-3-66.1(d).
(b) The limitation for mercury (Hg) is non-detect. Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. E.P.A. Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 Dgm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with 56-3-66.1 (d).
(4) All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user’s discharge, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
(C) National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall comply with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements, provided, however, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this division, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. part 403 and as established by the Department. The national categorical pretreatment standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are delineated in Appendix A.
(1) Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the Department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user’s permit.
(2) Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The Department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7. The authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of the pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. Where authorization is given to the Department, any industrial user desiring to obtain the credit shall make an application to the Department, consistent with the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 and of this division. Any credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7, or as determined by the Department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of the pollutants removed by the POTW, the surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section.
Water and Sewer System
X?39
(3) Compliance period.
(a) Within 30 days of the effective date of this article, the POTW shall notify all existing industrial users operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective date of this article. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user’s compliance or non compliance with these limitations, and in the event of non-compliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of this article.
(b) An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the POTW for a second extension as part of an administrative consent order. The Department, shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into an agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this provision.
(4) Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 1317(d) and of this division. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
(5) Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to the categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the Department a report containing the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to the Director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the Department a report which contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)( 1-5). In the report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(4) and (5).
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?40
(D) Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the Charter Township of Plymouth, the City of Detroit or by the State of Michigan.
(E) Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the requirements of this division including, but not limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload the waste has applied for and received a permit from the Department for unloading the waste in accordance with the Board’s rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the Board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in Section X-3.31 of this article. The Department may establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this division.
(F) Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued, by the Department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless the industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the Department to require further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the Department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the Department before discharging the wastewater. An industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of the types of wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof:
(1) The general nature, source and process(es) generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards as delineated in Appendix A, shall be so designated;
(2) The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the wastewater;
(3) At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis for the E.P.A. priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application is made in subsection (F)(1) of this section;
(4) A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or collected by the facility’s treatment process(es);
(5) The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the Department; and,
Water and Sewer System
X?41
(6) (a) Other information requested by the Department including, but not limited to, information required by Section X-3.31 of this article, or by rules adopted by the Board. The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of the permit in accordance with the procedures contained in Section X-3.31 of this article, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions contained in Section X-3.31 of this article regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the Department may include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the information mandated in subsections (1) through (6) of this section.
(b) All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the Department.
(G) Groundwater discharges.
(1) Unless authorization has been granted by the Department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited.
(2) (a) The Department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its enactment.
(b) If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from the Department, the Department may authorize the discharge of the wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in Section X-3.31 of this article, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the Board.
(H) Charter Township of Plymouth right of revision. The City of Detroit and the Charter Township of Plymouth reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the Board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. Ninety days after adoption by the Board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations.
(I) Accidental discharges.
(1) (a) Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the Department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against the accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner’s or industrial user’s cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit a plan within 60 days of the effective date of this article. New significant industrial users shall submit a plan prior to the time they commence discharging.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?42
(b) For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a concentration of 5% or greater in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW.
(c) The industrial user shall promptly notify the Department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory.
(2) At least once every two years, the Department shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit a plan within 30 days of notification by the Department.
(J) Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this division or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state or the Charter Township of Plymouth laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with subsection (I)(1) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the Department at its control center and notify the Department of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the Department, the industrial user’s wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or property.
(K) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user’s bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees whom to contact in the Department in the event of an actual or excessive or prohibited discharge.
(L) Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the provisions of this division, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the Department’s POTW, or causes the Department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the Department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the Department because of the violation or discharge. Prior to assessing costs, the Department shall notify the user of its determination that the user’s discharge was the proximate cause of the damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the township’s NPDES permit and the Department’s intent to assess the costs to the user. Any notice shall include written
Water and Sewer System
X?43
documentation which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this division. The charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this division, or this article, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity.
(M) Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into the Charter Township of Plymouth collection system, shall notify the Department in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261. The notification must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p).
(N) Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined in Section X-3.28 of this article, may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in Section X-3.28 where:
(1) The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in Section X-3.28 of this article;
(2) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and,
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the Department.
(O) Pollution prevention. The Department shall encourage and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels required by this division. The Department may require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?44
X-3.30. Fees.
(A) The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the Board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by Board action.
(B) The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the Department’s industrial waste control and pretreatment programs;
(2) User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal;
(3) Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and,
(4) Other fees, which the Board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law.
X-3.31. Wastewater discharge permits.
(A) Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of Section X-3.29(D) of this article. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(1) All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the effective date of this division, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of the effective date of this division. Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all information specified in Section X-3.31(C) of this article and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b).
(2) All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The application must include all information specified in Section X-3.31(C) of this article and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the Department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW.
Water and Sewer System
X?45
(3) Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than sanitary or non-contact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval from the Department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the discharge.
(B) Permit application or reapplication. The Department may require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the same to the Department for determining whether the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a user’s facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with the Department’s request in the manner and form prescribed by the Department. Failure of the Department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this division.
(1) A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, unless an earlier date is specified or required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in Section X-3.31(C) and (G) of this article.
(2) A separate permit application shall be required for each separate facility.
(3) Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the Department.
(C) Application or reapplication information. In support of an application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility;
(2) Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and legally;
(3) All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the standard industrial classification manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended;
(4) Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. The parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in Section X-3.29 of this article, those pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one year period shall be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process wastestream. Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined wastestream formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?46
accordance with procedures established by the E.P.A. pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator;
(5) A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to subsection (C)(4), of this section, identify which pollutants are associated with each process;
(6) Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in subsection (C)(4), of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in subsection (C)(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of immunity;
(7) A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the week:
(8) The average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and each combined wastestream;
(9) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream and which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined wastestream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information furnished in subsection (C)(8) of this section;
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements only;
(11) A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this division and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional;
(12) Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of Section X-3.31(I) of this article;
(13) Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process;
Water and Sewer System
X?47
(14) A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process type;
(15) If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water, the industrial user’s source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source;
(16) If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this division and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance procedures;
(17) Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and,
(18) Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit.
(D) Permit issuance.
(1) Upon receipt of an application, the Department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing regarding any of the following:
(a) The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit;
(b) The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant industrial user but is found by the Department to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The Department shall make such determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6);
(c) The application is incomplete or the information only partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 or by the Department, and that additional information and data are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is unacceptable;
(d) The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The Department shall notify the industrial user of its determination and the basis of the determination.
(2) The Department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to the Department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this division. If the Department determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?48
accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user’s review. An industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in Section X-3.29(L) of this article, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the Department of any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one facility location shall be included in each permit.
(E) Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(l)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this division, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or Charter Township of Plymouth without repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the following:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in Section X-3.29 of this article, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards;
(2) Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(3) Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user;
(4) Restrictions on which of the user’s discharge wastestreams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW;
(5) Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules;
(6) Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges;
(7) Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application;
(8) Additional reporting requirements:
(a) All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by the Department, or on an alternative form approved by the Department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this division. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be established by the Department. Analytical data generated by the Department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility’s own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit.
(b) Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the requirements of Section X-3.29(D) of this article. The report shall show the concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the Department in accordance with Section X-3.29(D) of this article.
Water and Sewer System
X?49
(c) Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by the Department. A compliance report shall be submitted to the Department no later than 90 days following the final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later than 90 days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the Department and incorporated into the industrial users discharge permit and in accordance with Section X-3.29(D) of this article. The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the Department or on an alternate form approved by the Department, and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by national categorical pretreatment standards, or which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the Department in accordance with Section X-3.29(D) of this article. The report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined wastestream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the Department, provided there have been no changes to the elements composing the combined wastestream.
(d) 1. Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for significant industrial users subject to production based standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required to determine compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R. Part 403, or by the Department, but no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator.
2. If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Department using the procedures as prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards.
(e) This report, and those required under Sections X-3.29 and X-3.29(D) of this article, shall include the following certification statement: AI certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations. The certification shall be signed by the facility’s authorized representative, as defined in Section X-3.31(F)(5) of this article. If an
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?50
authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative definition must be submitted to the Department prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(f) If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Department within 24 hours of the time the user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Department within 30 days after the user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation.
(9) In the event the Director determines that an industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the Department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the Department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this division, the Department shall provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit;
(10) Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and,
(11) Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this division.
(F) Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period. Except as deemed necessary by the Department, or as otherwise provided for under this division, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the Department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final.
(G) Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Department during the term of the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in Section X-3.29 of this article are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) Material or substantial changes to an industrial user’s facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user’s effluent. It shall be the industrial user’s duty to request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change;
(2) Change(s) in the Department’s NPDES permit;
(3) Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court order;
(4) Any changes necessary to fulfill the Department’s role as control authority;
(5) An industrial user’s non-compliance with portions of an existing permit;
(6) A change of conditions within the POTW;
Water and Sewer System
X?51
(7) A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the industrial user;
(8) Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and those delineated in Appendix A of this division. Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the Department for a modified permit within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the Department may initiate this action;
(9) Changes in the monitoring location. (See Section X-3.32 of this article);
(10) Typographical errors or omissions in permits;
(11) The Department may modify the permit on its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or,
(12) (a) The user may request a modification of the permit.
(b) When initiated by the Department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The Department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the Department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in Section X-3.37 of this article, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance.
(H) Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the Department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder’s duty to notify the Department of any change at least 30 days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the Department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the Department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place, the Department may require the application for a new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the Department allows to be retained.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?52
(I) Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly notify the Department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this division.
X-3.32. Monitoring facilities.
(A) Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the Department and the industrial user, and to enable the Department to conduct other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this division. In the event the Department determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the Department, the facility shall be provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the Department. The industrial user shall provide the Department with:
(1) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the POTW;
(2) A flow schematic showing: (a) which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream, (b) which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water, and (c) which lines handle each combined wastestream. This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the Department may install the structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the Department for any costs incurred therein.
(B) The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user’s premises in a location readily accessible to the Department. When a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user, the Department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when mere is room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near the sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Department’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. (See Section X-3.31(G) of this article).
Water and Sewer System
X?53
X-3.33. Inspection, sampling and record-keeping.
(A) For purposes of administering and enforcing this division, any other applicable provisions of this article or applicable state or federal laws and regulations, the Department may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The Department’s employees or authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user’s premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities.
(B) Each inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the industrial user’s premises, the Department shall inform the industrial user, or the industrial user’s employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility’s authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. The Department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity.
(C) While performing work on private property, employees or authorized representatives of the Department shall observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the Department shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user’s option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized Department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this division. Which shall be maintained by the Department as confidential in accordance with Section X-3.34 of this article.
(D) Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from the Department will be permitted to, enter for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(E) Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The Department may require samples to be split with the Department for the Department’s independent analysis.
(F) Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from monitoring activities required by this division, or by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit’s Industrial Waste Program, or when requested by the Department, by the state, or by the E.P.A.
(G) Upon the request of the Department, industrial users shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users shall make records readily accessible to the Department at all reasonable times, and allow the Department to copy the records.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?54
(H) In the event the Department obtains samples, and analyses are made of the samples, a copy of the results of the analyses shall be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user’s authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user, the Department employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the user’s discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user’s independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the Department shall be controlling unless proven invalid.
(I) In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user’s discharge is obtained by the Department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in Section X-3.29(B) of this article, or as contained in the facility’s wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the Department within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the limitation in the future.
X-3.34. Confidential information.
(A) (1) Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department that the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
(2) When submitted to the Department, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked ‘confidential’. When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the Department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the State Disposal System permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be non-confidential by the governmental agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the Department releases pursuant to a request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The Department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information released to the governmental agency. The Department will use sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the industrial user’s confidentiality claim.
Water and Sewer System
X?55
(3) The Department shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the Department shall be made in writing.
(4) Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
(B) Except as otherwise determined by the Department or provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with the township shall be made available upon request by the user or the user’s authorized representative during normal business hours.
X-3.35. Statutes, laws and regulations.
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards defined in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this division to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or organization of government other than the Charter Township of Plymouth shall be construed to apply to the code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this division.
X-3.36. Enforcement.
(A) Violations. It shall be a violation of this division for any user to:
(1) Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user’s discharge;
(2) Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user’s operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time frames provided in Section X-3.31(G) of this article;
(3) Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user’s premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(4) Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided, that upon request reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the Department;
(5) Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the Department’s monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers;
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?56
(6) Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial user’s wastewater discharge permit;
(7) Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of this division including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this division shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this division, and the permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this division until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance schedules.
(B) Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for non-compliance with national categorical pretreatment standards where the requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met.
(1) An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(b) At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to the Department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days:
1. A description of the discharge and cause of non-compliance;
2. The period of non-compliance including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to continue; and,
3. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
(2) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(3) The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this division upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
Water and Sewer System
X?57
(C) Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, and if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section.
(1) Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the Department at least ten days in advance.
(2) Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
(3) Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the Department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
(a) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and,
(c) The industrial user properly notified the Department as described in subsection (C)(2) of this section.
(4) Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in subsection (C)(3) of this section, the Department may approve an anticipated bypass.
(D) Pollution prevention initiatives: BMPs.
(1) Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined in Section X-3.28 during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum non-detect ordinance limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP as part of its response. The Department may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as part of an enforcement response. Upon approval of the Department, these pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP, shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?58
(2) Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and a certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement.
(E) Emergency suspensions and orders. The Department may order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the Department, the suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the Department provides informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the Department shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or the environment. In the event the steps are taken, the Director shall notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of the action and order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the Department shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the Director, or his or her designated representative, within ten days of the action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the Department within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the non-complying discharge, the Department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service.
(F) Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened discharge as specified in subsection (D) of this section, whenever the Department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this division, the Department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the Department shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the Department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the Department from escalating its enforcement response.
(G) Administrative actions. Whenever the Department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any prohibition of this division, the Department, except in the case of emergency or flagrant violation, may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy the violation as soon as possible.
(H) Conferences. The Department may order any person, who violates this division, to attend a conference wherein the Department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the Department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this division. Nothing contained herein shall require the Department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the Department from
Water and Sewer System
X?59
proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (K) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the Department’s duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of the agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this division and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder.
(I) Compliance schedules. The user and the Department may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement, or an administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following conditions:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, and completing construction;
(2) No single increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months;
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on the date and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and,
(4) Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this division.
(J) Administrative orders. The Department may order any industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this division or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order.
(K) Show cause hearing. The Department may order any industrial user, who violates this division or allows the violation to occur, to show cause before the Department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the Department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before the Department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?60
personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative.
(1) Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the Board. A hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may:
(a) In the name of the Board, issue notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
(b) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Director for action thereon.
(2) Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter.
(L) Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing any of the following actions:
(1) Immediate compliance with the industrial user’s wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this division, or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation;
(2) Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time period;
(3) Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self- monitoring and analysis during a specified time period;
(4) Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date;
(5) Control of discharge quantities;
(6) Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring, and administration of the industrial user’s activities by the Department during compliance efforts;
(7) Any other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed; and/or,
(8) A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this division or of a duly issued permit did not occur.
Water and Sewer System
X?61
(M) Public notification of significant non-compliance. The Department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit and the Charter Township of Plymouth a list of all industrial users which were in significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy.
(N) Legal actions.
(1) Criminal action: Any user, who violates any provision of this division including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required under this division, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The Department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this division.
(2) Civil action: Whenever the Department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any requirement of this division, the Director may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The Department or Board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit does not constitute an exclusive election of remedies and does not prohibit the Department, Director, Board, City of Detroit or the Charter Township of Plymouth from commencing action in federal court for discharges believed to be in violation of this division, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit’s NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit and/or the Charter Township of Plymouth may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this division, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
(3) All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and the Charter Township of Plymouth where applicable.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?62
X-3.37. Reconsideration and appeal.
Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the Department which result from its construction, application and enforcement of this division. The procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this division.
(A) Selection of reconsideration or of appeal.
(1) Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the Department by the Director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this division.
(2) An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected (i) by a permit issued as final by the Department, or (ii) by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration.
(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this division, a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative, and received at the Department’s general offices within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration shall contain the requester’s name and address, a brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request.
(4) A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the Department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the Director, or the Department’s authorized representative, is final and any right to reconsideration or appeal may be deemed waived.
(B) Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for reconsideration, the Department shall notify the applicant of the time and place for a hearing.
(1) A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings officer who is designated by the Director and may be an employee of the Department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the Director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection (C) of this section.
(2) Where improperly or untimely submitted, the Department may reject a request for reconsideration. The Department shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected.
(3) Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time.
Water and Sewer System
X?63
(4) The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the Department or from the court reporter.
(5) Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer shall issue a final decision which shall contain a recommendation to the Director. The hearings officer shall send the decision to the requester by certified mail.
(6) Unless action is necessary to prevent pass-through, interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the Department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration.
(C) Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for an appeal, the Department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set by the Board until rules are promulgated pursuant to Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition:
(1) Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the Department’s action, determination or decision regarding the request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this division.
(2) Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the Director, or the Department’s authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the Department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected.
(3) The Department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the Department.
(4) The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be submitted to the Board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(5) In accordance with applicable law, the user or the Department may appeal any final decision of the Board to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(6) Unless action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the Department that is the subject of the appeal.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?64
Appendix A
Aluminum forming
40 C.F.R. Part 467
Asbestos manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 427
Battery manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 461
Builder’s paper and board mills
40 C.F.R. Part 431
Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables
40 C.F.R. Part 407
Canned and preserved seafood processing
40 C.F.R. Part 408
Carbon black manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 458
Cement manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 411
Coal mining
40 C.F.R. Part 434
Coil coating
40 C.F.R. Part 465
Copper forming
40 C.F.R. Part 468
Dairy products processing
40 C.F.R. Part 405
Electrical and electronic components I & II
40 C.F.R. Part 469
Electroplating
40 C.F.R. Part 413
Explosives manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 457
Feed lots
40 C.F.R. Part 412
Ferroalloy manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 424
Fertilizer manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 418
Glass manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 426
Grain mills
40 C.F.R. Part 406
Gum and wood chemicals manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 454
Hospital
40 C.F.R. Part 460
Ink formulating
40 C.F.R. Part 447
Inorganic chemicals manufacture (I & II)
40 C.F.R. Part 415
Iron and steel
40 C.F.R. Part 420
Leather tanning and finishing
40 C.F.R. Part 425
Meat products
40 C.F.R. Part 432
Water and Sewer System
X?65
Metal finishing
40 C.F.R. Part 433
Metal molding and casting
40 C.F.R. Part 464
Mineral mining and processing
40 C.F.R. Part 436
Nonferrous metals forming
40 C.F.R. Part 471
Nonferrous metals manufacturing I
40 C.F.R. Part 421
Ore mining and dressing
40 C.F.R. Part 440
Organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers
40 C.F.R. Part 414
Paint formulating
40 C.F.R. Part 446
Paving and roofing materials
40 C.F.R. Part 443
Pesticide chemicals
40 C.F.R. Part 455
Petroleum refining
40 C.F.R. Part 419
Pharmaceutical
40 C.F.R. Part 439
Phosphate manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 422
Photographic
40 C.F.R. Part 459
Plastics molding and forming
40 C.F.R. Part 463
Porcelain enameling
40 C.F.R. Part 466
Pulp, paper, and paperboard
40 C.F.R. Parts 430 and 431
Rubber manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 428
Soap and detergent manufacturing
40 C.F.R. Part 417
Steam electric
40 C.F.R. Part 423
Sugar processing
40 C.F.R. Part 409
Textile mills
40 C.F.R. Part 410
Timber products
40 C.F.R. Part 429
Appendix B
An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols limitation specified in Section X-3.28, to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the total phenols limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the total phenols limitation, upon election:
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?66
2-Chlorophenol
2.0 mg/l
4-Chlorophenol
2.0 mg/l
4-Chloro-3-methylphenol
1.0 mg/l
2,4-Dichlorophenol
5.5 mg/l
2,4-Dinitrophenol
2.0 mg/l
4-Methylphenol
5.0 mg/l
4-Nitrophenol
15.0 mg/l
Phenol
14.0 mg/l
Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters.
Appendix C - Interim Discharge Limitations
No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations:
(A) Compatible pollutants:
(1) Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour period.
(2) Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l.
(3) Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l.
(4) Any phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l.
Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over an operating period representative of a user’s discharge, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
(B) Non-compatible pollutants
Cadmium (Cd) 1.0 mg/l
Water and Sewer System
X?67
SECTION III
X-3.38. Industrial Waste Surcharge and Industrial Waste Pretreatment.
Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
X-3.39. Applicability.
This section shall apply to all users that discharge into the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority’s (YCUA) publicly owned treatment works (the POTW). In addition, it shall be unlawful for any users located outside the Ypsilanti Township limits to continue discharges to the POTW except as provided in this article. In addition, this article shall establish permit requirements for connections or alterations to township or YCUA sewage works facilities or the POTW; govern the design, construction, alteration or use of and connection to the sewage works and POTW; regulate the discharge of wastewater into the sewage works and POTW; prohibit certain detrimental conduct; authorize the issuance of permits; authorize inspections; provide for administration and enforcement of this article; establish civil and criminal penalties for violations; and authorize the enforcement of and ensure compliance within the township of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Clean Water Act and the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, more specifically defined herein, and regulations promulgated and adopted under the acts and statutes.
X-3.40. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT, “THE ACT,” THE FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT and THE CLEAN WATER ACT. Used interchangeably in this article and refer to Public Law 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended by Public Law 95-217 of 1977, and any succeeding amendments and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder, as amended or revised from time to time.
ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMIT. Limits set by the YCUA in lieu of the promulgated national categorical pretreatment standard for integrated facilities in accordance with the combined wastestream formula as set by the EPA.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
(1) A responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user is a corporation, who shall be a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?68
corporation or means the principal manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second quarter 1980 dollars) if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
(2) A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
(3) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above and if all of the following apply:
(a) The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections (1) or (2) of this definition.
(b) This authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
(c) The written authorization is submitted to the Director. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the industrial user, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this definition shall be submitted to the Director or YCUA prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts, initiated and implemented by users, which can or does lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but not limited to the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority (YCUA) publicly owned treatment system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or design of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control, and may include technical and economic considerations. BMP’s may be structural or non-structural or both. In determining what BMPs will be required of an user in a particular case, the Director may consider all relevant technological, economical, practical, and institutional considerations as determined relevant and appropriate by the Director, consistent with achieving and maintaining compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES PLAN (BMPP). A written document that describes how the BMPs will be accomplished.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter).
BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority.
Water and Sewer System
X?69
BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the drainage from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. That extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other places of disposal.
BYPASS. Intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a industrial user’s treatment facility.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively.
CHLORINE DEMAND. The difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact and temperature.
COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMBINED WASTESTREAM. The wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewaters (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. A substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal conform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove the pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, and phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples obtained at intervals over a period of time. The individual samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the YCUA. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the YCUA, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Manual generation of a composite sample through the collection and combining of grab samples may be approved if the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. The decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documents in the users file for that facility or facilities. Composite sampling protocols delineated in the user’s permit take precedence.
COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?70
DAILY MAXIMUM. The concentration or mass loading that shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be regarded as zero when calculating the daily maximum concentration.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGES. The charges levied to customers of the wastewater system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the sewage works.
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT or DNRE. The State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment, Administrator or other duly authorized official.
DIRECTOR. The Director of the YCUA or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations, which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a POTW.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or E.P.A. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Administrator or other duly authorized official.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG). Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, or any other non-volatile or semi-volatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvents in accordance with standard methods.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE. A composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE). A non-domestic user that engages in one or more of the following food preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling; sautéing, rotisserie cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting; toasting; poaching; infrared heating; searing; barbecuing; and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
FOOTING DRAIN. A pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits ground water.
Water and Sewer System
X?71
GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE. A sample taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis over a period of time of not more than 15 minutes without regard to the flow in the wastestream.
HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater discharges from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharge from any structure with these characteristics, as distinct from their employee’s domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable, but excludes single family and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics.
INDUSTRIAL USER PERMIT or INDUSTRIAL USER PRETREATMENT PERMIT. A discharge permit issued by the Director under this article and the YCUA Industrial Pretreatment Program.
INFILTRATION. That portion of groundwater which is unintentionally admitted to a sewer.
INTERFERENCE. A discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, to which both of the following provisions apply: (1) the discharge inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; (2) pursuant to paragraph (1) of this definition, the discharge is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the YCUA or the Act or the State Act, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder, or more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 2601 et seq, including Title II, more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act: the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 7401 et seq; the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. Section 2601 et seq; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, 33 U.S.C Section 1401 et seq.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?72
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM CONCENTRATION. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant in time (independent of the flow rate or duration of the sampling event). If the concentration determined by analysis of any grab sample, composite sample, or discrete portion of a composite sample exceeds the instantaneous maximum concentration, the instantaneous maximum concentration shall be deemed to have been exceeded. Any discharge of a pollutant at or above a specified instantaneous maximum concentration is a violation of this article and the YCUA Industrial Pretreatment Program.
MERCURY REDUCTION PLAN. A plan to ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the POTW is not exceeded as described in Section X-3.81 of this article.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the E.P.A. in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C Section 1317, which apply to a specific category of users which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, subchapter N (1990), parts 405-471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge and for which construction commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), and if any of the following provisions apply: (1) the building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; (2) the building, structure, faculty, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (3) the production of wastewater-generated processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. The extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source and the extent of integration of the new facility with the existing plant should be considered in determining whether the process is substantially independent.
NONDOMESTIC USER. An industry, commercial establishment, or other entity that discharges wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All work, materials, equipment, utilities, administration and other effort required to operate and maintain the sewage works consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement.
Water and Sewer System
X?73
OPERATOR. The person responsible for the overall operation of a facility.
OWNER. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
PASS THROUGH. A discharge that exits the WWTP into state waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Act, the State Act, or the NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH. The logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution or expressed in standard units (SU).
POLLUTANT. Any of the following: substances regulated by categorical standards; substances discharged to the POTW that are required to be monitored, are limited in the POTWs permit, or are or are to be identified in the POTWs permit application; substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid restricting the approved residuals management program of the POTW; substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid operational problems at the POTW; substances for which control measures on nondomestic sources are necessary to avoid worker health and safety problems in the POTW.
POLLUTION. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on a nondomestic user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act and the State Act. This term includes prohibited discharges and local limits defined in R 323.2303 and categorical standards.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?74
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). The treatment works owned and/or operated by the YCUA and includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. The term also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to or through the publicly owned treatment works. The term also means the municipality (the Township of Ypsilanti) that has jurisdiction over indirect discharges to, and discharges from, the treatment works.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
REPLACEMENT. The replacement in whole or in part of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other state and federal regulations.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial or permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the sewage works.
SEWAGE TREATMENT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS. All municipal facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The sum of any applicable user charges, surcharges and debt service charges.
SHALL. Is mandatory; may is permissive.
Water and Sewer System
X?75
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU). Either of the following:
(1) A nondomestic user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403 (March 26, 2007) and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, subchapter N (1990); or,
(2) (a) A nondomestic user that, in the opinion of YCUA or of the township, has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW’s operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement or that contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or that discharge an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater. Any user designated as significant may petition the township to be deleted from the list of significant industrial users on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(b) The Director may determine that a user that meets the criteria of subsections (1) and (2) of this definition above is not currently a significant industrial user, if the Director finds that the user has no reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement, or that a industrial user permit is not required to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. A determination that a user is not a significant industrial user (or that a permit is therefore not required) shall not be binding and may be reversed by the Director at any time based on changed circumstances, new information, or as otherwise determined necessary by the Director to meet the purposes and objectives of this article.
SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE. Any of the following: (i) chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as results of analyses in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.2(l); (ii) technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as results of analyses in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same each pollutant parameter taken during a 6-month period equal or exceed the product of the pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable technical review criteria. (Technical review criteria equals 1.4 for compatible pollutants and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH.); (iii) any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(l) (daily maximum, or longer-term average instantaneous limits, or narrative standard) that the YCUA determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of township or YCUA personnel or the general public; (iv) any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in the YCUA’s exercise of its emergency authority under Rule 323.2306(a) (vi) of the Part 23 Rules under the State Act or its emergency authority under this article to halt or prevent the discharge; (v) failure to meet, within 90 days after a scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a YCUA or other local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; (vi) failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, a required report such as, but not limited to, a baseline monitoring report, 90 day or other compliance report, periodic self-monitoring report, or report on compliance with a compliance schedule; (vii) failure to timely or accurately report non-compliance; or (viii) any other violation or group of violations, which may include
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?76
a violation of Best Management Practices, that YCUA determines will affect or has adversely affected the operation or implementation of the YCUA pretreatment program or operation of the POTW.
SLUG, SLUG LOADING, SLUG DISCHARGE. Either:
(1) Any discharge of pollutants at a volume or concentration that causes upset of or interference with the POTW or causes the pass-through of pollutants to receiving waters;
(2) Any discharge of a pollutant(s), measured by a grab sample, at a concentration exceeding five times the composite or grab sample discharge limit;
(3) Any discharge of wastewater outside the pH range of five - 11 S.U. for either a continuous duration of greater than or equal to 15 minutes or for a sum total of 30 minutes within one day; or,
(4) Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge.
STATE. The State of Michigan.
STATE ACT. Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), as amended, and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder, as amended or revised from time to time.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SURCHARGE. An extra charge to cover the cost of treating, sampling and testing extra strength sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWNSHIP. The Charter Township of Plymouth, Michigan or its board of trustees.
TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
Water and Sewer System
X?77
USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewage works.
USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works pursuant to Section 204(b) of PL 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement.
USER CLASS. The kind of user connected to sanitary sewers including but not limited to residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental.
(1) Residential user means a user of the treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, or permanent multifamily dwellings (transient lodging is not included, it is considered commercial).
(2) Industrial user means any user who discharges an “industrial waste” as defined in this article or any nondomestic source who discharges pollutants to the sewage works or POTW.
(3) Commercial user means an establishment involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the YCUA discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential user or an industrial user.
(4) Institutional user means any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a determination by the YCUA discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
(5) Governmental user means any federal, state or local government user of the wastewater treatment works.
WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
X-3.41. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASTM - American Society for Testing and Materials
BMP - Best Management Practices
BMPP - Best Management Practices Plan
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?78
C.F.R. - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical oxygen demand
CWA - Clean Water Act
DNRE - Department of Natural Resources and Environment (State of Michigan)
E.P.A. - Environmental Protection Agency
FOG - Fats, Oils and Grease
l - liter
MRP - Mercury Reduction Plan
mg - milligrams
mg/l - milligrams per liter
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M - Operation and maintenance
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
SS - Suspended solids
U.S.C. - United States Code
WWTP - The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority Wastewater Treatment Plant
WEF - Water Environment Federation
YCUA - Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority
Water and Sewer System
X?79
X-3.42. Protection from damage.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works or POTW.
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
X-3.43. Permit or authorization required.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the waters of the state within the township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the township and/or to the sewage works, any wastewater except as provided by an NPDES permit and/or as authorized by the township and the YCUA in accordance with the provisions of this article.
X-3.44. Information required prior to connection to system.
All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the sewage works shall submit information on the use, processes and wastewater to the Director before connecting to or contributing to the sewage works. The information submitted must be sufficient for the YCUA to determine the impact of the user’s discharge on the sewage works and the need for pretreatment. The user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(A) The name, address and location of the user.
(B) The SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended and the industrial category subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40 C.F.R., Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Part 403, Appendix C, if applicable.
(C) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those pollutants mentioned in Section X-3.37 through X-3.87 of this article, when required by the Director, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007), as amended from time to time. Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the E.P.A. determines that the part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods of any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the publicly owned treatment works or other parties, approved by the E.P.A.
(D) The time and duration of contribution.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?80
(E) The average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(F) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation, if the user is a SIU or as required by the YCUA.
(G) A description of activities, faculties and plant processes on the premises including all materials, which are or could be discharged.
(H) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any YCUA, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
(I) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide additional pretreatment shall be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards.
(2) No increment referred to in subsection (I)(1) of this section shall exceed nine months.
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the Director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on the date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Director.
(J) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
(K) The type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day.
(L) The number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pre treatment system.
(M) Any other information as may be deemed by the Director to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage works.
Water and Sewer System
X?81
X-3.45. Reporting required after promulgation or revision of a pretreatment standard and reporting from a new source.
Within 180 days or the promulgation or revision of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under R 323.2311(2) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act, whichever is later, existing nondomestic users subject to the categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging, or scheduled to discharge, to the POTW shall submit, to the YCUA, a report that contains all of the information listed in this section. Where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the YCUA or E.P.A. in compliance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. S128.140(b) (1977), the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the information again. Not less than 90 days before the commencement of a discharge, sources that become nondomestic users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard and new sources shall be required to submit, to the YCUA, a report that contains the information listed in subsections (A) to (E) of this section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (D) and (E) of this section. All of the following information shall be submitted pursuant to this section.
(A) The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.
(B) A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(C) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation or operations carried out by the nondomestic user. The description shall include a facility drawing and schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW and from which processes the discharges originate.
(D) Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW for each of the following:
(1) Regulated process streams.
(2) Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula specified in R 323.2311(6). YCUA may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
(E) All of the following information shall be provided with respect to the measurement of pollutants:
(1) The identity of the pretreatment standards, including state or local standards, applicable to each regulated process.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?82
(2) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration or mass, where required by the standard or YCUA, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations.
(3) A minimum of four grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The YCUA may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any nondomestic user that demonstrates that time proportional sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling period. Samples obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples may be approved by the Director or designee when the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
(4) With the exception of the pollutants specified in subsection (3) of this section, the user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
(5) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if the facilities exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if pretreatment facilities do not exist. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater before pretreatment, the nondomestic user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula specified in R 323.2311(7) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with R 323.2311(5), the adjusted limit and supporting data shall be submitted to YCUA.
(6) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA. determines that the part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by YCUA or other parties, approved by the EPA.
(7) The YCUA may allow the submission of a baseline report that utilizes only historical data if the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
(8) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling and the methods of analysis and shall certify that the sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(F) A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the nondomestic user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for the nondomestic user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
Water and Sewer System
X?83
(G) If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the nondomestic user will provide additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance. The completion date in the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. All of the following conditions shall apply to compliance schedules:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the nondomestic user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The events may include any of the following:
(a) The hiring of an engineer.
(b) Completing preliminary plans.
(c) Completing final plans.
(d) Executing contracts for major components.
(e) Commencing construction.
(f) Completing construction.
(g) Other similar major events.
(2) An increment referred to in this subsection shall not be more than nine months.
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the nondomestic user shall submit a progress report to YCUA, including, at a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on a particular date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the nondomestic user to return the construction to the schedule established. Not more than nine months shall elapse between progress reports to YCUA.
(H) Where the nondomestic user’s categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance under R 323.2311(7) or a fundamentally different factors variance under R 323.2313(b) at the time the nondomestic user submits the report required by this rule, the information required by subsections (F) and (G) of this section shall pertain to the modified limits.
(I) Any changes to information requested under subsections (A) to (E) of this section shall be submitted by the nondomestic user to YCUA within 60 days.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?84
X-3.46. Additional reporting required and periodic report requirements.
(A) Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage works, POTW or the WWTP, any nondomestic user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Director and/or YCUA a report containing the information required in subsections (D) through (F), inclusive, of Section X-3.45 of this article. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by YCUA in accordance with the procedures in R 323.2311(5) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act or otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or rules promulgated thereunder, the report shall contain a reasonable measure of the nondomestic user’s long-term production rate. For all other nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, the report shall include the nondomestic user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period.
(B) The YCUA may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(C) All of the following provisions shall apply to periodic reports on continued compliance:
(1) Any nondomestic user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the publicly owned treatment works shall submit, to the YCUA semiannually, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the YCUA, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent that are limited by the categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, the report shall include a record of measured or appropriately estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported in Section X-3.45 or this article, except that YCUA may require more detailed reporting of flows.
(2) Where YCUA has imposed mass limitations on nondomestic users as provided for by R 323.2311(5) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act or where such limitations are otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or Rules promulgated thereunder, the report required by subsection (1) immediately above shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the discharge from the nondomestic user.
(3) For nondomestic users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the YCUA or under the Act or the State Act or Rules promulgated thereunder, the report required by subsection (1) immediately above shall contain a reasonable measure of the nondomestic user’s long-term production rate. For all other nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, the report required by subsection (1) immediately above shall include the nondomestic user’s actual average production rate for the reporting period.
Water and Sewer System
X?85
(D) All categorical and non-categorical nondomestic users shall notify the YCUA immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings.
(E) All of the following provisions apply to significant industrial users that are categorical industrial users or non-categorical users in regards to monitoring and analysis to demonstrate continued compliance:
(1) The reports required in Section X-3.45 or this article or in this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the YCUA, of pollutants contained in the discharge that are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the YCUA instead of the nondomestic user. Where the YCUA elects to perform the required sampling and analysis instead of the nondomestic user, the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the compliance certification required under Section X-3.45 and subsection (A) of this section. In addition, where the YCUA collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the report. The YCUA shall provide, to the nondomestic user, within ten days after the results are available, the results of any sampling the YCUA performs for nondomestic user self-monitoring that show a violation of any pretreatment standard. Any certification required by a categorical pretreatment standard shall be included with the semiannual compliance reports.
(2) If sampling performed by a nondomestic user indicates a violation of pretreatment standards, the nondomestic user shall notify the YCUA within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The nondomestic user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the YCUA within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation; however, the nondomestic user is not required to resample if the YCUA performs sampling at the nondomestic user at a frequency of at least once per month or if the YCUA performs sampling at the nondomestic user between the time when the nondomestic user performs its initial sampling and the time when the nondomestic user receives the results of the sampling.
(3) The reports required in subsection (C) of this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The YCUA may require a frequency of monitoring that is necessary to assess and assure compliance by nondomestic users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(4) All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the E.P.A. pursuant to section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007) or with any other test procedures approved by the E.P.A. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the E.P.A. Where the provisions of 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007) do not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the E.P.A. determines that the part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the YCUA or other parties and approved by the E.P.A.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?86
(5) If a nondomestic user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the YCUA using the procedures prescribed in subsection (4) immediately above, the results of the monitoring shall be included in the report.
(6) A minimum of one grab sample shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The YCUA may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any nondomestic user that demonstrates that time-proportional sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling period. Samples obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples may be approved by the Director or designee when the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
(F) The YCUA may require appropriate reporting from nondomestic users that have discharges, which are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards. Significant industrial users shall submit, to the YCUA, at least semiannually, a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the YCUA. The reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where the provisions of 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007) do not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the E.P.A. determines that the part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the YCUA or other persons and approved by the E.P.A. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the YCUA instead of the significant industrial user. Where the YCUA collects all of the information required for the report, the significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. The YCUA shall provide, to the nondomestic user, within ten days after the results are available, the results of any sampling it performs for nondomestic user self-monitoring that show a violation of any pretreatment standard. Where YCUA performs sampling for a significant industrial User, YCUA must perform any required repeat sampling and analysis within 30 days of becoming aware of a violation.
(G) All periodic compliance reports shall be certified and signed by the authorized representative of the industrial user. The authorized representative shall state the following certification when submitting the periodic compliance reports to YCUA: “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather 6and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
Water and Sewer System
X?87
X-3.47. Powers of the YCUA.
Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article, the Act and State Act and all other applicable regulations established by the YCUA. The YCUA may:
(A) Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(B) Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
(C) Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(D) Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(E) Establish compliance schedules;
(F) Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
(G) Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the YCUA, and affording YCUA access thereto, and copying thereof;
(H) Require notification of slug discharges and accidental spills;
(I) Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the YCUA to ensure compliance with this article, the Act and the State Act. The YCUA shall require notification of the YCUA for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
X-3.48. Sampling and monitoring facilities may be required.
The YCUA shall, when determined necessary by the Director, require to be provided and operated at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the YCUA and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the YCUA.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?88
X-3.49. Right to access of facilities for inspection, sampling, records examination, record copying or other duties.
The YCUA shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the YCUA or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The YCUA, DNRE and E.P.A. shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, at the user’s expense, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where security measures are in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards or other appropriate personnel so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the YCUA, DNRE and E.P.A. will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
X-3.50. Compliance with article provisions required.
(A) Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article, the Act and State Act and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and as required by the YCUA, the Act or the State Act. Any industrial user that qualifies as a new source is required to have pretreatment equipment installed and operational before discharging and shall be in full compliance within 90 days of initial discharge. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the YCUA shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the YCUA for review, and shall be approved by the YCUA before construction of the facility. The review of the plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the YCUA under the provisions of this article, the Act or the State Act. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the YCUA prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.
(B) As required by Section 403.8(D)(viii) of the Federal Register, the YCUA shall publish at least annually in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW of the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant non-compliance with any applicable pretreatment requirements. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the E.P.A. or DNRE upon request.
X-3.51. Confidentiality of information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the DNRE and the E.P.A. without restriction and shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests and
Water and Sewer System
X?89
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user, in accord with applicable provisions of the state freedom of information act, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended and Rule 323.2314 of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act.
X-3.52. Enforcement by township.
(A) All orders, directives, legal and/or equitable actions, which are necessary and appropriate to enforce this article, the Act and State Act shall be carried out by YCUA and/or the township.
(B) Nothing contained in subsection (A) of this section shall preclude the township or YCUA from instituting, maintaining or joining any legal and/or equitable actions to enforce this article, the Act and State Act.
X-3.53. Records, accounts, audits, classification of Users, insurance.
(A) The YCUA will maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the POTW. The YCUA will cause an annual audit of the books of record and account for the preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent certified public accountant, and will supply the audit report to authorized public officials on request.
(B) In conjunction with the audit there shall be an annual review of the sewer charge system for adequacies meeting expected expenditures for the following year.
(C) Classification of old and new industrial users may also be reviewed annually.
(D) The YCUA will maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of the system, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems.
(E) Retention of records. A user shall retain records of all monitoring information, including, all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by this article, an order, or a permit, all documentation associated with Best Management Practices, and the records of all data used to complete the application for a permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of a sample, measurement, report application or orders. This period may be extended by the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority at any time.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?90
X-3.54. Powers and authority of inspectors.
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article, the Act and State Act.
X-3.55. Enforcement Process.
(A) Emergency suspension. The Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or any permit issued under this article when a suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, the POTW, or constitutes a violation of any condition of a NPDES or other permit, this article, the Act or State Act. Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment services or a permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge into a township or YCUA sanitary sewer. If a user fails to immediately comply with a suspension order as required in this section, the YCUA shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination or severance of the user’s sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to any person, the POTW or the environment. The YCUA shall allow the user to recommence its discharge upon receipt of proof of compliance with this article and the elimination of the discharge and/or identified danger. A user whose wastewater treatment service or permit has been suspended under this article shall submit, within 15 days of the suspension, a written statement to the Director describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent future harmful discharges in addition to other information required by this article or otherwise required by the Act or State Act under such circumstances.
(B) Notice letter. The minimum enforcement response that the Director or his or her designee will use to notify a user that a violation of the local applicable sewer use article or YCUA Industrial Pretreatment Program has occurred or is occurring.
(C) Notification of violation. Whenever the Director finds that any user has violated or is violating any provision of this article or a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued under his or her article, the Act or State Act, the Director may serve upon said user written notice of the violation. Within 30 days of receipt of the notice, the user shall submit to the Director or designee an explanation of the violation and a written plan for satisfactory correction. Submission of this plan does not relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act or State Act.
(D) Show cause order. The Director may order any user violating this article or the IPP a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act, or State Act, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The show cause notice shall require the user to appear before the Director for a show cause meeting within a reasonable time, not less than ten days after first class mailing of the order to the user’s recorded or last known address. Enforcement action may be pursued whether or not a user appears at a show cause meeting and issuance of a show cause order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act, or State Act.
Water and Sewer System
X?91
(E) Consent order. The Director is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance and other similar documented agreements establishing an agreement with a user responsible for non-compliance with an order, permit, this article, the Act or State Act. A document may include compliance schedules, stipulated fines or penalties, the amount of which shall not be limited by the civil fine assessment provision of this article, remedial actions and signatures of the Director and user. Consent orders or similar documented agreements prepared and executed under this section shall have the same force and effect as other orders issued under this article.
(F) Compliance order. When the Director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, an order may be issued to the user directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated and compliance is otherwise achieved. An order may contain other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the non-compliance, including, but not limited to, the installation of pre-treatment technology, additional self-monitoring and new management practices. Issuance of a compliance order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act or State Act.
(G) Cease and desist order. When the Director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, an order may be issued to the user responsible for the violation directing that the violations cease and desist immediately. In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may be given by telephone. In a non-emergency situation, the cease and desist order may be used to suspend or permanently revoke an industrial wastewater discharge permit or permits. A cease and desist order may require the user to take appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the order or as otherwise provided in this article.
(H) Termination of wastewater discharge permit.
(1) Any user who has a permit who violates the following conditions of a wastewater discharge permit or violates this article, the Act or State Act or any applicable state or federal law or regulation is subject to permit termination:
(a) Failure to accurately report wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(b) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?92
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises or records for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling or for any other purpose permitted under this article, the Act or State Act;
(d) Failure to comply with an order issued under this article; or,
(e) For those reasons stated in Section X-3.60 or for any other reason permitting termination as provided in this article, the Act or State Act.
(2) Users shall be notified of the proposed permit termination and shall be offered an opportunity to show cause under the provision of subsection (D) of this section, why the proposed action should not be taken.
(I) Administrative assessments. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, shall be liable to the YCUA and/or township for any expense loss or damage occasioned by reason of the violation, including but not limited to reasonable attorney’s fees and may be subject to an administrative assessment by the YCUA in an amount of $1,000 per violation, per day. Each day on which non-compliance shall occur or is continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. The expense, loss, damage or assessments may be added to a user’s sewer service charges and the YCUA and the township shall have other collection rights and remedies as designated by law, the Act, the State Act and this article to collect these sewer service charges.
(J) Judicial remedies. A person who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, is subject to the judicial remedies described below in addition to being responsible for a civil fine assessment or a misdemeanor or any administrative remedy or enforcement action provided for in this article:
(1) Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or the State Act, the Director, through counsel, may petition the Circuit Court for issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both to restrain or compel certain activities on the part of the user.
(2) Any user who has violated or continues to violate any order or permit issued hereunder may be liable to the YCUA in such judicial proceedings for a civil fine assessment of $1,000, plus actual damages, direct or indirect, incurred by the YCUA, per violation, per day, for as long as the violation continues. Additionally, the YCUA may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs and other expenses associated with any enforcement activities, including sampling, monitoring and analysis expenses.
(3) The Director, through counsel, may petition the Circuit Court to impose, assess, and recover the assessments and sums. In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude or duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained by the user through the violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other relevant factor.
Water and Sewer System
X?93
(K) Liens. Any fine or other assessment issued or imposed under this article or other costs or charges imposed under this article may be added to the user’s sewer service charges and the YCUA shall have other collection rights and remedies as designated by law and this article to collect the charges and all unpaid charges, fines, assessments, penalties and service charges shall constitute and may be recorded as a lien against the user’s property if not paid within the time frame allocated by YCUA or a court for payment.
(L) Appeals. Any person or user subject to enforcement action under the provisions of this article, the Act or State Act, except for civil fine assessment notices, consent orders, emergency actions under this article or judicial actions by YCUA, may request a hearing before the Director within ten days of receipt of notification of the proposed enforcement action. A hearing shall then be held by the Director concerning the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action has been taken, the proposed enforcement action, and the user’s explanation or other relevant evidence. An appeal may be taken from the Director’s final decision. The following rules shall apply to the hearing and appeal:
(1) The Director may issue notices of a hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of evidence relative to the hearing.
(2) In the event a request for hearing is not filed within ten days of the user’s notice of an enforcement action, failure to file a request shall be deemed a waiver of any and all hearing or appeal rights established under this article.
(3) A request for hearing shall state the basis for the request, the reasons in support of the request and any alternative relief which the aggrieved party seeks.
(4) During the pendency of any hearing process or appeal the user must comply with the enforcement action or YCUA order from which the appeal is taken.
(5) At the hearing, testimony must be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. A transcript of the hearing shall be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of usual and reasonable charges.
(6) After the Director has held a hearing and reviewed the evidence, he or she may issue an order affirming, modifying or withdrawing the enforcement action.
(7) Within 15 days from receipt of the Director’s final decision, the aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the board stating the grounds on which the appeal is based together with all documents, evidence, transcripts and information in support of the aggrieved party’s position. In addition, the aggrieved party shall file five copies of the appeal and supporting documentation with the board and serve an additional copy on the Director.
(8) The Director shall have 30 days to respond to the appeal and to submit all evidence, documents and information in support of the Director’s decision and shall file five copies with the board and shall serve an additional copy on the aggrieved party.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?94
(9) (a) Within 30 days of receiving the Director’s response the board shall meet and review all documents and evidence pertaining to the appeal and shall issue an order affirming the Director’s order, affirming the Director’s order in part and reversing in part, or reversing the Director’s order in full.
(b) The board shall forward a copy of its decision to all interested parties.
(M) Industrial Pretreatment Program and Enforcement Response Plan. This article, the Act and State Act shall also be enforced by the YCUA pursuant to a written Industrial Pretreatment Program adopted by YCUA as required by the Act and State Act which plan shall include those plan elements required by the Act and State Act including, but not limited to, an enforcement response plan designed to achieve enforcement of that program. That enforcement response plan shall provide for, at minimum, those powers of enforcement granted by this article, the Act and State Act.
X-3.56. Same -- Surcharges, fees.
The Director shall also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the YCUA for the additional cost of operation and maintenance of the sewage works or POTW due to the violations of this article, the Act or State Act.
X-3.57. Permit - Requirements for nondomestic Users.
(A) All nondomestic users must notify the Director of the nature and characteristics of their wastewater prior to commencing their discharge. The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose.
(B) It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the sewage works or POTW township’s sanitary sewer system without first obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit from the YCUA. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an Industrial user pretreatment permit shall be deemed a violation of this article. Obtaining an Industrial user pretreatment permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state or local law.
(C) The Director may require that other Industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, obtain Industrial user pretreatment permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
(D) Any Industrial user located beyond the Ypsilanti Township limits shall submit a permit application in accordance with Section 62-141 of the Ypsilanti Township Sewer Use Article within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. New Industrial users located beyond the Ypsilanti Township limits shall submit applications to the Director 60 days prior to discharging into the sewage works or POTW. Upon review and approval of the application, the Director may enter into a contract with the user which requires the user to subject itself to, and abide by this article, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions contained in this article, the Act or State Act.
Water and Sewer System
X?95
(E) Any significant Industrial user which discharges nondomestic waste into the sewage works or POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after the date, apply to the YCUA for an industrial user pretreatment permit and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived except in accordance with a permit issued by the Director.
(F) Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging nondomestic wastes into the sewage works or POTW must obtain a pretreatment permit prior to beginning or recommencing the discharge. An application for this permit must be filed at least 60 days prior to the anticipated start up date.
X-3.58. Same - Application.
(A) In order to be considered for a pretreatment permit, all Industrial users required to have a permit must submit the information required by Section X-3.44 on an application form approved by the Director:
(B) When required, plans must be certified for accuracy by a state - registered professional engineer.
(C) All applications must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the Industrial user: “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(D) The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the Industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation of the data furnished, the Director may issue an Industrial user pretreatment permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
(E) At the time an application for a permit is made, the user shall pay to YCUA a permit fee in an amount established from time to time by the board, which fee shall be refunded to the user in the event the permit is denied. In addition to the above-stated permit fee, the user shall pay to YCUA a nonrefundable permit fee equal to YCUA’s expenses incurred in hiring laboratories, engineers, or other consultants for the purpose of evaluating the permit application submitted by the user to YCUA.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?96
X-3.59. Same - contents.
Pretreatment permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the POTW’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate POTW sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW collection system or plant and ensure compliance with this article, the Act and State Act. Permits shall contain a statement of the duration of the permit which shall not be more than five years; a statement of permit non-transferability without prior notification to the YCUA and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator; effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements, including identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limit, and state and local law; and a statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. The schedule may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal or state deadlines. Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following:
(A) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(B) Limits on the average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties;
(C) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, or similar requirements designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works or POTW;
(D) Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including additional management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routing discharges;
(E) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the sewage works or POTW;
(F) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(G) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules;
(H) Compliance schedules;
Water and Sewer System
X?97
(I) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
(J) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Director and affording the Director, or his or her representatives, access thereto;
(K) Requirements for notification of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater being introduced in the sewage works or POTW;
(L) Requirements for the notification of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. Requirements for notification to YCUA of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges;
(M) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations, including the Act and State Act;
(N) A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal, state or local pretreatment standards or limits, including those which become effective during the term of the permit.
X-3.60. Same - Issuance process.
(A) Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the Director.
(B) The Director will provide all interested persons with notice of final permit terms. Upon notice by the Director, any person, including the Industrial user, may petition to appeal the terms of the permit within 30 days of the notice.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a reconsideration by the board. If, after considering the petition and any arguments put forth by the Director, the board determines that reconsideration is proper, it shall remand the permit back to the Director for reissuance. Those permit provisions being reconsidered by the Director shall be stayed pending reissuance.
(4) A board’s decision not to reconsider a final permit shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(C) The Director may modify or terminate the permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?98
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
(2) Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger’s operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit;
(3) A change in any condition in either the Industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the sewage works or POTW or POTW personnel or the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;
(6) Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
(9) To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator;
(10) Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations;
(11) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(12) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(13) Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and records;
(14) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(15) Failure to pay fines;
(16) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(17) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(18) As provided in Section X-3.55.
Water and Sewer System
X?99
(D) The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated non-compliance, does not stay any permit condition.
(E) Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of the Director, if:
(1) The permittee must give at least 30 days advance notice to the Director.
(2) The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which:
(a) States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes.
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit.
(F) The user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued, if:
(G) Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the POTW and any user whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the POTW and specially treated and subject to any payments or user charges, as may be applicable. However, no discharge which violates pretreatment standards will be allowed under the terms of such special agreements. If, in the opinion of the Director, the wastewater may have the potential to cause or result in any of the following circumstances, no special agreement will be made:
(1) Pass through or interference.
(2) Endanger municipal employees or the public.
X-3.61. Penalty for violation of article: liability of User.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, shall become liable to the township for and may be subject to a civil fine assessment of $1,000 per violation, per day, plus any costs, damages and expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the township or YCUA in connection with the violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of this article that is listed below shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine of not more than $500, exclusive of any civil fine assessment or other costs, damages and expenses, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. Misdemeanor violations include:
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?100
(1) intentional unpermitted discharge;
(2) falsification of a monitoring report or the making of any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article;
(3) improper sampling, with evidence of an intent to falsify or mislead;
(4) intentional failure to install monitoring equipment after a deadline established by an order issued under this article or the tampering with or knowingly rendering inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment or method required under this article;
(5) intentional recurring violation of a compliance schedule in a permit or a violation of a compliance schedule in an order issued under this article; or,
(6) illegal discharge when the discharge causes harm and there is evidence of intent.
X-3.62. Funding/Fees.
(A) The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the Board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by Board action.
(B) The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not necessarily limited to:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the YCUA’s Industrial Pretreatment Programs; and Enforcement Response Plan.
(2) User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in a discharge, and to cover other treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; and
(3) Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for enforcement hearings or other enforcement action including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and,
(4) Other fees, which the Board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein and continued in other IPP & ERP, or as may be required by law.
X-3.63. Reserved.
X-3.64. Reserved.
Water and Sewer System
X?101
DIVISION 3. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
X-3.65. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof or any part of the sewage works or POTW without first obtaining a written permit from the Director.
X-3.66. Classes of permits; application; fees.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (1) For residential and commercial service; and (2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the township or YCUA The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent, in the judgment of the township or YCUA. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the township at the time the application is filed.
X-3.67. Costs of connection to be borne by owner; indemnification of township and YCUA.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the township and the YCUA from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
X-3.68. Separate building sewer for each building required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
X-3.69. Use of old building sewers with new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the township or YCUA, to meet all requirements of this article.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?102
X-3.70. Construction specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer; and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the township or YCUA. In the absence of the Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
X-3.71. Elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
X-3.72. Prohibited connections.
(A) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer.
(B) The YCUA shall not allow any connection to the sanitary sewer unless there is sufficient capacity in the sewage works to convey and adequately treat the additional wastewater from the proposed connection.
X-3.73. Connection specifications.
(A) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules land regulations of the YCUA or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
(B) Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the YCUA before installation.
X-3.74. Inspection; supervision of connection.
The contractor installing the building sewer shall notify the YCUA when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of YCUA.
Water and Sewer System
X?103
X-3.75. Guards for excavations; restoration of public property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the township and YCUA.
DIVISION 4. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
X-3.76. Required.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the township, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(B) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article.
(C) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other faculty intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(D) The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the township and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer of the township, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line.
X-3.77. Unpolluted discharges.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains, roof water, or other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection except as otherwise provided in this article. Any premises connected to a storm sewer shall comply with county, state and federal requirements as well as those by the township and the YCUA.
(B) Stormwater, groundwater, water from footing drains and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers, or to a natural outlet, except as otherwise provided in this article. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon application and approval of the YCUA and the appropriate state agency to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?104
X-3.78. Fats, Oils and Grease, (FOG) Interceptor and Sand Interceptors.
Fats, oils and grease (FOG) and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing fats, oils, or grease discharges in which the concentration in a grab sample exceeds the 100 mg/l limit, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted into place shall be gastight and watertight. When installed, all fats, oils, and grease, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. A user may petition the Director for an exemption from having to install a fats, oils, and grease (FOG) interceptor in accordance with provisions specified in the YCUA FOG Mitigation Program Policy, as amended from time to time. Upon approval by the Director, YCUA’s Contract Communities that have a Fats, Oils, and Grease Ordinance/Policy can implement the ordinance/policy in lieu of this section and the YCUA Fats, Oils, and Grease Mitigation Program Policy.
X-3.79. Prohibited discharges.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the sewage works. A user may not contribute the following substances to the sewage works:
(A) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage works or to the operation of the sewage works.
(B) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities.
(C) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 11.0; or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works.
(D) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or of high chlorine demand in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage works, or exceed the limitation set forth in the E.P.A. categorical pretreatment standard, or any other federal, state or county standards.
Water and Sewer System
X?105
(E) Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, wastewaters which contain liquids, solids, or gases that cause gases, vapors, or fumes from the discharge to exceed 10% of the immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) concentration. Discharges which contain more than one pollutant which may contribute to fume toxicity shall be subject to more restrictive limitations, as determined necessary by the Director. The more restrictive discharge limits shall be calculated based on the additive fume toxicity of all compounds identified or reasonably expected to be present in the discharge.
(F) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(G) Any substance, which may cause the sewage, works such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for land application or reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
(H) Any substance, which will cause the sewage, works to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards.
(I) Any wastewater with color of sufficient light absorbency to interfere with treatment plant process, prevent analytical determinations, or create any aesthetic effect on the treatment plant effluent, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(J) Daily maximum concentration or mass loading shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be regarded as zero (0) when calculating the daily maximum concentration.
(K) Any wastewater having a temperature, which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage, works resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewage works, which exceeds 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) or is lower than zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit).
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?106
(L) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable state or federal regulations.
(M) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
(N) Organic solvent extractable substances such as fats, wax, grease, or oils of petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) and 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius).
(N) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases; or other pollutants which cause the wastewater to have a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), or which cause an exceedance of 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point within the collection system or containing gasoline, benzene, xylene or toluene which causes the wastewater to exceed the state surface water quality standard.
(O) Any garbage that has not been ground by household type or other suitable garbage grinders.
(P) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure or any other solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions or other interferences with the proper operation of the sewer system.
(Q) Toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute hazards to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in waters which receive the POTW effluent, which shall include, but are not limited to wastes containing cyanide, chromium, cadmium, mercury, copper, and nickel ions.
(R) Solids of such character and quantity that special and unusual attention is required for their handling.
(S) Any substance which would cause the treatment plant to be in non-compliance with sludge use, recycle or disposal criteria pursuant to guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Federal Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or other regulations or criteria for sludge management and disposal as required by the state.
(T) Any medical or infectious wastes prohibited from being discharged under federal or state law and regulations.
(U) Material considered a hazardous waste under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
(V) Any commercial or industrial waste that may cause pass through of pollutants or interference with the wastewater treatment plant operations or that violates federal, state, or local restrictions.
Water and Sewer System
X?107
(W) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
(X) Trucked and hauled waste, except at discharge points designated by the POTW.
(Y) Pollutants causing toxic gases, vapors, and fumes.
(Z) Any leachate from a hazardous waste landfill.
(AA) Any landfill leachate unless permitted and authorized under a written contract, within YCUA’s sole discretion, between YCUA and the user.
(BB) Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug.
X-3.80. Promulgation of more stringent standards.
Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or other federal or state limitations, for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article and shall be considered part of this article. The YCUA shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements.
X-3.81. Prohibited concentrations of certain pollutants and mercury reduction plan.
(A) No person shall discharge wastewater that the concentration of pollutants in one grab sample exceeds the following limits for oil and grease or pH:
100mg/l oil and grease
< 5 or > 11 standard units pH
1.0 mg/l Total cyanides
1.0 mg/l Total phenolic compounds
(B) No person shall discharge wastewater that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample is at or above the following surcharge threshold, except as otherwise permitted in writing by the Director and on payment of a surcharge fee, and no person shall discharge wastewater that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample exceeds the following upper limits, with respect to the following compatible pollutants:
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?108
Surcharge Threshold
Upper Limits
COMPATIBLES
300 mg/l
1000 mg/l
5-day BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand)
350 mg/l
2500 mg/l
Total SS (Suspended Solids)
600 mg/l
2000 mg/l
COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand)
15 mg/l
75 mg/l
Total Phosphorus
30 mg/l
700 mg/l
Ammonia-Nitrogen
(C) No person shall discharge wastewater that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample shall exceed the following limits with respect to the following inorganic or organic pollutants or phenolic compounds:
Inorganics
1.0 mg/l
Arsenic
0.002 mg/l
Beryllium
0.50 mg/l
Cadmium
4.0 mg/l
Chromium (Total)
3.0 mg/l
Copper
0.3 mg/l
Lead
Nondetectable
Mercury
3.0 mg/l
Nickel
0.15 mg/l
Silver
3.0 mg/l
Zinc
(1) Organics - Nondetectable Polychlorinated Biphenyls (Nondetectable per U.S. E.P.A. Method 608. Any detectable sample exceeds this limit.)
(2) The local discharge limitation for Polychlorinated Biphenyls is established at the level of detection in accordance with the following: There shall be no detectable amounts of Polychlorinated Biphenyls discharged to a township or YCUA sanitary sewer. Polychlorinated Biphenyls sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with E.P.A. Method 608. The level of detection, developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 C.F.R. 136, shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for Polychlorinated Biphenyls, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference.
(D) The total phenols limit is based on the discharge of any or all of the following phenolic compounds: 2-Chlorophenol, 4-Chlorophenol, 2, 4-Dichlorophenol, 2,4-Dimethylphenol,
Water and Sewer System
X?109
2,4-Dinitrophenol, 2-Methyphenol, 3-Methylphenol, 4-Methylphenol, 2-Nitrophenol, 4-Nitrophenol, and Phenol. Discharge of other phenolic compounds is prohibited except as specifically authorized by the Director.
(E) The Director shall annually review the quantities of industrial pollutants listed above which are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the sewage works. The Director shall recommend any revisions to these limits necessary to insure that the NPDES permit, Federal Pretreatment Standards and Water Resources limits are met and to ensure that the industrial discharge will not interfere with the treatment process of sludge disposal. At such time as the previously cited limits are changed by the township or YCUA, the unit authorizing change shall notify the remaining units of the change.
(F) The local discharge limitation for mercury is established at the level of detection in accordance with the following:
(1) There shall be no detectable amounts of mercury discharged to a township or YCUA sanitary sewer. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with E.P.A. Method 245.1. The level of detection, developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 C.F.R. 136, shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for Mercury, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference.
(2) The evaluation of potential matrix interference(s) shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) A demonstration that the laboratory conducting the analysis is capable of achieving the level of detection of 0.2 ug/L in reagent water;
(b) A demonstration that the level of detection of 0.2 ug/L cannot be achieved in the effluent; and,
(c) A demonstration that an attempt has been made to resolve the matrix interference(s).
(3) In cases where true matrix interference(s) can be demonstrated, a discharge-specific level of detection will be developed in accordance with the procedure in 40 C.F.R. 136. Discharge-specific levels of detection will be incorporated into the wastewater discharge permit of the non-domestic user.
(4) To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the POTW is not exceeded, YCUA may require any non-domestic user with a reasonable potential to discharge mercury to develop, submit for approval and implement a Mercury Reduction Plan (MRP). The MRP may be required by permit if the non-domestic user has not violated the local limit for mercury, but YCUA has determined that a reasonable potential for the violation may exist. MRP’s may be required in notices of violations, orders or other enforcement actions when the non-domestic user has violated the mercury local limit. At a minimum, an approvable MRP shall contain the following:
(a) A written commitment by the non-domestic user to reduce all non-domestic discharges of mercury to levels below the level of detection within three years of the MRP’s original approval date;
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?110
(b) Within 60 days of notification by YCUA that a MRP is required, the non-domestic user shall supply an initial identification of all potential sources of mercury which could be discharged to the sanitary sewer system;
(c) Specific strategies for mercury reduction with reasonable time frames for implementation, capable of ensuring that mercury discharges will be below the specified level of detection within three years;
(d) A program for quarterly sampling and analysis of the non-domestic discharge for mercury in accordance with E.P.A. method 245.1;
(e) A demonstration of specific, measurable and/or otherwise quantifiable mercury reductions consistent with the goal of reducing mercury discharges below the specified level of detection. Where reductions cannot be demonstrated through normal effluent monitoring (e.g., mercury discharges are already near level of detection), the demonstration should incorporate the following:
1. Internal process monitoring, documenting the results of mercury reduction strategies at sampling locations within the facility (e.g., a program of regular monitoring of sink traps where mercury containing reagents had previously been disposed, but have since been substituted by non-mercury containing compounds).
2. Internal and/or effluent sampling utilizing clean and/or ultra-clean sampling and analytical methods as referenced by E.P.A. Federal Register. The results of the monitoring will not be used for compliance purposes unless performed in accordance with E.P.A. Method 245.1 and collected at the appropriate compliance measurement location.
3. Loading calculations wherein the non-domestic user calculates the total mass of mercury reduced from the sanitary sewer discharge through reagent substitutions, changes in disposal practices and/or other approved MRP strategies implemented.
(f) A semi-annual report on the status of the mercury reduction efforts. At a minimum, these reports shall: identify compliance or non-compliance with specific reduction commitments in the MRP; summarize the analytical, mass-based or other quantifiable demonstrations of mercury reductions performed to date; provide all applicable analytical data; provide an evaluation of effectiveness of actions taken to date; provide updates to the initial list of mercury containing compounds discharged to the sanitary sewer and propose for approval new strategies and/or modifications to the current MRP to continue and improve mercury reduction efforts; and,
(g) Any other conditions that YCUA deems necessary to ensure that mercury reduction efforts are effective in achieving the goals of this section.
(5) Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days of the required due date shall constitute significant non-compliance in accordance with this section, and will result in publication as a significant violator.
Water and Sewer System
X?111
(6) A MRP may be evaluated for adequacy at any time by YCUA. If an evaluation determines that the mercury reduction plan is inadequate, or the non-domestic user has not complied with its approved MRP, the non-domestic user will be notified. Failure to comply with the MRP requirement constitutes non-compliance. YCUA will follow its enforcement response plan (ERP) to ensure that corrective actions are taken.
(7) A non-domestic user may request a release from MRP requirements if all samples of the discharge for a period of one year are less than the specified level of detection; the non-domestic user has complied with the minimum monitoring frequency of quarterly sampling events; and YCUA deems that MRP commitments have been fulfilled sufficiently to ensure continued compliance with the mercury limitation. YCUA shall notify the non-domestic user of any release from MRP requirements in writing.
(8) If the MRP requirement is waived by YCUA, the non-domestic user remains subject to the local limitation for mercury in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(9) Re-discovery of mercury in the non-domestic user discharge subjects the user to the submission of a new MRP, or escalation of enforcement in accordance with the ERP.
(H) Implementation of Best Management Practices or Best Management Practices Plan.
(1) The Director may require any user to develop and implement Best Management Practices (BMP) to control, contain, treat, prevent, or reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants, or other substances from the user’s premises to the POTW , as determined necessary by the Director.
(2) In addition, the Director may require a user to develop and submit a Best Management Practices Plan (“BMPP”), including an enforceable implementation schedule, for review and approval by the Director. The BMPP shall be submitted within 30 days after notification by the Director or as otherwise required by a permit. The BMPP shall be directed at preventing the entrance of pollutants, directly or indirectly, into the POTW . The BMPP shall be available for inspection at all times at the premises. At a minimum, a user’s BMPP shall contain all of the following elements, as determined necessary by the Director, at a level of detail and in units and terms as determined necessary by the Director to adequately evaluate the plan:
(a) A statement of the purpose and objectives of the plan;
(b) A description of the strategies, methods, policies and procedures to prevent, minimize or reduce the introduction of pollutants into the user’s discharge and to minimize waste generation;
(c) A description of the options available to the user to control accidental spillage, leaks and drainage;
(d) A description of best available or practicable control technologies available for the user’s specific circumstances;
(e) A detailed facility layout and site diagram showing points of entry into the (POTWs);
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?112
(f) A description of the waste handling, treatment and discharge disposal facilities, including flow diagrams and process schematics;
(g) A description of operating and maintenance processes and procedures;
(h) An inventory of raw materials and a list of waste sources, including a list of all chemicals used or stored at the facility;
(i) A description of employee training programs, policies and procedures; continuing education programs; and participation;
(j) A description of the user’s documentation, including record keeping and forms;
(k) A description of monitoring activities;
(l) An information log of facility personnel, organization chart, emergency phone numbers, contact persons and maintenance or service representatives;
(m) A certification by a qualified professional that the plan is adequate to prevent spills, leaks, slug loads, or non-customary discharges of regulated substances, directly or indirectly, to the POTW;
(n) Such other information, documents or diagrams as required by the Director, including, but not limited to, any of the information required under this article, the Act, or state law.
(3) The BMPs or BMPP required of a user or approved for a user shall be incorporated in a user permit issued to the user. If the user already has a user permit, the existing permit shall be modified to incorporate the BMP requirements. If the user does not currently have a user permit, a permit shall be issued for that purpose.
(4) The Director may require revisions to a user’s BMPP if the Director determines that the Plan contains elements that are inadequate, or as otherwise determined necessary by the Director to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this article, the Act or state law. Review of a BMPP by the Director shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to comply with this article, the Act or state law.
(5) The user reports to the Director must include Best Management Practices compliance information. The user reports must be certified and signed by the user’s authorized representative.
(6) The user shall retain all documentation associated with Best Management Practices for a period of at least three years from the date of an activity associated with the practices. This period may be extended by the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority at any time.
Water and Sewer System
X?113
X-3.82. Sampling, measurements, tests and analyses.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 (1992) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the E.P.A. determines that the part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by YCUA or other parties, approved by the EPA.
X-3.83. Surcharge for discharges of unusual strength.
(A) If the character of the wastewater from any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises exceeds the limits for compatible pollutants established in Section X-3.81 or shall be such as to impose any unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the system or upon the sewage works or POTW in excess of a maximum limit prescribed in this article, then an additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates, or the Director shall require that the sewage be treated by the person, firm or corporation responsible for the sewage being emptied into the sewer or the right to empty the sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part thereof. Surcharges required shall be computed as the weight of excess compatible pollutant in pounds multiplied by the cost per pound specified in the applicable township rate ordinance. The strength of the wastes shall be determined by composite samples taken over a sufficient period of time to insure a representative sample. The cost of sampling and testing shall be borne by the industry or establishment, whether owner or lessee. Tests shall be made by the user, at an independent laboratory, or at the YCUA wastewater treatment plant.
(B) Any wastewater discharged into the sewer system having a compatible pollutant in excess of those prescribed in Section X-3.81 may be permitted by the Director provided payment by the industrial concern for the full cost of treating such excess constituents in the wastewater is made and acceptance of the waste does not cause violation of E.P.A. guidelines, NPDES requirements, the Act or State Act.
X-3.84. Special agreements authorized.
With respect to compatible pollutants only, no statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any agreement between the Director and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern, provided the agreement shall not violate E.P.A. guidelines or NPDES requirements and provided user charges and surcharges as provided in this article are agreed to in the agreement.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?114
X-3.85. Dilution of discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the YCUA or the state.
X-3.86. Accidental discharges.
(A) Where required, a user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article, the Act or State Act. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Director for review, and shall be approved by the Director before construction of the facility. All required users shall complete a program within 90 days of notification by the Director. If required by the Director a user who commences contribution to the sewage works after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Director. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article, the Act or State Act. In the case of any discharge, whether accidental or not, that could cause problems to the YCUA, the WWTP or POTW, including any slug loadings by the user, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the YCUA of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
(B) Within five days following any discharge, whether accidental or not, that could cause problems to the YCUA, the WWTP or POTW, including any slug loadings by the user, the user shall submit to the Director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works or POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall the notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article, the Act or State Act, or other applicable law. Failure to file a report shall be a separate violation of this article.
(C) Slug Control Plan.
(1) Each significant industrial user shall prepare and implement an individualized slug control plan when in the opinion of the Director a slug control is required. Existing significant industrial users that do not have a YCUA approved slug control plan shall provide an approvable slug control plan to the Director within 90 days of being notified by YCUA that a slug control plan is required. New sources that are significant industrial users shall submit a slug control plan to the Director for approval before beginning to discharge. Upon written notice from the Director, users that are not significant industrial users may also be required to prepare and implement a slug control plan, and the plan shall be submitted to the Director for approval as specified in the notice. Slug control requirements must be included in the SIU Control Mechanism (industrial user’s permit).
Water and Sewer System
X?115
(2) All slug control plans shall contain at least the following elements:
(a) A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
(b) A description of stored chemicals;
(c) The procedures for immediately notifying the Director of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate any discharge prohibition, limitation or requirement under this article, and procedures for follow-up written notification within five days of the discharge;
(d) The procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and equipment for emergency response.
(3) If a user has submitted to the Director plans or documents pursuant to other requirements of local, state or federal laws and regulations which meet all applicable requirements of the article, the Director may in its discretion determine that the user has satisfied the slug plan submission requirements of this section.
(4) Significant industrial users must immediately notify the Director of any changes at their facilities affecting their slug control plan or spill/slug potential.
(C) Secondary containment requirements.
(1) When in the opinion of the Director secondary containment is required, the user shall provide and maintain at the user’s sole expense secondary spill containment structures (including diking, curbing or other appropriate structures) adequate to protect all floor drains from accidental spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants or discharges regulated by this article, the Act or state law.
(a) The containment area shall be constructed so that no liquid polluting material can escape from the area by gravity through the building sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly into the POTW .
(b) The containment or curbing shall be sufficient to hold not less than 10% of the total volume of the tanks or containers within the secondary containment structure or provide a capacity of 100% of the largest single tank or container within the secondary containment structure, whichever is larger, unless a lesser containment area or alternate control measures are approved in advance by the Director.
(c) The containment structure must accommodate “squirt distance”. Containers within the containment structure must be able to be placed sufficiently back from the edge of the structure so if punctured, the resulting leak will be contained.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?116
(d) The containment structure must be designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration, rain or other liquids into the secondary containment system unless the containment system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on, infiltration, rain, or other liquids. Excess capacity when the prevention is not provided in the system must be sufficient to contain rain precipitation from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event.
(e) The containment structure shall be constructed with chemical-resistant water stops in place at all joints (if any) to be free of cracks or gaps.
(f) The containment structure shall be designed and installed to completely surround the tank or containers and to cover all surrounding earth likely to come into contact with the waste if released from the tank(s) or containers (i.e., capable of preventing lateral as well as vertical migration of the material).
(g) All floor drains found within the containment area must be plugged and sealed.
(2) Spill troughs and sumps within process areas must discharge to appropriate pretreatment tanks.
(3) Emergency containment shall also be provided for storage tanks that may be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical storage areas.
(4) Solid pollutants shall be located in security areas designed to prevent the loss of the materials to the POTW.
(5) Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection required by this article shall be submitted to the Director for review, and shall be approved by the Director before construction. Construction of approved containment for existing sources shall be completed within the time period specified by the Director.
(6) No new source shall be permitted to discharge to the POTW until emergency containment facilities have been approved and constructed as required by this article.
(7) The Director may order a user to take interim measures for emergency containment as determined necessary by the Director under the circumstances.
X-3.87. Determination of sewage flow.
To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the YCUA may use one of the following methods:
(A) The amount of water supplied to the premises by the public water system as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered.
Water and Sewer System
X?117
(B) If the premises are supplied with river water or water from private wells, the amount of water supplied from the sources may be metered at the source or metered at its point of discharge prior to entry into the public sewer.
(C) If the premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of sewage discharged into the sewer system made by the utilities authority from the water, gas or electric supply, or metered at its point of discharge prior to entry into the public sewer.
(D) The volume of sewage discharged into the sewer system as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system at his or her own expense in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the YCUA pursuant to this article.
(E) A figure determined by the YCUA by any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method.
X-3.88. Disposal at sewage treatment plant.
Waste from industrial sewage disposal systems shall be disposed of at the sewage treatment plant or at any other refuse or disposal site approved by the Director. No waters or wastes described in Section X-3.79 shall be disposed of at the sewage treatment plant.
X-3.89. Bypass.
(A) An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Director, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the Director within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
(B) Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take enforcement action against an industrial user for bypass, unless:
(1) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
(2) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?118
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and,
(3) The industrial user submitted notice as required under this section. The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the Director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in this subsection (B).
X-3.90. Report of violation.
If the results of any sampling performed by the user indicates that any violation of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act has occurred, the user shall notify the YCUA within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation and shall repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and shall submit, in writing, the results of this repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. A written follow up report shall be filed by the user with the YCUA within five days of a user becoming aware of the violation. The report shall specify the following:
(A) A description of the violation, the cause thereof, and the violation’s impact on the user’s compliance status;
(B) Duration of the violation, including exact dates and times of the violation, and if not corrected, the anticipated time the violation is expected to continue;
(C) All steps taken or intended to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of a violation.
X-3.91. Notification of authorities upon discharge of hazardous waste.
All industrial users shall notify the YCUA, the E.P.A. regional waste management division Director and the DNRE in writing of any discharge to the YCUA of a substance that would be a regulated hazardous waste under any federal statute if disposed of otherwise. The notice shall be given in accordance with C.F.R. 403.12(p).
DIVISION 5. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
X-3.92. Authorized under certain conditions.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
Water and Sewer System
X?119
X-3.93. Permit required; application; fees.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the plumbing inspector. The application for a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the township or YCUA and shall include specifications and other information deemed necessary by the township and YCUA. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the township treasurer at the time the application is filed.
X-3.94. Inspection by township and YCUA
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the township and YCUA. The township and YCUA shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the township and YCUA when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the township or YCUA.
X-3.95. Specifications.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the County Health Department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
X-3.96. Connection with public sewer.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
X-3.97. Sanitary maintenance required.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the township or the YCUA.
Charter Township of Plymouth - Water and Sewer
X?120
X-3.98. Other requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the State or County Health Department or DNRE.

Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 1
Article 1: Title and Purpose
Amendments
ARTICLE I
TITLE AND PURPOSE
SEC. 1.1? SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF
PLYMOUTH ZONING ORDINANCE".
SEC. 1.2? PURPOSE
The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance is to provide for the regulation of land development and
the establishment of zoning districts in the portions of the Charter Township of Plymouth outside
the limits of cities and villages which regulate the use of land and structures; to meet the needs of
the state's citizens for food, fiber, energy and other natural resources, places of residence,
recreation, industry, trade, service and other uses of land; to ensure that use of the land shall be
situated in appropriate locations and relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of
land and congestion of population, transportation systems, and other public facilities; to facilitate
adequate and efficient provisions for transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy,
education, recreation, and other public service and facility requirements; and to promote public
health, safety and welfare.
For these purposes, the Charter Township of Plymouth shall divide the Township into districts of
such number, shape and area as it considers best suited to carry out this Ordinance; to provide for
the regulation of land development and the establishment of districts which apply only to land
areas and activities which are involved in a special program to achieve specific land management
objectives and avert or solve specific land use problems, including the regulation of land
development and the establishment of districts in areas subject to damage from flooding or
erosion; to designate or limit the location, the height, number of stories, and size of dwellings,
buildings, and structures that may be erected or altered, and specific uses for dwellings,
buildings, and structures, including trailer coaches and manufactured housing, that may be
erected, occupied, used or altered; to establish the area of yards, courts, and other open spaces,
and the sanitary, safety and protective measures that shall be required for the dwellings,
buildings and structures, including trailer coaches and manufactured housing; and to establish the
maximum number of families which may be housed in dwellings, buildings and structures in the
Charter Township of Plymouth, erected or altered.
? SEC. 1.1? SHORT TITLE
? SEC. 1.2? PURPOSE
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 2
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
ARTICLE II
ZONING DISTRICTS, ZONING MAP AND USES PERMITTED
SEC. 2.1 ZONING DISTRICTS?
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Charter Township of Plymouth is hereby divided into the
following districts, which shall be known by the following respective symbols and names:
SYMBOL DISTRICT NAME
AG Agricultural District
PL Public Lands District
R-1-E Single Family Residential District
R-1-H Single Family Residential District
R-1-S Single Family Residential District
R-1 Single Family Residential District
R-M Mobile Home Residential District
R-2 Two Family Residential District
R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
OS Office Service District
OS-ARC Office Service - Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
VP Vehicular Parking District
C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
C-2 General Commercial District
ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
MR Mid-Rise District
OR Office Research District
TAR Technology and Research District
IND Industrial District
SEC. 2.2 ZONING MAP?
The areas comprising these zoning districts and the boundaries of said districts, as shown upon
the Map attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance, being designated as the Zoning Map
of the Charter Township of Plymouth, with all proper notations, references and other information
shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as though described herein, provided,
however, where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries, the rules set forth in Sec. 2.3,
Boundaries of District, shall apply (see Zoning Map).
? SEC. 2.1 ZONING DISTRICTS
? SEC. 2.2 ZONING MAP
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 3
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
SEC. 2.3 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICT?
The boundaries of zoning districts, as shown on the Map, unless otherwise shown by dimensions
from street lines or other designated lines, follow the centerline of streets or alleys or lot lines,
and such lines extended and the corporate limits of the Charter Township of Plymouth as they
exist at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.
Where a district boundary line, as established in the above paragraph or as shown on the Zoning
Map, divides a lot which was in a single ownership and of record at the time of enactment of this
Ordinance, the district boundary line shall be fixed from the scale of the Zoning Map.
Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined by the
Zoning Board of Appeals after recommendation from the Township Planning Commission.
SEC. 2.4 AMENDMENT OF ZONING MAP?
The Zoning Map may be amended from time to time, in whole or in part, by Ordinance to which
there shall be attached a map of the Section or any part thereof affected by the amendment. Each
map shall be given an amendment number.
SEC. 2.5 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY?
All streets, alleys, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise designated, shall be deemed to be
in the same district as the property immediately abutting upon such rights-of-way. Where the
centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such street or alley,
unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting
property up to such centerline.
The boundary line of districts affected by vacation of a right-of-way shall remain at the
centerline of said vacated right-of-way. If this conflicts with the lot boundary line thus affected,
the district line shall follow the nearest boundary line of the lots created at the time of vacation.
SEC. 2.6 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES IN DISTRICTS?
Within each zoning district there are uses which, when developed in accordance with sound
planning and site plan principles, are consistent with the purpose and objectives of the district.
For the purpose of this Ordinance these uses shall be known as principal permitted uses as set
forth in the individual district and shall be allowed within that particular district subject to the
development requirements for the district.
? SEC. 2.3 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICT
? SEC. 2.4 AMENDMENT OF ZONING MAP
? SEC. 2.5 STREETS, ALLEYS AND RAILROAD
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
? SEC. 2.6 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES IN
DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 4
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
SEC. 2.7 SPECIAL LAND USES?
1. Purpose
Within each zoning district there are uses which may be consistent with the purpose and
objectives of the particular zoning district only in specific locations, under specific
conditions and when developed in accordance with sound planning and site plan
principles. For the purpose of this Ordinance these uses shall be known as special land
uses as set forth in the individual district and shall be allowed within that particular
district subject to the development requirements for the district, provided the Commission
finds:
(a) The use shall be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony
with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is situated
and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent districts or
uses. In evaluating whether a use complies with the intent of this provision,
among the factors the Planning Commission may evaluate are the following:
1) The intensity and scale of the use in comparison to surrounding uses and
conditions.
2) The consistency of the use with the Master Plan.
3) The impact of the use on natural features of the site and surrounding area.
4) The intent of the Zoning District in which the use is proposed to be
located.
(b) The use is designed, located and proposed to be operated so that the public health,
safety and welfare will be protected.
(c) The use will be adequately served by public services and facilities without
diminishing or adversely affecting public services and facilities to existing land
uses in the area.
(d) The vehicular circulation for the proposed use will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare in relationship to egress/ingress to the site,
vehicular turning movements related to street intersections and street gradient, site
distance and potential hazards to the normal flow of traffic.
(e) The location, use and assembly of persons in connection with the proposed use
will not be hazardous to the planning unit in which the use is located or hazardous
to a specific use or life and property within the planning unit, or be incongruous
therewith or in conflict with the normal traffic of the planning unit.
(f) The proposed site layout is in compliance with the general site development
standards of Article 29, Site Plan and Development Approval, and shall insure
that:
? ? SEC. 2.7 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 5
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
1) The use and associated activities on the property are so located as not to
hinder the projected development of the adjacent properties or impair the
existing uses of adjacent lands. This shall include all uses associated with
the particular use such as parking, lighting, display sign, etc.
2) Sufficient landscaping, fencing, walls and other means of buffering are
provided to insure that operation of the use will not be objectionable to
nearby uses or dwellings by reason of noise, fumes or flash of lights nor
increase the danger of fire or otherwise create the potential of endangering
the public safety.
2. Application
Application for approval shall be made by the owner or owners of any land, where such
use is contemplated. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as indicated in the
Schedule of Fees adopted by the Township Board of Trustees to cover the cost of
evaluating the application as to principles and conditions hereinafter set forth.
3. Application Information?
Application for approval shall contain the following information:
(a) A metes and bounds description of the acreage comprising the proposed
conditional or special land use.
(b) Topographic survey including natural and manmade features at a scale no greater
than 1"=50'.
(c) An existing land use map showing the existing use of adjacent lands.
(d) A general development plan of sufficient detail to define the proposed location of
buildings, parking, interior circulation and landscape areas.
(e) Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission
to make a determination concerning the desirability and appropriateness of the
proposed special land use.
4. Public Hearing Requirement (as amended on 9/30/07)
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a proposed special land
use in order to acquaint the public and adjoining property owners with the proposal prior
to furnishing of detailed plans and specifications by the petitioner. Notice of the hearing
shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet regardless of
whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. The notice shall be
given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be considered. If
SEC. 2.7 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 6
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making
notification. The notice shall:
(a) Describe the nature of the use request.
(b) Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request. The
notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property.
Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently
exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of
identification may be used.
(c) State when and where the special land use will be considered.
(d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the
request.
5. Planning Commission Decision (as amended on 9/30/07)
The Planning Commission may deny, approve or approve with conditions a request for
special land use approval. In permitting such request the Planning Commission may
require any conditions and safeguards the Commission determines to be in keeping with
the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and to protect the neighboring properties from an
impact. The decision on such use shall be incorporated in a statement to be made part of
the minutes of the meeting. Said statement shall contain the findings and conclusions
relative to the use under consideration specifying the basis for the decision and any
conditions imposed. Conditions and requirements stated and made part of the approval
shall be a continuing obligation running with the use of said property until the approved
use is abandoned or superseded by another permitted use.
The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final in regards to the denial, approval
or approval with conditions of the special land use, and the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall not have jurisdiction over the decision of the Planning Commission.
6. Expiration of Approval?
(a) Approval of a special land use request shall expire three hundred sixty five (365)
days after the date of approval, unless a site plan has been submitted for review in
accordance with Article 29, Site Plan and Development Approval, or unless the
use has been legally established (including issuance of a certificate of occupancy
where required) in cases where site plan review is not required.
(b) The Planning Commission may, upon written request, grant one (1) extension of
approval for a period of time not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of
SEC. 2.7 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 7
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
original approval, under such terms and conditions as deemed necessary in
accordance with the purpose of this Section.
(c) Approval of a special land use shall automatically expire if the approved final site
plan associated with the use expires in accordance with Section 29.11, Expiration
of Site Plan Approval.
7. Revocation of Approval
Approval of a special land use may be revoked by the Planning Commission upon
determination that the use has not been improved, constructed or maintained in
compliance with this Ordinance, approved permits, site plans, or conditions of approval.
Such action shall be subject to the following:
(a) Public Hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been
held in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 2.7.4 of this Article
(Public Hearing Requirement), at which time the owner of an interest in land for
which approval was sought, or the owner’s designated agent, shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence in opposition to revocation of approval.
(b) Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the Commission with
regard to the revocation shall be made, and written notification provided to said
owner or designated agent.
(c) The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final in regards to revocation
and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have jurisdiction over the decision of
the Planning Commission.
SEC. 2.8 USES PERMITTED REQUIRING APPROVAL OF THE ZONING BOARD
OF APPEALS?
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have limited authority to grant uses of land and/or buildings.
The Board of Appeals shall be limited to granting the following uses as specifically set forth in
this Ordinance, subject to the conditions described, and shall not have the authority to grant any
other use of land and/or business for either a temporary or permanent period of time.
1. Keeping of Fowl and Rabbits
The keeping of one (1) or more fowl or four (4) or more rabbits on lots less than five (5)
acres in area for non-commercial use by the occupants of the premises with the approval
of the Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to the following:
(d) That the lot area to be used for the keeping of fowl or rabbits shall not be less than
one (1) acre.
(e) That all fowl or rabbits be so housed, fenced and otherwise kept that their use will
not constitute a nuisance, and that the accessory building for the housing of fowl
? SEC. 2.8 USES PERMITTED REQUIRING APPROVAL
OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 8
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
or rabbits shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line and not
less than one hundred (100) feet from any dwelling.
2. Roadside Stands?
Roadside stands or buildings solely for the sale of fresh produce where permitted in the
individual zoning district with the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to
the following:
(a) The stand or building shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the street
setback line.
(b) A drive shall be provided from the road to a parking area. The location and
geometries of said drive shall be approved by the Michigan Department of
Transportation and/or the Wayne County Road Commission, whichever has
jurisdiction of the street or highway right-of-way.
(c) The parking area may be a lawn area or a gravel area which must be to the side or
rear of the roadside stand and shall comply with applicable parking requirements
of Article 24.
(d) As a condition of approval, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find the scope and
nature of the proposed roadside stand is within the spirit and intent of this subsection
of the Ordinance. The intent is to provide a property owner with the
means of selling homegrown-fresh produce produced on property owned within
the Charter Township of Plymouth. It is not the intent of this section to provide
for a commercial produce market outside of a commercial district.
3. Keeping of Domesticated Animals?
The keeping of horses, donkeys, mules, ponies and other domesticated animals, other
than house pets, for private use only, where permitted in the individual zoning district
with the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to the following:
(a) A minimum area of one (1) full acre shall be provided for each animal.
(b) An accessory building to be used for the housing of fowl or animals (excluding
cats and dogs) shall be not less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line and also not
less than one hundred (100) feet from any dwelling located on the lot or on an
adjoining lot, unless a greater or lesser setback is required by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(c) The said animals shall be confined in a suitable fenced area or paddock, in such a
manner that they may not approach any closer than one hundred (100) feet from
any dwelling, including residences on abutting parcels or lots.
? SEC. 2.8 USES PERMITTED REQUIRING APPROVAL
OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 9
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
(d) Stables shall be kept clean and manure shall be treated and handled in such a
manner as to control odor and flies.
SEC. 2.9 USES PROHIBITED IN DISTRICTS?
If a use is not specifically listed as a principal permitted use, a special land use, or a use
permitted requiring approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals within a zoning district, that use
shall be prohibited in that district, unless the Planning Commission determines that the use is
consistent with the purpose and intent of the district.
END OF ARTICLE 2.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
? SEC. 2.9 USES PROHIBITED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
Page 1 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE II (2)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
Page 2 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE II (2)
The following language was amended on 09/30/07
SEC. 2.7 SPECIAL LAND USES?
4. Public Hearing Requirement
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a proposed special land
use in order to acquaint the public and adjoining property owners with the proposal prior
to furnishing of detailed plans and specifications by the petitioner. Notice of the hearing
shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the
boundary of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures within three
hundred (300) feet. The notice shall be given not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen
(15) days before the date the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant
is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification. Notification need
not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure
contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased, by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or
spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than
four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the
manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary
entrance to the structure. The notice shall:
(a) Describe the nature of the use request.
(b) Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request.
(c) State when and where the special land use will be considered.
(d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the
request.
5. Planning Commission Decision?
The Planning Commission may deny, approve or approve with conditions a request for
use permitted subject to special conditions. In permitting such request the Planning
Commission may require any conditions and safeguards the Commission determines to
? ?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 2: Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Uses Permitted
Amendments:
Page 3 of 3
be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and to protect the neighboring
properties from an impact. The decision on such use shall be incorporated in a statement
to be made part of the minutes of the meeting. Said statement shall contain the
conclusions relative to the use under consideration specifying the basis for the decision
and any conditions imposed. Conditions and requirements stated and made part of the
approval shall be a continuing obligation running with the use of said property until the
approved use is abandoned or superseded by another permitted use.
The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final in regards to the denial, approval
or approval with conditions of the special land use, and the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall not have jurisdiction over the decision of the Planning Commission.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 10
Article 3: FS Floodplain District
Amendments:
?ARTICLE III
FS FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
PURPOSE
The Floodplain District is designed to assure the flood and stormwater carrying capacity of the
Township’s water courses; to protect and preserve property values and open and public lands; to
protect residents; to avoid damage, infringement and nuisance to property; and to avoid needless
public and private expense inevitably resulting from inappropriate development. Floodplain and
floodway designations are based on the Federal Insurance Management Agency’s (FEMA) study of
the Charter Township of Plymouth and further study by the Charter Township of Plymouth
Engineer. These designations are based on the best available information regarding areas of flood
hazard within the Township.
SEC. 3.1 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Article:
1. “Base Flood” means the 100 year flood or a flood having a one (1) percent or greater chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
2. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
mobile home placement, or excavation, located within the Floodplain.
3. “Floodplain” means that area designated as floodplain on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program map, as amended, which
describes an area of land including and adjacent to a watercourse where excess water flows
when the capacity of the normal channel is exceeded. The floodplain line is based on the
base flood elevation.
4. “Floodway” means that area designated as floodway on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency’s (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program map, as amended which is the channel
of the river and/or lands immediately adjacent thereto which serves to actively convey flood
water downstream.
SEC. 3.2 DISTRICT DESIGNATION
? PURPOSE
SEC. 3.1 DEFINITIONS
SEC. 3.2 DISTRICT DESIGNATION
1. In addition to the zoning districts enumerated in Section 2.1 and delineated by Section 2.2 of
Article 2, there is established the Floodplain District which is designed to overlay other
zoning districts and the floodplain is delineated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency’s (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program Map, as amended, which is adopted
by reference and declared to be part of this Ordinance. The FEMA map is on file and may
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 11
Article 3: FS Floodplain District
Amendments:
be examined at the Department of Building and Code Enforcement and the office of the
Township Clerk.
2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no development shall take place in
the designated Floodplain District except in accordance with the regulations contained in this
Article. The regulations in this Article shall be in addition to regulations otherwise
pertaining to such development and the regulations regarding permitted uses, conditional
uses, accessory uses and all other requirements of this Ordinance shall fully apply to the land
and development within the Floodplain District.
SEC 3.3 FLOODPLAIN/FLOODWAY REGULATIONS
1. All development shall be prohibited within the designated floodways, except for one or more
of the following uses which shall not include the building of structures or earth changes
altering the natural water carrying capacity of the floodway: Agricultural crops, horticulture,
open recreation areas, golf courses, bridle or nature paths, or the common area of a
development. An area within a floodway may be used to supply open space or lot area
requirements of a lot or other development located partially beyond the floodway line.
Construction of drainage structures or stormwater facilities maintaining the natural water
carrying capacity of the floodway shall be permitted in accordance with provisions of this
Article.
2. To the maximum extent practicable, all development shall be prohibited within the
designated floodplains, except the uses and exceptions listed and subject to the requirements
in 3.3.1 above. The following steps shall apply to administrative determinations of
compliance with this subsection 3.3.2:
(a) If proposed development can reasonably proceed in accordance with all other
applicable requirements of this Ordinance and not involve development in the
floodplain, a proposal shall be required not to include development in the floodplain.
This requirement is applicable, for example, where placing a proposed structure in a
different location on the site than originally proposed is possible within otherwise
applicable requirements such as setbacks. In that instance and in similar instances
where a change in the development plan is possible within other restrictions that
would not involve development in the floodplain, no development in the floodplain
will be permitted.?
(b) If the conditions of 3.3.2(a) above do not reasonably pertain to the proposal and if
reasonable variance of this Ordinance or the development of a Residential Unit
Developments or Single Family Cluster Housing in accordance with Articles 21 and
22 is possible which would allow the proposed development with changes avoiding
development within the floodplain, the applicant shall be directed to undertake such
procedures pursuant to this Ordinance. A report of the Chief Building Official
and/or Township Engineer shall accompany such applications indicating the
determinations made regarding the application. All conditions for a variance or
? SEC. 3.2 DISTRICT DESIGNATION
SEC. 3.3 FLOODPLAIN/FLOODWAY REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 12
Article 3: FS Floodplain District
Amendments:
allowance of a Residential Unit Developments or Single Family Cluster Housing
otherwise pertaining must be met as they would for any other proposal before a
permit may be issued in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(c) Only if 3.3.2(a) and 3.3.2(b) procedures above are not applicable or a denial pursuant
to 3.3.2(b) has been issued, and the applicant has demonstrated compliance with all
applicable federal, state and local floodplain requirements, shall a permit be issued
for development in a floodplain. Compliance with federal and state requirements
may be evidenced by grant of a consolidated state permit or letter from the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality indicating compliance of the proposal with
state and federal requirements.
(d) Initial consultation in the administration of this subsection 3.3.2 shall involve the
applicant or agent and the Chief Building Official with the assistance of the
Township Engineer, if determined necessary. Appeal of determinations of the Chief
Building Official shall be to the Planning Commission pursuant to procedures for site
plan review in Article 29 of this Ordinance.
SEC. 3.4 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL?
Application for review of proposed development in the Floodplain District and the applicable appeal
procedures shall be in accordance with provisions in Article 29 for site plan review and approval
except that:
1. The application shall include, in addition to the information required by Article 29 of this
Ordinance or by Article 3 of the Plymouth Township Subdivision Control Ordinance,
Ordinance 32, if applicable, the following information:
(a) The location of the floodplain, floodway and wetlands, if any, on the site.?
(b) The location of neighboring water detention areas or facilities, culverts, storm
sewers, open or enclosed drains, swales or other natural or built areas or facilities
designed for stormwater management.
(c) The siting of all structures and proposed development in relation to floodplains,
floodways or wetlands, if any.?
? SEC. 3.4 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 13
Article 4: PL Public Lands District
Amendments:
ARTICLE IV
PL PUBLIC LANDS DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
The Public Lands District is designed to classify public owned uses as well as certain privately
owned uses and lands which are intended for major use in a recreational or institutional setting
by the public. Buildings and sites in this district should be compatible with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood and should establish a high standard of site design and appearance.
SEC. 4.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Municipal or other governmental buildings such as, but not limited to: township offices,
fire stations, police stations, post offices and park comfort stations, provided that such
uses do not meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses.”
2. Outdoor public owned recreational uses including, but not limited to: playgrounds,
playfields, golf courses, boating areas, fishing sites, parks and parkways.
3. Public schools, provided that such schools do not meet the definition of “large scale
institutional uses”, offering courses in general education subject to the following
requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
4. Cultural services such as museums, art galleries and historical sites.
SEC. 4.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Public and private clubs or associations providing recreational uses for their members
including, but not limited to: private golf clubs, country clubs, tennis clubs and riding
clubs, subject to the following requirements:
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 4.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
SEC. 4.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 14
Article 4: PL Public Lands District
Amendments:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
(d) No building shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
(e) Golf fairways, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar uses shall be located not
less than thirty-five (35) feet from any property line and shall comply with the
requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering. ?
2. Facilities such as licensed restaurants and bars may be permitted when occupying an
integral part of the main building and are considered incidental to a permitted use or an
approved special land use provided:
(a) There is no exterior display or advertising of said premises.
(b) The structure and associated parking facilities are so sited and landscaped so as to
protect views and adjacent existing residential uses and districts.
3. Municipal facilities that qualify as “large scale institutional uses,” subject to the
conditions of Section 28.63.
4. Wireless communication facilities, subject to Section 28.11.
5. Private schools, including parochial and charter schools, excluding child care facilities,
provided that such schools do not meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses”,
subject to the following requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
6. Churches, temples, and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto,
provided that such uses do not meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” or
“large scale churches” and subject to the following requirements:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
? SEC. 4.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 15
Article 4: PL Public Lands District
Amendments:
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
SEC. 4.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal permitted uses and special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses, as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses, as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses, as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
4. Signs for all uses, as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
5. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
6. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations, as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance for the PL Zoning District. However, the height, area, lot coverage and yard
regulations of the abutting district may be applied to the subject property provided the
Planning Commission finds the height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations of the
abutting district to be consistent with the purpose of this Article and shall not adversely
affect adjacent neighboring properties in their existing or planned future use.
7. Fences shall be permitted in a PL District, subject to the following:
(a) No fence shall be built closer to the street than the front yard setback line
applicable to the premises pursuant to the Schedule of Regulations (Article 20.)
(b) No fence shall be built closer to the street than the established front building line
along said street or in front of the building closest to the street on the fenced
premises.
(c) No fence shall be built on the side or rear of a corner lot parcel or tract closer to
either of the intersecting streets than the applicable side or rear setback lines
applicable to the premises pursuant to the Schedule of Regulations (Article 20).
(d) No such fence shall be built closer to the street than the established front building
line along such intersecting street.
?SEC. 4.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 16
Article 4: PL Public Lands District
Amendments:
(e) No fence permitted shall exceed four (4) feet in height.
(f) The Planning Commission may permit an alternative as to placement and height
of fence as it deems necessary to insure the protection of public facilities and/or
property or the general public. The Planning Commission in granting an
alternative may require any condition or safeguard the Commission determines to
be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and necessary to provide
adequate protection for the abutting properties.?
(g) In the PL District it shall be unlawful for any person to build, repair or relocate a
fence without first having secured a Zoning Compliance and/or Building permit
from the Department of Building and code Enforcement.
? SEC. 4.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 17
Article 5: AG Agricultural District
PURPOSE
SEC 5.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
ARTICLE V
AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
PURPOSE
To allow continued use of land zoned AG which is suited to eventual development into uses
which would be consistent with the Future Land Use Plan of the Charter Township of Plymouth,
and without encroaching upon adjacent uses.
SEC. 5.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. One family dwellings, subject to the standards of Section 28.3.
2. Agricultural uses on five (5) acres or more, as defined in Section 36.2. Stables or barns
accessory to an active farm or agricultural use shall be subject to the standards of Section
5.2.12. Farms operated wholly or in part for the raising of hogs and/or other animals by
the feeding of garbage, sewage, rubbish or offal shall not be permitted.
3. Truck-gardening, landscape nurseries and greenhouses without retail facilities.
4. Home occupations, subject to the standards of Section 28.70.
5. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) Adult foster care family home [six (6) or fewer adults].
(b) Foster family home [four (4) or fewer children 24 hours per day].
(c) Foster family group home [five (5) to six (6) children 24 hours per day].
(d) Family day care home [six (6) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
6. Private stables for the keeping of horses and ponies for private use only, on five (5) acres
or more.
7. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
8. Public schools offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not
meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” subject to the following
requirements:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 18
Article 5: AG Agricultural District
SEC 5.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
SEC. 5.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Municipal facilities, including libraries, community buildings, and municipal parks,
playgrounds and other recreational facilities (excluding park and ride facilities), provided
such facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
2. Nursing and convalescent homes, subject to the following conditions, provided that such
facilities do not meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses.”
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by
the residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks
along adjacent public or private streets.
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
3. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) Group day care home [twelve (12) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
(b) Adult foster care small group home [twelve (12) or fewer adults].
(c) Adult foster care large group home [thirteen (13) to twenty (20) adults].
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 19
Article 5: AG Agricultural District
SEC 5.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
4. Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto
provided that the uses do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” or
“large scale churches,” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary of collector road as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
5. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools, but excluding child care facilities provided for in Section 28.64
offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not meet the
definition of “large-scale institutional uses” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
6. Private recreation areas, uses and facilities including country clubs, golf courses and
swimming pools, provided that such facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale
institutional uses” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) No building shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
(b) Facilities such as licensed restaurants and bars may be permitted when occupying
an integral part of the main structure, provided there is no exterior display or
advertising of said facilities.
(c) Golf fairways, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar uses shall be locate not
less than thirty-five (35) feet from any property line and shall comply with the
requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering.
7. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet, and two side yards and a rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet each.
8. Cemeteries provided that no buildings or structures shall be located nearer than two
hundred (200) feet to the boundary line of any adjacent parcel.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 20
Article 5: AG Agricultural District
SEC 5.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
9. Truck gardening, landscape nurseries and greenhouses with retail facilities.
10. Mortuaries or funeral homes, provided that such facilities do not meet the definition of
“large-scale institutional uses,” and subject to the following conditions.
(a) Adequate off-street vehicle assembly space shall be provided for funeral
processions and similar activities. This space shall be required in addition to the
required off-street parking and loading areas, except where the Planning
Commission determines that an alternative arrangement will be adequate to serve
the proposed activities.
(b) All loading and unloading areas shall be adequately screened from adjacent
residential districts or uses and street rights-of-way.
(c) The caretaker’s residence shall be contained within the mortuary building or may
be provided in an accessory building after review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
(d) The caretaker’s residence shall be constructed in accord with the adopted building
code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom, and kitchen facilities.
(e) In no case shall the caretaker’s residence be used as a permanent single-family
dwelling by other than a watchman or caretaker.
Kennels, subject to the standards of Section 28.73.
11. Public riding stables, subject to the following standards:
(a) A minimum lot area of not less than ten (10) acres, with a minimum lot width of
not less than five hundred (500) feet, shall be maintained for such use.
(b) A riding stable shall provide an area of not less than two (2) acres for each horse
stabled and used as a part of the riding stable use, but not less than 5.2.12.(a),
above.
(c) Buildings, pens and runways for housing or keeping of horses, shall not be less
than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any adjacent property line, provided
however, that such yard space may be used for pasture in connection with a riding
stable.
(d) Pens and runways shall be screened from view in all directions either by the
buildings or a greenbelt planting.
(e) Sites shall be enclosed by a suitable fence, and maintained so that odor, dust,
noise or water drainage shall not constitute a nuisance or hazard to adjoining
properties. Stables shall be kept clean, and manure shall be treated and handled in
such a manner as to control odor and flies.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 21
Article 5: AG Agricultural District
SEC 5.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
13. Gun clubs subject to the following:
(a) Individual ranges, areas containing more than one range, or the entire property
shall be enclosed with a minimum six (6) foot chain link fence. Range fencing
shall enclose the range proper, backstop, side walls, or greenbelt, shotfall area for
shotgun ranges, firing line, ready areas, and any other area in which a person
might unwittingly subject himself to reasonable hazard.
(b) No-trespassing or danger signs designating the hazard, not less than two (2)
square feet nor more than four (4) square feet in area, and spaced not more than
two hundred (200) feet apart, shall be posted on the upper portion of the fence
enclosing the range. The sign shall also be posted at each gate and other entry.
(c) Outdoor ranges may be operated for light arms only during the daylight hours
between 9:00 AM and 6:00 PM. The ranges may be operated for heavy arms only
during the daylight hours between 1:00 PM and 6:00 PM only. Light arms are
defined as shotguns, .22 caliber rim fire cartridges only. All other firearms are to
be considered heavy arms.
(d) Trap, skeet or other shotgun ranges shall be placed such that the firing positions
are not less than nine hundred (900) feet from the nearest property line in the
direction of fire. No backstop is required for such shotgun ranges.
(e) All outdoor pistol and rifle ranges shall be provided with a secondary backstop
and a primary bullet-stop immediately behind the target line. The primary bulletstop
shall consist of inclined steel plates with sand pits, or heavy timbers backed
with earth. The steel plates shall be backed with sand or other sound deadening
material. The secondary backstop shall be constructed of earth and shall be of
sufficient height to subtend an angle of not less than six (6) degrees above the
horizontal when viewed from the firing line, shall be equal to or greater than its
distance from the firing line plus the width of the firing line. This backstop may
be a natural rise of ground if free of stone and exposed rock and lying entirely
within the fenced area. Alternative construction affording equivalent protection
and noise reduction may be allowed on petition to the Planning Commission.
(f) In addition to the primary and secondary backstops, all outdoor pistol and rifle
ranges shall be enclosed on the remaining three (3) sides by a dense greenbelt of
bushes, brush or trees not less than ten (10) feet in height and not less than two
hundred (200) feet in width. As an alternative to the greenbelt, an earthwork may
be constructed such that the top of the earthwork subtends an angle of not less
than six (6) degrees from the horizontal when viewed from any point on the firing
line, or not less than ten (10) feet in height, whichever is greater. In case of the
earthwork, the two hundred (200) feet distance between the firing line and the
property line shall be maintained. Alternative construction affording equivalent
protection and noise reduction may be allowed on petition to the Planning
Commission.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 22
Article 5: AG Agricultural District
SEC 5.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
SEC 5.3 USES PERMITTED REQUIRING APPROVAL
OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SEC 5.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
(g) Indoor firing ranges shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide sound
reduction and to prevent stray shots from leaving the range area in hazardous
directions. In this interest all construction plans for initial construction, major
alteration and subsequent new construction shall be approved by the Planning
Commission and Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
(h) All ranges shall be used only in the presence of competent supervision, as
designated by the responsible officers of the club. A list of the responsible
officers and of qualified range supervisors shall be registered each year in January
with the Township Clerk.
SEC.5.2A (Added 3/14/10) USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use
which would be in violation of any State or Federal Law.
SEC. 5.3 USES PERMITTED REQUIRING APPROVAL OF THE ZONING BOARD
OF APPEALS
The following uses are permitted with the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to
the use standards listed in Section 2.8 and the review procedure specified in Section 31.8 of this
Ordinance.
1. The keeping of one (1) or more fowl or four (4) or more rabbits for non-commercial use
by the occupants of the premises on lots of less than five (5) acres.
2. One (1) roadside stand solely for the sale of fresh produce.
3. The keeping of horses, donkeys, mules, ponies and other domesticated animals, other
than house pets, for private use only, subject to the standards of Section 2.8.3
SEC. 5.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
All principal permitted uses, special land uses and uses permitted requiring approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance,
including but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses, except for single family dwellings, as
specified in Article 29 of this Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses, as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses, as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
4. Signs for all uses, as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 23
Article 5: AG Agricultural District
SEC 5.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
5. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
6. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations, as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
7. The following specific requirements shall apply within an AG District:
(a) Accessory buildings for the housing of fowl or small animals (excluding cats and
dogs) shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line and not less
than one hundred (100) feet from any dwelling.
(b) Any lot or parcel of land that was divided and recorded prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance and is smaller than the five (5) acres required in an AG District
must conform to the uses, yard size, lot area, percentage of lot coverage and other
regulations of the R-1-E District.
8. Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
9. Sidewalks as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
10. Fences may be permitted as specified in Section 6.4.8(f) of this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 24
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
ARTICLE VI
R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1
ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
PURPOSE
These residential districts are designed to ensure that the development of the designated areas
proceeds in a manner consistent with the existing and desired residential character of the
Township. The four (4) One Family Residential Districts are differentiated, among other factors,
by densities and yard requirements as established in Article 20, Schedule of Regulations in order
to provide a reasonable balance and variety of single family living environments.
SEC. 6.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. One family dwellings, subject to the standards of Section 28.3.
2. Home occupations subject to the standards of Section 28.70.
3. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) Adult foster care family home [six (6) or fewer adults].
(b) Foster family home [four (4) or fewer children 24 hours per day].
(c) Foster family group home [five (5) to six (6) children 24 hours per day].
(d) Family day care home [six (6) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
4. Public schools offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not
meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” subject to the following
requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
PURPOSE
SEC. 6.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 25
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
5. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SEC. 6.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Municipal facilities, including libraries, community buildings, and municipal parks,
playgrounds and other recreational facilities (excluding park and ride facilities), provided
such facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
2. Nursing and convalescent homes, subject to the following conditions, provided that such
facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by
the residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks
along adjacent public or private streets.
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
3. Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto,
provided that the uses do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” or
“large scale churches,” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
SEC. 6.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 26
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
4. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools (excluding child care or day care facilities provided for in Section
28.64) offering courses in general education, subject to the following conditions. Public,
charter and private schools that meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” shall
be permitted only in the R-1-E District and shall also be subject to the conditions
specified in Section 28.63.
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
5. Public and private recreation areas, uses and facilities including country clubs, golf
courses and swimming pools, provided that such facilities do not meet the definition of
“large-scale institutional uses” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) No building shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
(b) Facilities such as licensed restaurants and bars may be permitted when occupying
an integral part of the main structure, provided there is no exterior display or
advertising of said facilities.
(c) Golf fairways, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar uses shall be located not
less than thirty-five (35) feet from any property line and shall comply with the
requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering.
6. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fortyfive
(45) feet, and two side yards and a rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet each.
7. Cemeteries provided that no buildings or structures shall be located nearer than two
hundred (200) feet to the boundary line of any adjacent parcel.
8. Mortuaries or funeral homes, provided that such facilities do not meet the definition of
“large-scale institutional uses,” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Adequate off-street vehicle assembly space shall be provided for funeral
processions and similar activities. This space shall be required in addition to the
required off-street parking and loading areas, except where the Planning
Commission determines that an alternative arrangement will be adequate to serve
the proposed activities.
(b) All loading and unloading areas shall be adequately screened from adjacent
residential districts or uses and street rights-of-way.
SEC. 6.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 27
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
(c) The caretaker’s residence shall be contained within the mortuary building or may
be provided in an accessory building after review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
(d) The caretaker’s residence shall be constructed in accordance with the adopted
building code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom, and kitchen
facilities.
(e) In no case shall the caretaker’s residence be used as a permanent single-family
dwelling by anyone other than a watchman or caretaker.
9. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) Group day care home [twelve (12) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
(b) Adult foster care small group home [twelve (12) or fewer adults].
(c) Child care centers.
10. Bed-and-Breakfast Inns with not more than four (4) transient sleeping units, and subject
to the conditions of Section 28.71.
11. Veterinary Clinics, subject to the conditions of Section 28.72.
12. Kennels, subject to the conditions of Section 28.73.
13. Public riding stables subject to the following conditions:
(a) A minimum lot area of not less than ten (10) acres, with a minimum lot width of
not less than five hundred (500) feet, shall be maintained for such use.
(b) A riding stable shall provide an area of not less than two (2) acres for each horse
stabled and used as a part of the riding stable use, but not less than 6.2.13.a,
above.
(c) Building’s pens and runways for housing or keeping of horses, shall not be less
than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any adjacent property line, provided
however, that such yard space may be used for pasture in connection with a riding
stable.
(d) Pens and runways shall be screened from view in all directions either by the
buildings or a greenbelt plantings.
(e) Sites shall be enclosed by a suitable fence, and maintained so that odor, dust,
noise or water drainage shall not constitute a nuisance or hazard to adjoining
SEC. 6.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 28
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
properties. Stables shall be kept clean, and manure shall be treated and handled in
such a manner as to control odor and flies.
SEC. 6.3 USES PERMITTED REQUIRING APPROVAL OF ZONING BOARD OF
APPEALS
The following uses are permitted with the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to
the use standards listed in Section 2.8 and the review procedure specified in Section 31.8 of this
Ordinance.
1. The keeping of one (1) or more fowl or four (4) or more rabbits for non-commercial use
by the occupants of the premises on lots less than five (5) acres.
2. One (1) roadside stand solely for the sale of fresh produce grown on the same parcel in
the R-I-E or R-1-H Districts.
3. The keeping of horses, donkeys, mules, ponies and other domesticated animals, other
than house pets, in the R-l-E or R-1-H District for private use only, subject to the
standards of Section 2.8.3.
4. Private stables for the keeping of horses and ponies for private use only in a R-1-E
District, subject to the standards of Section 2.8.3.
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
All principal permitted uses, special land uses, and uses requiring approval of the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, including but
not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses, except for single-family dwellings, as
specified in Article 29 of this Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses, as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Screening and land use buffers for all uses, as specified in Article 26 of this Ordinance.
4. Signs for all uses, as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
5. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
6. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations, as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
SEC. 6.3 USES PERMITTED REQUIRING APPROVAL
OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 29
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
7. Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards of Section 28.8, Exterior Lighting.
8. The following specific requirements shall apply within a One Family Residential District
(R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1):
(a) Accessory Buildings in Residential Districts. An accessory building, including a
carport, attached to the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof,
and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this Ordinance
applicable to the principal building. Breezeways, as an attachment between the
garage or carport and the main building, shall be considered a part of the main
building, but shall not be considered livable floor area. When garages are
separated from the dwelling unit by an open breezeway, the garage wall and roof
nearest that main building shall be not less than three-quarter (3/4) hour fire
construction along the entire width of the breezeway.
1) A garage, carport or other accessory buildings, unless attached and made a
part of the principal building as above provided, shall not be nearer than
ten (10) feet to the principal building.
2) A detached garage or detached accessory building may not be located in
the front yard; provided, however, when topographic conditions prevent
compliance with this provision, the Zoning Board of Appeals may vary the
above requirements in such a manner as to contribute to the public safety
and general welfare.
3) Detached garages and detached accessory buildings shall not exceed one
(1) story or twelve (12) feet in height. All detached garages and detached
accessory buildings combined shall not occupy more than seven (7)
percent of the lot area or 650 square feet, whichever is greater, and shall
not exceed the total square foot area of the residence.
4) Detached garages and detached accessory buildings, where located on the
rear one-quarter (1/4) of the lot, shall not be nearer than five (5) feet to any
rear or side lot line, and where otherwise located shall conform to all
requirements for side yards set forth in the requirements for each
residential district. Where the side yard abuts upon a side street, such
accessory structures shall not extend nearer to the side street lot line than
the required building setback. In no instance shall an accessory building
be located within a dedicated easement or right- of-way.
5) Garage facilities considered incidental to the principal permitted uses may
be used to store a maximum of one (1) commercial vehicle. Outdoor
storage of commercial vehicles is prohibited.
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 30
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
6) Permit Required: Prior to the construction, repair or alteration of an
accessory structure, a zoning compliance and/or building permit must be
obtained from the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
(b) Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
(c) Front Yard Use. Any portion of a lot lying in front of the building line shall be
used only for utilities and for ornamental purposes and nothing other than ground
cover, flowers, trees and shrubs, permitted professional signs or utilities shall be
placed, erected or planted thereon. The front yard, for the purposes of this
Section, shall be defined as a yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the front lot line and the nearest line of the building. If the lot fronts
upon a public street, the area lying between the front lot line and the back of curb
or edge of roadway is street right-of-way and as such is under the jurisdiction of
the Wayne County Department of Public Services and/or Michigan Department of
Transportation. A permit from the agency with jurisdiction shall be required for
all work performed in this area.
(d) Swimming Pools, accessory to an individual single family dwelling shall be
permitted as an accessory use, provided they meet the following requirements:
1) There shall be a distance of not less than ten (10) feet between the
adjoining property line and the outside of the pool wall or raised deck or
walkway.
2) There shall be a distance of not less than four (4) feet between the outside
pool wall and any principal building located on the same lot.
3) Swimming pools shall not be located within any required front or street
side yard setbacks as specified in Article 20, Schedule of Regulations.
4) If electrical service drop conductors or other utility wires cross under or
over a proposed pool area, the applicant shall make satisfactory
arrangements with the utility involved for the relocation of wires before a
permit shall be issued for the construction of a pool.
5) A swimming pool shall not be located in an easement.
6) For the protection of the public, all areas containing swimming pools shall
be completely enclosed by a fence in accordance with regulations of the
State of Michigan. The gate shall be of a self-closing and latching type,
with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily available for children to
open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is
not in use for extended periods. This provision may be waived by the
Chief Building Official if the entire yard is securely enclosed. For
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 31
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
additional pool fence requirements see Charter Township of Plymouth
Code of Ordinances Chapter 29, Swimming Pools.
(e) Tennis Courts, accessory to an individual single family dwelling shall be
permitted as an accessory use, subject to the following:
1) The tennis court and its perimeter fence shall be located a minimum of
thirty five (35) feet from any side or rear lot line and shall comply with the
minimum front yard setback of the zoning district, as specified in Article
20, Schedule of Regulations.
2) If tennis court perimeter fencing is provided, it shall not exceed four (4)
feet in height. Lifts or similar devices may be permitted at each of the two
(2) ends of the tennis court. These lifts may raise retractable fencing to no
greater than ten (10) feet in height, and may only be extended only when
the court is being used.
3) Lighting shall be concealed source, shielded and focused so as to not glare
off site and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
4) Administrative site plan approval shall be required, as provided by Section
29.4. The site plan shall contain sufficient detail to determine compliance
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
5) Landscape screening shall be provided to effectively form a visual and
physical separation between the tennis court and adjacent residential uses,
and to buffer the noise created. A planting plan, including size, species,
location and spacing of plant materials shall be submitted with the site
plan for approval.
6) Letters shall be submitted from all abutting property owners stating that
they have no objection to the use
(f) Fences. In all Single Family Residential Districts it shall be unlawful for any
person to build, repair or relocate a fence without first having secured a Building
and/or Zoning Compliance permit from the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement. In all Single Family Residential Districts the following shall apply
in regards to fencing: The following language was amended on 04/09/19:
1) Protective or Security Fencing: Protective or security fencing shall be
considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous
lands either in whole or in part serving the purpose of preventing intrusion
onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from
without or straying from within. The following shall govern the height,
location and placement of protective or security fencing:
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 32
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
a) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or
security fence shall be six (6) feet, unless otherwise provided for in
this Article, or required by the Planning Commission as part of
special land use and/or site plan approval.
b) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall
not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided
if such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of
not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material and shall have
an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90) degrees. The fence
shall comply with the requirements of applicable requirements of
the State Construction Code enforced by the Township. Chain link
fencing, as defined in this Ordinance as a type of woven fence
typically constructed from galvanized or coated steel wire (and
may also be referred to as chain-wire fence, cyclone fence, or
hurricane fence) shall only be permitted at four (4) feet in height
and shall not contain plastic or other types of strips intertwined or
otherwise attached to the fence.
c) Placement:
1. Interior Lots: Fencing may be placed along the lot lines,
provided no six (6) foot in height fence shall be built closer
to the street than the established midpoint of the principal
building line closest to the street on the fenced premise1. In
the case of two different midpoints on a building, the
midpoint furthest setback from the street shall control. All
fencing closer to the street than the established midpoint
line of the principal building shall be a maximum of four
(4) feet in height but in no case shall extend beyond the
front building line.
a. Exception: Where a lot backs or sides to a major
thoroughfare with an ultimate right-of-way of one
hundred twenty (120) feet.
The fence may be located within three (3) feet of
the street setback line for the major thoroughfare
without regards to the established building line for
the thoroughfare provided that some form of
landscaping is provided between the fence and the
proposed sidewalk area and that said location shall
1 No fence shall be built closer to the street than the front setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to the
Article 20, Schedule of Regulations.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 33
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
not constitute a safety hazard for pedestrian and/or
motor vehicles and their passengers.
b. Exception: A six (6) foot in height fence may
extend beyond the midpoint to permit side entry
doors and the like to be enclosed, by the reasonably
sound judgment of the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement.
2. Corner Lots: One street frontage shall be identified as the
front yard. In said case the standards established under
Section 1) Interior Lots shall apply. The designated side
yard shall be handled in the following manner. The fence
may run along the rear property line to a point not nearer
than twenty (20) feet from the side street corner of the
property. The fence may then run on an angle not less than
forty-five (45) degrees to a point which intersects a line
located three (3) feet inside the side property line. When a
visual obstruction is not present, the forty-five (45) degree
angle standard may be waived, as determined by the
reasonably sound judgement of the Department of Building
and Code Enforcement. The fence may then proceed along
said line to a point intersecting the rear building line
extension of the residence. In all cases the type of fencing
and landscaping proposed shall be treated in a manner
which will not result in a safety hazard for pedestrian
and/or motor vehicles and their passengers.
2) Decorative Fencing: A structure intended primarily for ornamental
purpose. A decorative fence shall be any fence which by definition is not
to be considered a pool fence, tennis court fence, protective or security
fence or a privacy screen fence.
a) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a decorative fence
shall be four (4) feet.
b) Material: Chain link fencing shall not be considered decorative
fencing for the purpose of this Section of the Ordinance.
c) Placement: Decorative fencing so located as to result in a safety
hazard to pedestrians and/or motor vehicles and passengers shall
not be permitted and said fencing shall be removed within thirty
(30) days of such determination and notification by the Department
of Building and Code Enforcement. No decorative fencing shall
be located nearer than two (2) feet from a street right-of-way line.
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 34
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
3) Privacy Screen Fence: A structure intended to form a visual screen or
windbreak for a patio or outdoor living area located in the rear yard only.
a) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a privacy screen fence
shall be six (6) feet.
b) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall
not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided
if such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of
not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material and shall have
an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90) degrees. The fence
shall comply with the requirements of the applicable requirements
of the State Construction Code enforced by the Township.
Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing with plastic or other types of
strips intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence shall be
prohibited.
c) Placement: Said structure shall be located within the rear yard
only and shall not be located nearer than twenty (20) feet to the
rear property line, nor shall said fencing extend beyond the
extension of the side building line of the residence.
4) Dog Runs and Outdoor Service Areas Fences: A structure intended to
contain an animal permitted within a single family area or to screen an
outdoor service area.
a) Maximum Height: Maximum height shall be four (4) feet in side
yards and six (6) feet in rear yards.
b) Maximum Enclosure: Three hundred (300) square feet.
c) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall
not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided
such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of
not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material and shall have
an angle at the top of not less than 90 degrees. The fence shall
comply with the requirements of the building code. Cyclone
fencing with plastic or other types of strips intertwined in the
fencing shall be prohibited.
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 6.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 35
Article 6: One Family Residential Districts
Amendments:
d) Placement: Side or rear yard provided that said run shall be
screened appropriately from any public right-of-way or adjacent
property and shall not be closer than eight (8) feet to a side
property line or ten (10) feet from a rear yard line.
5) Pool Fence: See Charter Township of Plymouth Code of Ordinances
Chapter 29, Swimming Pools.
6) The following provisions shall apply to all fences:
(a) Fence Maintenance.
Fences shall be maintained in good condition. Rotten or broken
components shall be replaced, repaired, or removed. If a fence is
determined to be in need of repair by reasonably sound judgement of the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement, orders to complete such
repairs may be issued.
(b) Clear Vision.
Fences shall be designed to provide unobstructed sight distances and
shall comply with Section 28.25, Corner Visibility and Clear Vision
Zones. Further, all fences must be setback a minimum of one (1) foot
from the nearest edge of any sidewalk.
(c) Appeal of a Decision.
An applicant may appeal a decision of the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement concerning a proposed fence to the Zoning Board of
Appeals (ZBA).
(d) Appearance.
All fences shall present a finished appearance to view from off site. If,
because of design or construction, one side of a fence has a more finished
appearance than the other, the side of the fence with the more finished
appearance shall face the exterior of the lot. High quality fences, in neutral
colors, that are consistent with the surrounding neighborhood design, are
encouraged.
(g) Sidewalks shall be provided as required by Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(h) Underground utilities shall be provided as required under Section 28.10.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 35
Article 7: R-M Mobile Home Residential Districts
Amendments:
ARTICLE VII
R-M
MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
PURPOSE?
This District is designed primarily to provide locations for mobile home parks thus providing for
a variety of housing types and residential living environments in the Charter Township of
Plymouth in areas which will not adversely impact the living environment of other existing and
future residential areas.
SEC. 7.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES ?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. One family dwellings subject to the requirements of Article 6, One Family Residential
District and Article 20, Schedule of Regulations for an R-1 Residential District.
2. Agriculture on five (5) acres or more in area.
3. Mobile home parks subject to the following:
(a) Preliminary or Tentative Site Plan approval shall be required for all mobile home
parks and shall be subject to the following procedures:
1) The application for approval of a mobile home park shall be accompanied
by a preliminary or tentative site plan submitted to the Clerk's Office for
review and approval or denial by the Planning Commission.
2) The date of receipt of the preliminary or tentative site plan shall be fifteen
(15) days prior to the date of the regular Planning Commission meeting.
Explanation of sub. par. 3(a)2) above: The Charter Township of Plymouth
Planning Commission meets only once a month. If a submission of a
preliminary plan for a mobile home park was submitted immediately
following a Planning Commission meeting, a severe hardship would result
in the review and approval process. The above language is therefore
proposed to insure a proper review can be completed without undue
hardship on the developer of the mobile home park.
3) Preliminary or tentative site plans and specifications shall be submitted in
accordance with Article 29 and Article 26 of this Ordinance.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 7.1? PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 36
Article 7: R-M Mobile Home Residential Districts
Amendments:
4) The preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Wayne County, Department
of Public Services, Wayne County Health Department and the office of the
Wayne County Drain Commissioner in accordance with Public Act 96 of
1987, State of Michigan, as amended.
5) The Planning Commission shall either approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the preliminary or tentative site plan within
sixty (60) days of the date of receipt of the preliminary plan. The plan
shall be approved prior to submission of a final site plan.
6) Four (4) copies of drawings approved by the State for construction shall be
submitted to the Township by the applicant.
(b) A mobile home park shall not be permitted on parcels of less than twenty-five
(25) acres in net area. In determining net area all dedicated or deductible interior
and exterior right of way equal to or greater than eighty-six (86) feet in width
shall be excluded.
(c) Overall density for the mobile home park shall not exceed 6.5 dwelling units per
acre. All mobile home sites shall have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet and
minimum lot area of not less than 5,500 square feet provided however that the lot
width and lot area may be reduced by a maximum of twenty (20) percent. For
each square foot of land gained through the reduction of the site below 5,500
square feet, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated as open space and
developed in a manner approved by the Planning Commission as part of the
preliminary plan review.
(d) Any mobile home park shall have direct access to a Major Thoroughfare Road. If
a mobile home park does not have direct access to a Major Thoroughfare Road,
access to the Major Thoroughfare Road may be permitted by a public right-ofway
not less than eighty-six (86) feet in width provided, however, that such
access would not be through a developed or future one family residential area.
(e) Mobile home park developments shall comply with all requirements of Public Act
96 of 1987, State of Michigan, as amended
(f) A greenbelt and/or berm not less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be located
and continuously maintained along all exterior boundary lot lines. ?
(g) All yards and open space areas in a RM District shall be graded in a manner
which shall avoid the ponding of stormwater unless said conditions have been
designed to occur as part of a stormwater management facility which has been
approved by the Planning Commission as part of the Preliminary Plan Approval.
(h) Mobile home, community building or service building shall not be located closer
than twenty five (25) feet to any mobile home park perimeter property line.
? ? SEC. 7.1? PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 37
Article 7: R-M Mobile Home Residential Districts
Amendments:
(i) A mobile home park shall provide an outdoor recreation area of at least 25,000
square feet. For mobile home parks containing more than fifty (50) mobile home
sites, the minimum outdoor recreation area shall be increased by three hundred
(300) square feet for each site or lot over fifty (50). Open space provided as a
result of lot size reduction as permitted in Sec. 7.1 par. 3(c) may be included in
the computation of outdoor recreation area. The outdoor recreation area shall be
so designed and located to facilitate access and use by the residents of the mobile
home park.
(j) The mobile home park primary walk system, including walks along main
highways, main drives and secondary streets shall not be less than five (5) feet in
width, except those located along a Major Thoroughfare. In the case of a Major
Thoroughfare, all sidewalks shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in width. All
sidewalks shall conform to the standards and requirements for public sidewalks as
established by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. The
secondary walk system, including walks from each mobile home entrance to
facilities on the lot and connections to the primary walk system shall not be less
than thirty (30) inches wide and shall conform to the standards and requirements
for public sidewalks as established by the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement.
(k) Installation and anchoring systems shall comply with all requirements as
established in the "Manufactured Housing Commission General Rules" State of
Michigan.
(l) A uniform skirting shall be required to surround the base of a mobile home and
installed within sixty (60) days after placement of said mobile home. Skirting
shall comply with requirements as found in the Manufactured Housing
Commission General Rules. ?
(m) All utility lines or similar facilities intended to serve any use in a R-M Mobile
Home Residential District, whether designed for primary service from main lines
or for distribution of services throughout the site shall be placed and maintained
underground at all points within the boundaries of this site.
(n) Where permitted by the individual mobile home park, each mobile home may be
provided with one (1) utility cabinet, with no more than one hundred (100) square
feet of floor area, which shall be uniform as to appearance and location
throughout the mobile home park. All cabinets shall be kept clean and shall be
maintained in good condition and shall be prohibited on the front twenty-five (25)
feet of the mobile home lot and shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any mobile
home.
(o) Lot line fences if permitted in the individual mobile home park shall be uniform
in height and shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height and shall be
constructed in such a manner as to provide firemen access to all sides of each
? SEC. 7.1? PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 38
Article 7: R-M Mobile Home Residential Districts
Amendments:
mobile home and shall be in accordance with the Manufactured Housing
Commission General Rules. Further, fences shall not be constructed of old or
used material unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall not be made of
or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or
pointed projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of pickets,
the pickets shall be made of not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material
and shall have an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90) degrees. The fence
shall comply with the requirements of the building code. Plastic or other types of
stripes intertwined in cyclone fencing shall be prohibited.
(p) No mobile home may be occupied until a Certificate of Occupancy has been
issued by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
4. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SEC. 7.2? SPECIAL LAND USES
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Public, parochial and private schools including nursery schools, churches, libraries,
community buildings, hospitals, convalescent homes, municipal facilities, municipal
parks and playgrounds other than park and ride facilities.
2. Public and private recreation areas, uses and facilities including country clubs, golf
courses and swimming pools subject to the following:
(a) No building shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
(b) Facilities such as licensed restaurants and bars may be permitted when occupying
an integral part of the main structure, provided there is no exterior display or
advertising of said facilities.
(c) Golf fairways, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar uses shall be located not
less than thirty-five (35) feet from any property line and shall comply with the
requirements of Section 26.12 of this Ordinance.
3. Communication facilities, public utility transformer stations, sub-stations, and gas
regulator stations without service or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of
Section 26.12 of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the following:
? SEC. 7.2? SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 39
Article 7: R-M Mobile Home Residential Districts
Amendments:
(a) A front yard setback of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be provided (irrespective
of the yard requirements of the district in which it is located) and two side yards
and a rear yard shall be provided, each shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet
in width.
(b) When a transmission or relay tower, etc. is proposed as part of the facility, the
tower shall be so located that it does not present a nuisance to abutting residential
properties. The tower shall be so located on the subject property that the distance
from the base of the tower to all points on each property line shall be not less than
one and one-half (1 ½) times the height of the tower.
SEC. 7.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
The following requirements shall be provided within a R-M Mobile Home Residential District:
1. Site Plan and Development Approval as specified in Article 29 shall be required for all
uses except for single family residences and mobile home parks. Mobile home parks
shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.1 par. 3(a).
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance without
interference to normal movement of traffic.
3. Screening and land use buffers for all uses as specified in Article 26 of this Ordinance
except that mobile home parks shall comply with the requirements of Section 7.1 par.
3(a) in regards to the review and approval process.
4. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
5. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
6. Yard Grading and Drainage. All yards and open space areas in a R-M Mobile Home
Residential District shall be graded in a manner which shall avoid the ponding of
stormwater unless said conditions have been designed to occur as part of a stormwater
management facility which has been approved by the Planning Commission as part of the
Preliminary Plan Approval.
? SEC. 7.3? DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 40
Article 8: R-2 Two Family Residential District
Amendments:
ARTICLE VIII
R-2 TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
To provide for medium-density residential development in areas ordinarily located between
single family areas and areas of more intense use and/or major thoroughfares and to promote and
encourage a suitable environment for family life.
SEC. 8.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. One family dwellings, subject to the standards of Section 28.3.
2. Two family dwellings.
3. Home occupations subject to the standards of Section 28.70.
4. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) Adult foster care family home [six (6) or fewer adults].
(b) Foster family home [four (4) or fewer children 24 hours per day].
(c) Foster family group home [five (5) to six (6) children 24 hours per day].
(d) Family day care home [six (6) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
5. Public schools offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not
meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” subject to the following
requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
6. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
? ? PURPOSE
? SEC. 8.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 41
Article 8: R-2 Two Family Residential District
Amendments:
SEC. 8.2 SPECIAL LAND USES?
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Municipal facilities, including libraries, community buildings, and municipal parks,
playgrounds and other recreational facilities (excluding park and ride facilities), provided
such facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
2. Nursing and convalescent homes, subject to the following conditions, provided that such
facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by
the residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks
along adjacent public or private streets.
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
3. Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto,
provided that the uses do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” or
“large scale churches,” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
4. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools, but excluding child care facilities provided for in Section 28.64,
? SEC. 8.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 42
Article 8: R-2 Two Family Residential District
Amendments:
offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not meet the
definition of “large-scale institutional uses” and subject to the following:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license. ?
5. Public and private recreation areas, uses and facilities including country clubs, golf
courses and swimming pools, provided that such facilities do not meet the definition of
“large-scale institutional uses” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) No building shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
(b) Facilities such as licensed restaurants and bars may be permitted when occupying
an integral part of the main structure, provided there is no exterior display or
advertising of said facilities.
(c) Golf fairways, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar uses shall be located not
less than thirty-five (35) feet from any property line and shall comply with the
requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering of
this Ordinance.
6. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet, and two side yards and a rear yard of not be less than twenty five (25) feet each.
7. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan: ?
(a) Group day care home [twelve (12) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
(b) Adult foster care small group home [twelve (12) or fewer adults].
(c) Adult foster care large group home [thirteen (13) to twenty (20) adults]
(d) Child care centers.
?
? SEC. 8.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 43
Article 8: R-2 Two Family Residential District
Amendments:
SEC. 8.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal permitted uses and special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses, except for single-family dwellings, as
specified in Article 29 of this Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses, as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses, as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
4. Signs for all uses, as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
5. ?Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
6. ?Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations, as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
7. Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
8. Fences. Section 6.4.8(f) shall apply regarding fencing in a R-2 District.
9. Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
10. Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards of Section 28.8, Exterior Lighting. ?
11. Underground utilities shall be provided as required under Section 28.10 of this
Ordinance.
?
SEC. 8.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 44
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
PURPOSE
SEC 9.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
ARTICLE IX
R-2-A MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
PURPOSE
This district is to provide for high-density residential developments in areas ordinarily located
between Single Family Residential areas and areas of more intense use and/or major
thoroughfares. The regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential
characteristics of the district and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family
life.
SEC. 9.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. Two family dwellings.
2. Townhouse and stacked flats dwellings.
3. Multiple family residential buildings.
4. Home occupations subject to the standards of Section 28.70.
5. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) Adult foster care family home [six (6) or fewer adults].
(b) Foster family home [four (4) or fewer children 24 hours per day].
(c) Foster family group home [five (5) to six (6) children 24 hours per day].
(d) Family day care home [six (6) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
6. Public schools offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not
meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” subject to the following
requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 45
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
7. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SEC. 9.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Municipal facilities including libraries, community buildings, park and ride facilities, and
municipal parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities. If such facilities are large
scale institutional uses as defined herein, they shall be subject to the conditions of Section
28.63.
2. Housing for the elderly, including congregate elderly housing, subject to the conditions of
Section 28.65.
3. Nursing and convalescent homes, subject to the following conditions, provided that such
facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall
be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through the site
to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the site or
traffic on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by
the residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks
along adjacent public or private streets.
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
4. Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto,
provided that the uses do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” or
“large scale churches,” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 46
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
5. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools (excluding child care facilities provided for in Section 28.64) offering
courses in general education, subject to the following conditions. Charter, private and
public schools which meet the definition of large scale institutional uses shall also be
subject to the conditions of Section 28.63.
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
6. Hospitals provided that such facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale
institutional uses” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Hospital sites shall have a minimum gross land area of ten (10) acres.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall
be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through the site
to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the site or
traffic on nearby roads.
(c) Minimum setback distances for any two (2) story main or accessory building shall
be at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines or street setback lines.
The minimum setback distances shall be increased by twenty (20) feet for each
additional story, provided that no such building shall exceed six (6) stories in
height.
(d) Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be screened from adjacent
residential districts and uses a six (6) foot decorative masonry wall or other
method deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
(e) Hospitals shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in conformance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
7. Public and private recreation areas, uses and facilities including country clubs, golf
courses and swimming pools, and subject to the following conditions
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 47
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
SEC 9.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
(a) No building shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
(b) Facilities such as licensed restaurants and bars may be permitted when occupying
an integral part of the main structure, provided there is no exterior display or
advertising of said facilities.
(c) Golf fairways, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar uses shall be located not
less than thirty-five (35) feet from any property line and shall comply with the
requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering of
this Ordinance.
8. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet, and two side yards and a rear yard of not less than twenty five (25) feet each.
9. Child and adult residential care facilities, subject to the standards of Section 28.64, of the
following nature and as licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) Group day care home [twelve (12) or fewer children less than 24 hours per day].
(b) Adult foster care small group home [twelve (12) or fewer adults].
(c) Adult foster care large group home [thirteen (13) to twenty (20) adults]
(d) Child care centers.
10. Veterinary clinics, animal clinics and animal hospitals provided that it shall be
demonstrated that the granting of such special land use shall be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare of the general public and that denial of said special land
use shall constitute a general hardship on the community as a whole and further subject to
the requirements of Section 28.72.
11. (Added 5/9/10) One family cluster dwellings subject to the following:
(a) The side yard distance between a one family cluster building and a one family
cluster building shall be a minimum of 10 ft.
(b) The inclusion of the one family cluster buildings will provide for greater
flexibility and variety in the development, and result in a decrease in the overall
density of the project as compared to the density that would be permitted as a
standard multiple family development under Section 20.02(j).
SEC. 9.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT
All principal permitted uses and uses subject to special conditions shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 47.a
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses, as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 48
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
4. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
5. Special provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
6. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations, as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
7. The following specific requirements shall apply within an R-2-A Multiple Family
Residential District
(a) There shall not be more than eight (8) dwelling units in a one story building,
sixteen (16) dwelling units in a two (2) story building or twenty-eight (28)
dwelling units in a combined two (2) and three (3) story building when individual
living units are on each floor. There shall not be more than six (6) dwelling units
in a townhouse building, or eighteen (18) dwelling units in a stacked flat building.
(b) All multiple family developments shall be provided with improvements for streets
and utilities as provided in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Charter
Township of Plymouth. When a multiple family development is not platted as a
subdivision and where reference is made to subdivisions, such reference shall also
apply to multiple family developments. All interior roads, both those designed as
public and private, shall be constructed in compliance with existing construction
standards as adopted by the Wayne County Department of Public Services for
residential streets. The Planning Commission may waive this requirement after
review and recommendation by the Township Engineer, provided the waiver will
not materially impair the intent and purpose of this Ordinance or the public
interest.
(c) Underground utilities shall be provided, as required under Section 28.10.
(d) All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose exterior
is structurally altered, which faces a street or which is adjacent to property zoned
or used as residential shall be designed, treated and finished in a uniform manner
consistent with the exterior of the front of the building. All such buildings shall
comply with Section 28.14, Building Design Standards.
(e) Locations of clustered mail box facilities shall be indicated on all site plans for
multiple family housing. Mail box cluster locations shall not interfere with
parking for multiple family units, or traffic circulation on adjacent streets and
interior drives.
8. Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
9. All dwelling units shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and shall
comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
10. Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 49
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
11. Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
12. The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission for approval.
Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the requirements of Section
28.9, Waste Receptacles.
13. Fences
In all Multiple Family Residential Districts it shall be unlawful for any person to build,
repair or relocate a fence without first having secured a Zoning Compliance and/or
Building permit from the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the Planning Commission as
part of special land use and/or site plan approval shall be permitted.
(a) Protective or Security Fencing. Protective or security fencing shall be considered
a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous land either in whole
or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion onto or across a lot of record
or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from without or straying from within. The
following shall govern the height, location and placement of protective or security
fencing:
1) Permit Required: In all Multiple Family Residential Districts it shall be
unlawful for any person to build, repair or relocate a protective or security
fence without first having secured a fence permit therefore from the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
2) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security fence
shall be four (4) feet.
3) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material unless
such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of the Department
of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall not be made of or contain
barbed wire, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or pointed
projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of pickets,
the pickets shall be made of not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch
material and shall have an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90)
degrees. The fence shall comply with the requirements of applicable
requirements of the State Construction Code enforced by the Township.
Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing with plastic or other types of strips
intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence shall be prohibited.
4) Placement on Interior Lots: No fence shall be built closer to the street than
the front setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to the Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, provided no fence shall be built closer to the
street than the established front building line along said street or in front of
the building closest to the street on the fenced premises.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 50
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
(b) Decorative Fencing. A structure intended primarily for ornamental purpose. A
decorative fence shall be any fence which by definition is not to be considered a
pool fence, protective or security fence and a privacy screen fence.
1) Permit: A permit shall be required for decorative fencing in a R-2-A
District.
2) Maximum height: The maximum height of a decorative fence shall be four
(4) feet.
3) Material: Chain link fencing shall not be considered decorative fencing for
the purpose of this section of the Ordinance.
4) Placement: Decorative fencing so located as to result in a safety hazard to
pedestrians and/or motor vehicles and passengers shall not be permitted
and said fencing shall be removed within thirty (30) days of such
determination and notification by the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement. No decorative fencing shall be located nearer than two (2)
feet from a street right-of-way line.
(c) Privacy Screen Fence. A structure intended to form a visual screen or windbreak
for a patio or outdoor living area.
1) Maximum height: The maximum height of a privacy screen fence shall be
six (6) feet.
2) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material unless
such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of the Department
of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall not be made of or contain
barbed wire, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or pointed
projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of pickets,
the pickets shall be made of not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch
material and shall have an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90)
degrees. The fence shall comply with the requirements of applicable
requirements of the State Construction Code enforced by the Township.
Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing with plastic or other types of strips
intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence shall be prohibited.
3) Placement: Said fencing shall not be located nearer than fifteen (15) feet to
a property line.
(d) Tennis Courts.
1) The tennis court and its perimeter fence shall be located a minimum of
thirty five (35) feet from any side or rear lot line and shall comply with the
minimum front yard setback of the zoning district, as specified in Article
20, Schedule of Regulations.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 51
Article 9: R-2-A Multiple Family Residential District
SEC 9.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
2) If tennis court perimeter fencing is provided, it shall not exceed four (4)
feet in height. Lifts or similar devices may be permitted at each of the two
(2) ends of the tennis court. These lifts may raise retractable fencing to no
greater than ten (10) feet in height, and may only be extended only when
the court is being used. The Planning Commission may waive or modify
this requirement upon determining such modifications meet the spirit and
intent of this Article.
3) Lighting shall be concealed source, shielded and focused so as to not glare
off site and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
4) Landscape screening shall be provided to effectively form a visual and
physical separation between the tennis court and adjacent residential uses,
and to buffer the noise created. A planting plan, including size, species,
location and spacing of plant materials shall be submitted with the site
plan for approval.
14. Street trees shall be provided between the street or road pavement and sidewalk of all
interior and exterior streets and/or roadways.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 52
Article 10: OS Office Service District
PURPOSE
SEC 10.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
ARTICLE X
OS
OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT
PURPOSE
To provide a district to accommodate office uses of an administrative, business, governmental or
professional nature such as, but not limited to, dental and medical care and office-type services,
or to serve as a transitional zone between Single Family Residential areas and areas of more
intense use and/or major thoroughfares.
SEC. 10.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Medical and dental offices and clinics and other professional offices.
2. Administrative, executive and editorial offices.
3. Real estate and other general business offices, not including exhibiting or storing of
products for sale.
4. Schools for arts and crafts, photography and studios for music or dancing.
5. Mortuaries, provided that they do not meet the definition of “large scale institutional
uses,” and further are subject to the following requirements:
(a) Adequate off-street vehicle assembly space shall be provided for funeral
processions and similar activities. This space shall be required in addition to the
required off-street parking and loading areas, except where the Planning
Commission determines that an alternative arrangement will be adequate to serve
the proposed activities.
(b) All loading and unloading areas shall be adequately screened from adjacent
residential districts or uses and street rights-of-way.
(c) A caretaker’s residence may be permitted as an accessory use to a mortuary or
funeral home, provided that:
1) The caretaker’s residence shall be contained within the mortuary building
or may be provided in an accessory building after review and approval by
the Planning Commission.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 53
Article 10: OS Office Service District
SEC 10.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
SEC 10.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
2) The caretaker’s residence shall be constructed in accordance with the
adopted building code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom,
and kitchen facilities.
3) In no case shall the caretaker’s residence be used as a permanent singlefamily
dwelling by anyone other than a watchman or caretaker.
6. Public schools offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not
meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” subject to the following
requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
7. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, subject
to the standards of this Article, including restrictions on accessory warehousing and
storage as specified in Section 10.3, Development Requirements.
SEC. 10.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Any other office/service use not specified as a principal permitted use which the Planning
Commission finds not to be inconsistent with the purposes of this Article and will not
impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties.
2. Banks and financial institutions.
3. Commercial, medical and dental laboratories, not including the manufacturing of
pharmaceutical or other products for general sale or distribution.
4. Veterinary offices and clinics subject to the requirements of Section 28.72.
5. Municipal facilities including park and ride facilities, libraries, community buildings and
municipal parks and playgrounds. If such facilities are large scale institutional uses as
defined herein, they shall also be subject to the conditions of Section 28.63.
6. Nursing and convalescent homes, subject to the following conditions, provided that such
facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 54
Article 10: OS Office Service District
SEC 10.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
SEC 10.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by the
residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks
along adjacent public or private streets.
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
7. Child care centers, as licensed by the State of Michigan, subject to the standards of
Section 28.64.
8. Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto,
provided that the uses do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” or
“large scale churches,” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
9. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools (excluding child care or day care facilities provided for in Section
28.64) offering courses in general education, subject to the following conditions. Public,
charter and private schools that meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses" shall
also be subject to the conditions specified in Sections 28.63.
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 55
Article 10: OS Office Service District
SEC 10.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
SEC 10.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
10. Hospitals provided that such facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale
institutional uses” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Hospital sites shall have a minimum gross land area of ten (10) acres.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(c) Minimum setback distances for any two (2) story main or accessory building shall
be at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines or street setback lines.
The minimum setback distances shall be increased by twenty (20) feet for each
additional story, provided that no such building shall exceed six (6) stories in
height.
(d) Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be screened from adjacent residential
districts and uses a six (6) foot decorative masonry wall or other method deemed
appropriate by the Planning Commission.
(e) Hospitals shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in conformance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
11. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service or
storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening
and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty (50) feet, and two
(2) side yards and a rear yard of not be less than twenty five (25) feet each.
12. Massage therapy clinics subject to the following requirements:
(a) Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, medical clinics, wellness centers, health clubs,
tanning salons gyms and offices of physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths,
psychologists, clinical social workers or family counselors who are licensed to practice
in the state shall be permitted to provide massage therapy services as an accessory use
within the principal building.
(b) Adult use or sexually-oriented business activities shall be prohibited.
SEC. 10.2A (Added 3/14/10) USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which would be in
violation of any State or Federal Law.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 55a
Article 10: OS Office Service District
SEC 10.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
SEC. 10.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
All principal permitted uses and special land uses in the OS Office Service District shall comply with
all applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses, as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 56
Article 10: OS Office Service District
SEC 10.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
3. Off-street loading and unloading for all uses, as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
4. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses, as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
5. Signs, as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
6. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
7. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations, as specified in Article 20 of this Ordinance.
8. The following specific requirements shall apply within an OS Office Service District:
(a) Yard Grading and Drainage, as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
(b) All structures shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and shall
comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(d) Lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
(e) The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles.
(f) Underground utilities shall be provided as required under Section 28.10.
(g) Fencing. In all Office Service Districts it shall be unlawful for any person to
build, repair or relocate fence without first having secured a Zoning Compliance
and/or Building permit from the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the Planning
Commission as part of special land use and/or site plan approval shall be
permitted.
1) Protective or Security Fencing: Protective or security fencing shall be
considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous
land either in whole or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion
onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from
without or straying from within. The following shall govern the height,
location and placement of protective or security fencing:
a) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security
fence shall be four (4) feet.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 57
Article 10: OS Office Service District
SEC 10.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
b) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall
not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided
if such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of
not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material and shall have
an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90) degrees. The fence
shall comply with the requirements of the applicable requirements
of the State Construction Code enforced by the Township.
Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing with plastic or other types of
strips intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence shall be
prohibited.
c) Placement: No fence shall be built closer to the street than the front
setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to the Article 20
Schedule of Regulations, provided no fence shall be built closer to
the street than the established front building line along said street
or in front of the principal building on the lot that is closest to the
street setback.
d) The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, permit alternative
fence placements, heights or materials in keeping with the spirit
and intent of this Ordinance and deemed necessary to provide
adequate protection for the abutting properties.
(h) Street trees shall be provided between the street or road pavement and sidewalk of
all public right of ways.
(i) All warehousing and storage of goods associated with permitted uses in the OS
Office Service district shall be limited to that which is normally associated with
the permitted use and/or shall be restricted to that amount necessary to support
on-site operations of the principal use. There shall be no outside storage of goods,
inventory, or equipment.
(j) All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose exterior
is structurally altered, which faces a street or which is adjacent to property zoned
or used as residential shall be designed, treated and finished in a uniform manner
consistent with the exterior of the front of the building. All such buildings shall
comply with Section 28.14, Building Design Standards.
(k) Mechanical equipment, including but not limited to transformers, telephone
equipment boxes and HVAC units, shall be screened from view.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 58
Article 11: OS-ARC Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
ARTICLE XI
OS-ARC
OFFICE SERVICE – ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
Recognizing the importance of a viable Ann Arbor Road Corridor with well-planned and high
quality development, and further recognizing that a unified approach is the most effective, the City
of Plymouth and the Charter Township of Plymouth jointly established the Ann Arbor Road
Corridor District (ARC). To maintain a consistent, attractive pattern of development and site
improvements, the Office Service – Ann Arbor Road Corridor District (OS-ARC) Zoning District is
hereby established to accommodate office uses of an administrative, business, governmental,
administrative or professional nature on parcels within the Ann Arbor Road Corridor where all of the
permitted uses in the ARC District would not be appropriate, and to serve as a transition zone
between single-family residential areas and areas of more intensive use in the ARC District. To
insure uniformity along the Ann Arbor Road Corridor, conserve property values and promote an
attractive, well designed and functional environment, uses in the OS-ARC District shall be subject to
the site development standards of the ARC District, such as dimensions for building and site
development, parking, landscaping and signage, and the Ann Arbor Road streetscape improvement
plans of the Township.
SEC. 11.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Medical and dental offices and clinics and other professional offices.
2. Administrative, executive and editorial offices.
3. Real estate and other general business offices, not including exhibiting or storing of products
for sale.
4. Schools for arts and crafts, photography and studios for music or dancing.
5. Mortuaries, provided that they do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses,”
and further, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Adequate off-street vehicle assembly space shall be provided for funeral processions
and similar activities. This space shall be required in addition to the required offstreet
parking and loading areas, except where the Planning Commission determines
that an alternative arrangement will be adequate to serve the proposed activities.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 11.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 59
Article 11: OS-ARC Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
(b) All loading and unloading areas shall be adequately screened from adjacent
residential districts or uses and street rights-of-way.
(c) A caretaker’s residence may be permitted as an accessory use to a mortuary or
funeral home, provided that:
1) The caretaker’s residence shall be contained within the mortuary building
or may be provided in an accessory building after review and approval by
the Planning Commission.
2) The caretaker’s residence shall be constructed in accordance with the
adopted building code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom,
and kitchen facilities.
3) In no case shall the caretaker’s residence be used as a permanent singlefamily
dwelling by anyone other than a watchman or caretaker.
6. Public schools offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not meet
the definition of “large scale institutional uses” subject to the following requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
7. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, subject to
the standards of this Article, including restrictions on accessory warehousing and storage as
specified in Section 11.3, Development Requirements.
SEC. 11.2 SPECIAL LAND USES?
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted only
after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure and
standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance, and further subject to the requirements listed
below:
1. Any other office/service use not specified as a principal permitted use which the Planning
Commission finds not to be consistent with the purposes of this Article, and which will not
impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties.
2. Banks and financial institutions.
3. Commercial, medical and dental laboratories, not including the manufacturing of
pharmaceutical or other products for general sale or distribution.
? SEC. 11.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 60
Article 11: OS-ARC Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
4. Veterinary offices and clinics subject to the requirements of Section 28.72.?
5. Municipal facilities including park and ride facilities, libraries, community buildings and
municipal parks and playgrounds, provided such facilities do not meet the definition of
“large-scale institutional uses.”
6. Nursing and convalescent homes subject to the following conditions, provided that such uses
do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall
be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through the site to
a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the site or traffic
on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by the
residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks along
adjacent public or private streets.
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
7. Commercial child care center , as licensed by the State of Michigan, subject to the standards
of Section 28.64.
8. Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto,
provided that the uses do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” or “large
scale churches,” and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11, Methods
of Screening.
9. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary intermediate and/or secondary
schools offering courses in general education provided such uses do not meet the definition
of ‘large scale institutional uses” and subject to the following conditions:
? SEC. 11.2 SPECIAL LAND USES ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 61
Article 11: OS-ARC Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
10. Hospitals subject to the following conditions, provided such uses do not meet the definition
of “large-scale institutional uses.”
(a) Hospital sites shall have a minimum gross land area of ten (10) acres.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall
be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through the site to
a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the site or traffic
on nearby roads.
(c) Minimum setback distances for any two (2) story main or accessory building shall be
at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines or street setback lines. The
minimum setback distances shall be increased by twenty (20) feet for each additional
story, provided that no such building shall exceed six (6) stories in height.
(d) Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be screened from adjacent residential
districts and uses a six (6) foot decorative masonry wall or other method deemed
appropriate by the Planning Commission.
(e) Hospitals shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in conformance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
11. Massage therapy clinics subject to the following requirements:
(a) Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, medical clinics, wellness centers, health
clubs, tanning salons gyms and offices of physicians, surgeons, chiropractors,
osteopaths, psychologists, clinical social workers or family counselors who are
licensed to practice in the state shall be permitted to provide massage therapy
services as an accessory use within the principal building.?
(b) Adult use or sexually-oriented business activities shall be prohibited.
12. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service or
storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty (50)
feet, irrespective of the yard requirements of the district in which it is located, and two side
yard and a rear yard setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width.
SEC. 11.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 62
Article 11: OS-ARC Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 11.2A (Added 3/14/10) USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which would be in
violation of any State or Federal law.
SEC. 11.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal uses and special land uses in the OS-ARC District shall comply with all applicable
requirements of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan review and approval is required for all uses in accordance with the requirements of
Article 29, Site Plan Review.
2. All uses in the OS-ARC District are subject to the requirements of Section 14.4, ARC
Parking Requirements, Layout Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading.
3. All uses in the OS-ARC District are subject to the requirements of Section 14.5, ARC
Access Management and Driveway Standards.
4. All uses in the OS-ARC District are subject to the requirements of Section 14.6, ARC
Landscaping Standards.
5. All uses in the OS-ARC District are subject to the requirements of Section 14.7, ARC
Landscaping, Screening or Buffering Standards. For purposes of this section, the OS-ARC
District shall meet the standards specified for the ARC District. Within the intent of the Ann
Arbor Road Corridor District, the Planning Commission may approve landscaping, screening
or buffering alternatives as it deems necessary to accommodate peculiar circumstances or
unforeseen problems, or to carry out the spirit and intent of this Ordinance.
6. All uses in the OS-ARC District are subject to the requirements of Section 14.8, ARC
Parking Area Screening Requirements.
7. All uses in the OS-ARC District are subject to the requirements of Section 14.9, ARC
Parking Lot Landscaping Standards.
8. All uses in the OS-ARC District are subject to the requirements of Section 14.10, ARC Sign
Standards.
9. Streetscape improvements shall be installed consistent with the requirements of Section 14.8,
ARC Specific Landscape, Screening and Buffering Requirements.
10. Lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8, Exterior Lighting. The
type of lighting shall be consistent with the objectives of the Ann Arbor Road Corridor
District development standards.?
11. Sidewalks shall be provided as required in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
SEC. 11.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 63
Article 11: OS-ARC Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
12. The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission for approval.
Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the requirements of Section 28.9,
Waste Receptacles.?
13. Fences and Walls
All fencing or screening walls required or proposed shall be subject to approval by the
Planning Commission as part of special use or site plan review. Protective or security
fencing shall be considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous
land either in whole or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion onto or across a lot
of record or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from without or straying from within. The
following shall govern the height, location and placement of protective or security fencing:
(a) Permit Required. In the OS-ARC District, it shall be unlawful for any person to
build, repair or relocate a protective or security fence without first having secured a
Zoning Compliance and/or Building permit from the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement.
(b) Maximum Height. The maximum height of a protective or security fence shall be
four (4) feet.
(c) Material. Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material unless such
material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of the Building Department.
Fences shall not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges of
electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided if such fence is
constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of not less than one inch by three
inch (1” x 3”) material and shall have an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90)
degrees. The fence shall comply with the applicable requirements of the State
Construction Code enforced by the Township. Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing
with plastic or other types of strips intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence
shall be prohibited.
(d) Placement. No protective or security fence shall be built closer to the street than the
front setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to Section 14.3, provided
however, that no fence shall be built closer to the street than the established front
building line along said street or in front of the principal building on the lot that is
closest to the street setback.
(e) The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, permit alternative fence placements,
heights or materials in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and
deemed necessary to provide adequate protection for the abutting properties.
SEC. 11.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 64
Article 11: OS-ARC Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
14. All business, servicing, or processing shall be conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building.
15. All warehousing and storage of goods associated with permitted uses in the OS-ARC district
shall be limited to that which is normally associated with the permitted use and/or shall be
restricted to that amount necessary to support on-site operations of the principal use. There
shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or equipment.?
16. Commercially used or licensed vehicles used in the normal operation of a permitted use on
the site may be parked in the rear only. This provision shall also apply to operable vehicles
that are moved on and off of the site on a regular basis.
17. All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose exterior is
structurally altered, which faces a street or which is adjacent to property zoned or used as
residential shall be designed, treated and finished in a uniform manner consistent with the
exterior of the front of the building. All such buildings shall further comply with Section
28.14, Building Design Standards.
18. Compliance with Section 28.5, Environmental Performance Requirements, is required for all
uses.
19. Yard Grading and Drainage. All yard and open space areas in the OS-ARC District shall be
graded consistent with the requirements of Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
20. All structures shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and shall comply
with the Township’s Fire Prevention Ordinance.?
?
SEC. 11.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 65
Article 12: C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
ARTICLE XII
C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
PURPOSE
To provide for neighborhood shopping facilities in close proximity to residential areas which
satisfies the need for non-durable convenience goods and/or personal services and to encourage
the planned concentration of such activities in locations where analysis of the residential
population within a one mile radius demonstrates the need for such facilities.
SEC. 12.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Any use permitted in an OS, Office Service District, as a principal permitted or special
land use, provided such use does not meet the definition of “large scale institutional
uses”, unless otherwise indicated in this Article.
2. Retail establishments, whose principal activity is the sale of food and/or drugs in an
enclosed building without drive-in or drive-through facilities, such as and limited to:
(a) Bakeries, limited to retail, on the premises only.
(b) Candy, confectionery and ice cream stores.
(c) Delicatessens.
(d) Drug stores and pharmacies, without drive-in or drive-through facilities.
(e) Dairy stores, without drive-in or drive-through facilities.
(f) Food market, grocery stores and meat markets.
(g) Party stores.
(h) Tobacco stores.
(i) Other retail establishments as determined by the Planning Commission to be
consistent with the purpose and standards of the C-1 District.
3. Establishments which provide personal services in an enclosed building excluding drivein
or drive-through businesses and not exceeding 10,000 square feet of gross floor area,
such as and limited to:
PURPOSE
SEC. 12.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 66
Article 12: C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
(a) Barber shop or beauty parlor.
(b) Dry cleaning or laundry pick-up shops.
(c) Laundromat.
(d) Rental business with no outside storage or outside display of goods.
(e) Shoe and hat repair.
(f) Tailor shops.
(g) Television, computer, and radio repair shops.
(h) Watch repair shops.
4. Restaurants, but not drive-in or drive-through restaurants.
5. Restaurants, as permitted in 12.1(4), taverns, bars/lounges and other uses serving food
and/or alcoholic beverages, subject to the following requirements:
(a) The service of alcohol is considered an accessory use to the principle use of the
building and may not occupy greater than 30% of the total gross floor area.
(b) The service of alcohol is limited to the hours of 9:00 AM – 10:00 PM.
6. Public schools offering courses in general education provided that such facilities do not
meet the definition of “large scale institutional use” subject to the following
requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
7. Outdoor cafes and eating areas accessory to a permitted restaurant use, subject to
administrative site plan approval.
8. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, subject
to the standards of this Article, including restrictions on accessory warehousing and
storage as specified in Section 12.3, Development Requirements.
SEC. 12.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
SEC. 12.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 67
Article 12: C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Any of the principal permitted uses and related accessory uses listed in Section 12.1 with
hours of operation within the time period 12 Midnight to 6:00 A.M.
2. Public and quasi-public uses intended to serve the neighborhood and immediate vicinity
including park and ride facilities, provided that they do not meet the definition of “large
scale institutional uses.”
3. Municipal facilities, including libraries and community buildings, provided that they do
not meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses”.
4. Commercial child care centers and adult care facilities, as licensed by the State of
Michigan, subject to the standards of Section 28.64.
5. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools, provided that they do not meet the definition of “large scale
institutional uses” offering courses in general education subject to the following
conditions:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
6. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet, and two (2) side yards and a rear yard of not be less than twenty five (25) feet
each.
7. Outdoor cafes and eating areas accessory to a permitted use, which do not comply with the
administrative approval standards.
SEC. 12.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
All principal uses and special land uses in the C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District shall comply
with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
SEC. 12.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 68
Article 12: C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
4. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
5. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
6. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
7. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
8. The following specific requirements shall apply within a C-1 Neighborhood Shopping
District:
(a) The above specified stores, shops or businesses shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers and offering personal services
and/or new merchandise only.
(b) Such stores, shops or businesses shall be conducted entirely within a building.
(c) All goods produced on the premises shall be sold only at retail on the premises.
Manufacturing of products for distribution or sale at off-premises locations shall
be prohibited in the C-1 District.
(d) All warehousing and storage of goods associated with permitted uses in the C-1
district shall be limited to that which is normally associated with the permitted use
and/or shall be restricted to that amount necessary to support on-site operations of
the principal use. There shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or
equipment.
(e) All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected or extended or whose
exterior is structurally altered which faces a street or which is adjacent to property
classified as residential shall be designed, treated and finished in a uniform
manner consistent with the exterior of the front of the building. All such
buildings shall comply with Section 28.14, Building Design Standards.
(f) Underground utilities shall be provided as required under Section 28.10.
(g) Compliance with Section 28.5, Environmental Performance Requirements, is
required for all uses.
(h) Yard Grading and Drainage. All yard and open space areas in a C-1
Neighborhood Shopping District shall be graded as specified in Section 28.15 of
this Ordinance.
SEC. 12.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 69
Article 12: C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
(i) All buildings shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles, and shall
comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(j) Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(k) Lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
(l) The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles.
(m) Street trees shall be provided between the street or road pavement and sidewalk of
all public right of ways.
(n) Fences. In all Neighborhood Shopping Districts it shall be unlawful for any
person to build, repair or relocate a fence without first having secured a Zoning
Compliance and/or Building permit from the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement. All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the
Planning Commission as part of a special land use and/or site plan approval shall
be, subject to the following:
1) Protective or Security Fencing: Protective or security fencing shall be
considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous
land either in whole or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion
onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from
without or straying from within. The following shall govern the height,
location and placement of protective or security fencing:
a) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security
fence shall be four (4) feet.
b) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall
not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided
if such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of
not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material and shall have
an angle at the top of dot less than ninety (90) degrees. The fence
shall comply with the requirements of the applicable requirements
of the State Construction Code enforced by the Township.
Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing with plastic or other types of
strips intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence shall be
prohibited.
c) Placement: No fence shall be built closer to the street than the front
setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to the Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, provided no fence shall be built closer to
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 70
Article 12: C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
the street than the established front building line along said street
or in front of the principal building on the lot that is closest to the
street setback.
d) The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, permit alternative
fence placements, heights or materials in keeping with the spirit
and intent of this Ordinance and deemed necessary to provide
adequate protection for the abutting properties.
SEC. 12.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 70
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
ARTICLE XIII
C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
To serve the commercial needs of the general community, and to provide for, the planned
concentration of more intensive uses that, because of their nature or larger volume of vehicular
traffic generated, would be inappropriate in the C-1, Neighborhood Shopping District.
SEC. 13.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. Any use permitted as a principal permitted use in an OS, Office Service District or C-1,
Neighborhood Shopping District, unless otherwise indicated in this Article.
2. Retail establishments, whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed
building.
3. Service or retail establishments, including those that require a workshop or showroom.
4. Restaurants, cafes, and similar establishments serving food and/or alcoholic beverages.
5. Drug stores and pharmacies, dairy stores and similar establishments.
6. Private clubs and lodges.
7. Bus stations.
8. Commercial parking garages.
9. Trade schools.
10. Banks and financial institutions.
11. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, subject
to the standards of this Article, including restrictions on accessory warehousing and
storage as specified in Section 13.3, Development Requirements.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 13.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 71
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES?
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Hotels and motels subject to the following:
(a) Each hotel or motel shall provide minimum side yards of not less than twenty-five
(25) feet each; minimum rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet; minimum
front yard of twenty-five (25) feet except that when parking is provided between
the building and a street, the minimum front yard and/or side yard shall be not less
than seventy-five (75) feet.
(b) When the front yard and/or side yard abuts a street and is used to provide an
access road and/or off-street parking, the area shall be screened in compliance
with Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering.
(c) Each motel or hotel unit shall contain not less than two hundred and fifty (250)
square feet of floor area.
(d) Kitchen or cooking facilities may be provided in new motels or hotels upon
demonstration by the applicant that the provisions of all applicable fire prevention
and building codes have been met. No existing motel units shall be converted for
use of cooking and/or kitchen facilities unless the applicant can demonstrate
compliance with all applicable fire prevention and building codes and obtains a
certificate of occupancy for each unit being converted.
(e) Where a unit is provided as a residence for the owner or the manager, the
following minimum floor area requirements shall be provided: One (1) bedroom
unit, 600 square feet; two (2) bedroom unit, 800 square feet; three (3) bedroom
unit, 1,000 square feet; four (4) bedroom unit, 1,200 square feet.
2. Sales rooms, rental facilities, and/or sales lots for new and/or used automobiles,
recreation vehicles, trucks, mobile homes, trailers and modular homes, subject to the
following:
(a) Ingress and egress shall be located a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the
intersection of any two (2) streets.
(b) Where a sales lot and/or rental facilities for new and/or used automobiles, recreation
vehicles, trucks, mobile homes, trailers and modular homes abuts a street, a planting
strip shall be established consistent with the requirements of Article 26,
Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers.
? SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 72
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
(c) All service and repair facilities shall be contained within an enclosed building
except for the storage of repaired and wrecked cars. All areas used to store
repaired or wrecked cars, or for any other outdoor storage excluding new or used
vehicles held in inventory and not on display in a lot for sale, shall be screened in
compliance with Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering.
3. Motorcycle and motorbike sales, services, clubs and rental facilities subject to the
following:?
(a) No motorcycle or motorbike rental, sales, service or motorcycle or motorbike
clubs shall be permitted on a parcel of land which is located within two hundred
(200) feet of a residential district.
(b) Motorcycle or motorbike rental, sales, service or clubs may be operated only
between the hours of 6 A.M. and 12 midnight.
(c) Outdoor storage and/or testing areas shall not be permitted.
(d) Where a sales lot and/or outdoor display area abuts a street, a planting strip shall
be established in accordance with Article 26. The required shrubbery plantings
may be modified at the discretion of the Planning Commission, to break up the
areas without circumventing the total view of the product.
(e) All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or
other similar dust-proof surface.
4. Outdoor storage areas and open air businesses, not including lumber and coal-yards, junk
yards, used auto parts or wrecking establishments, subject to the following:
(a) Outdoor sales or display areas adjacent or visible to a residential district shall
provide additional screening in accordance with Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering.
(b) Display and sales areas shall consist of a permanent, durable and dustless surface,
and shall be graded and drained to dispose stormwater without a negative impact
on adjacent properties.
(c) No goods shall be stored or displayed in a manner that conflicts with pedestrian or
vehicular circulation. A minimum five (5) foot clear path shall be maintained at
all times around the perimeter of buildings for safe pedestrian circulation and
compliance with barrier- free standards.
(d) Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, or materials, other than as specifically
permitted by this Section, shall be prohibited.
SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 73
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
5. Outdoor cafes and eating areas accessory to a permitted restaurant use, subject to the
following:
(a) Pedestrian circulation and access to building entrances shall not be impaired. A
minimum of six (6) feet of sidewalk leading to the entrance to the establishment
shall be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances. Planters, posts with
ropes or other enclosures shall be used to define the area occupied by the outdoor
café.
(b) The outdoor café shall be kept clean, litter-free, and with a well-kept appearance
within? and immediately adjacent to the area of the tables and chairs. Additional
outdoor waste receptacles may be required. Written procedures for cleaning and
waste containment and removal responsibilities shall be included with all
applications and approved by the Planning Commission. Preparation of food and
beverages is prohibited in the outdoor café area.
(c) Tables, chairs, planters, waste receptacles, and other elements of street furniture
shall be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent buildings,
subject to Planning Commission approval.
6. Bowling alley, tennis courts, pool and billiard hall, roller and ice skating rink, and other
general indoor recreation facilities, when the structure housing such facilities is located at
least fifty (50) feet from any front, rear, or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent
residential district.
7. Theaters, assembly halls or similar uses within a completely enclosed principal building.
8. Veterinary clinics, animal clinics and animal hospitals subject to the conditions of
Section 28.72.
9. An accessory storage garage for commercial vehicles used by a business or other activity
when located on the same contiguous site therewith and not occupying more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the area of such contiguous site.
10. Automobile commercial garages, subject to the following:
(a) All operations of the commercial garage shall be conducted entirely within the
building except for the storage of repaired and wrecked cars. All areas used to
store repaired or wrecked cars shall be screened in compliance with the
requirements of Article 26, Landscaping, Screening and, Land Use Bufferings.
(b) All automobile commercial garages that sell gasoline fuel must also comply with
the standards applicable to an automobile service station.
? SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 74
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
11. Gasoline service station, including the sale of convenience goods, subject to the
following:
(a) Gasoline service stations shall provide a front yard and side yards of not less than
twenty (20) feet each.
(b) Gasoline service stations, including any part of the facade, and other structure or
part of any other structures on the same lot, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet
in height.
(c) Open space on the gasoline service station site may be used for parking or
maneuvering of vehicles being serviced, waiting to be serviced or serviced
vehicles waiting to be picked up. The use of the open space for parking of
vehicles for storage, sale or rental or for any other use other than that defined in
Section 36.2 of this Ordinance is prohibited.?
(d) Hoists or other equipment used in servicing of motor vehicles shall be located
within an enclosed building.
(e) Pump islands shall be setback not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street
setback line of any street to which the pump island is perpendicular and (31) feet
from the street setback line of any street to which the pump island is parallel and
not less than (31) thirty-one feet from any residential boundary line. A minimum
of twenty (20) feet shall be provided between parallel pump islands. The setback
areas shall include a minimum ten (10) foot planting strip located along and
between the street setback line and the pump islands. No servicing shall be
permitted on any vehicle while said vehicle is resting wholly or partly on a
sidewalk or on a public street or highway right-of-way.
SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 75
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
(f) On all corner lots, all vehicular entrance to or exits from any curb openings shall
be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection of
the curb and the extension of the street setback line. All curb openings, whether
on a corner lot or not, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width at the curb
line and thirty (30) feet at the property line. There shall be a minimum of thirty
(30) feet measured along the property line between any series of driveways. On
corner lots no driveway from a side street shall be less than forty (40) feet from
the rear property line as measured along the side street property line. The
Planning Commission may modify the location of curb openings upon finding
that the curb location will not adversely impact traffic circulation on and adjacent
to the site. ?
(g) No gasoline service station, commercial garage, auto wash or other establishment
where gasoline is stored and sold, which because of their nature unavoidably
invite vehicle traffic, depend on standing vehicles while awaiting service and
route such traffic across curb lines and sidewalks, shall be located, and no
property shall be used as such nearer than one hundred (100) feet in any direction
as measured from any point on the property line of any church, school (public,
charter, or private, including parochial), police station, fire station or buildings
used for public assembly and five hundred (500) feet from any hospital.
(h) Gasoline service stations shall be located on a plot of ground having frontage of
not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet as measured from the street setback line.
When the service station is located on a corner lot the minimum frontage of one
hundred fifty (150) feet shall apply to frontage on both streets as measured from
the street setback line. Each gasoline service station shall, in addition to the
minimum frontage requirement, provide a minimum area of not less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet. Such station shall be composed of the building
housing the office and the facilities for servicing, greasing and/or washing and the
pumps for dispensing gasoline. Such facilities shall contain not more than five (5)
units (as defined below). Any station designed for more than five (5) units shall
provide an additional area of three thousand (3,000) square feet for each
additional unit. For the purpose of this section, a unit shall mean (a) a set of
pumps or (b) a stall for one (1) vehicle within the building for servicing, greasing
or washing.?
(i) All gasoline and other combustible fuels used to propel internal combustion
motors shall be stored in compliance with the Fire Prevention Code of the Charter
Township of Plymouth.
(j) Gasoline service stations with an accessory restaurant, including drive through
restaurants, or convenience store or automobile car wash shall meet all separate
standards specified in this article for these individual uses. Additionally, stacking,
? SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 76
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
service and circulation lanes and parking for the individual uses shall be designed
and laid-out so as to minimize the potential for traffic circulation and vehiclepedestrian
conflicts. Landscaped islands and buffer strips shall be used to
separate and screen stacking and service lanes.
12. Automobile wash facilities subject to the following:
(a) All washing facilities shall be completely within an enclosed-building.
(b) Vacuuming facilities may be outside the building, but shall not be in the front
yard and shall not be closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any residential
district. Where such facilities are located in a side or rear yard abutting a street,
such use shall be screened consistent with the requirements of Article 26,
Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers.
(c) Driveway entrances into the automobile wash structure shall be from within the
lot and no entrance into the building shall be directly from a street or alley. No
alley shall be used as a means of serving an automobile wash facility.
Drains shall be provided at all entrances and exits at the street setback line where
surface drainage is directed towards the street. Ingress and egress points shall be
located a minimum of sixty (60) feet from the point of intersection of the curb and
the extension of the street setback line as established in the Thoroughfare Plan
when the proposed automobile wash facility is located at the intersection of any
two roads. Automobile wash facilities shall not, in general, be located within two
hundred (200) feet of an intersection of any two roads when either of the two
roads is considered to carry moderate to heavy traffic levels.?
(d) For efficient movement of cars into the wash rack, one or more hard surfaced,
striped, stacking lanes, not less than twelve (12) feet wide shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of Article 24, Parking Requirements, Layout,
Standards, and Off-street Loading and Unloading. Stacking space for cars
required to wait for access to the facilities within the street right-of-way shall be
prohibited. Automobile wash establishments shall provide adequate waiting and
stacking spaces for each washing stall or lane consistent with the requirements of
Article 24, Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-street Loading and
Unloading.
(e) The use of steam in the cleaning process shall be permitted when confined within
an enclosed building.?
13. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet irrespective of the yard requirements of the district in which it is located, and
two (2) side yards and a rear yard setback of not less than twenty five (25) feet in width.
SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 77
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
14. Arcades as defined in Ordinance No. 74 of Plymouth Township Ordinances, and any
commercial establishment in which the primary purpose of such establishment is the
operation of mechanical or electrical amusement devices, subject to the following:
(a) All activities shall be conducted entirely within a building.
(b) No such business shall be open for business between the hours of midnight (12:00
a.m.) and 9:00 a.m.
(c) The building housing such use shall be so constructed and maintained as to insure
that all interior noises are kept from reaching the building exterior.
(d) The Planning Commission shall review the proposed use to determine the need
for bicycle parking spaces. Said spaces shall be designed to permit the orderly
parking of said bicycles and permit them to be secured. These parking areas shall
be so located as to prevent the disruption of on-site and off-site pedestrian and
automobile traffic flow.
(e) Any part of the lot occupied by such use shall not be located within three hundred
(300) feet of any residential district or within five hundred (500) feet of the
property line of any public, parochial or private school.
15. Mortuaries and funeral homes subject to the following standards, including those that
meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” which are also subject to the
conditions of Section 28.63.
(a) Adequate off-street vehicle assembly space shall be provided for funeral
processions and similar activities. This space shall be required in addition to the
required off-street parking and loading areas, except where the Planning
Commission determines that an alternative arrangement will be adequate to serve
the proposed activities.
(b) All loading and unloading areas shall be adequately screened from adjacent
residential districts or uses and street rights-of-way.
(c) A caretaker’s residence may be permitted as an accessory use to a mortuary or
funeral home, provided that:?
1) The caretaker’s residence shall be contained within the mortuary building
or may be provided in an accessory building after review and approval by
the Planning Commission.
2) The caretaker’s residence shall be constructed in accordance with the
adopted building code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom,
and kitchen facilities.
? SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 78
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
3) In no case shall the caretaker’s residence be used as a permanent singlefamily
dwelling by anyone other than a watchman or caretaker.
16. Municipal facilities including park and ride facilities, libraries, community buildings and
municipal parks and playgrounds, including those that meet the definition of “large-scale
institutional uses” which are also subject to the conditions of Section 28.63.
17. Housing for the elderly, including congregate elderly housing subject to the conditions of
Section 28.65.
18. Nursing and convalescent homes subject to the following conditions, including such
facilities that meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” also subject to the
conditions of Section 28.63.
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by
the residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks
along adjacent public or private streets.?
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
19. Child and adult care facilities, as licensed by the State of Michigan, subject to the
standards of Section 28.64.?
20. Churches, temples and similar places of worship and other facilities incidental thereto
subject to the following conditions, including such facilities that meet the definition of
“large-scale institutional uses” or “large scale churches” which are also subject to the
conditions of Section 28.63.
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
? SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 79
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
21. Hospitals subject to the following conditions, including such facilities that meet the
definition of “large-scale institutional uses” which are also subject to the conditions of
Section 28.63.
(a) Hospital sites shall have a minimum gross land area of ten (10) acres.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(c) Minimum setback distances for any two (2) story main or accessory building shall
be at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines or street setback lines.
The minimum setback distances shall be increased by twenty (20) feet for each
additional story, provided that no such building shall exceed six (6) stories in
height.
(d) Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be screened from adjacent
residential districts and uses by a six (6) foot decorative masonry wall or other
method deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
(e) Hospitals shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in conformance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
22. Massage therapy clinics subject to the following requirements:
(a) Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, medical clinics, wellness centers, health
clubs, tanning salons gyms and offices of physicians, surgeons, chiropractors,
osteopaths, psychologists, clinical social workers or family counselors who are
licensed to practice in the state shall be permitted to provide massage therapy
services as an accessory use within the principal building.?
(b) Adult use or sexually-oriented business activities shall be prohibited.
23. Drive-through facilities accessory to any permitted use in the C-2 District shall be subject
to the following:
(a) A separate stacking lane, a minimum of ten (10) feet in width, shall be provided
and striped. The stacking lane shall be designed to accommodate the minimum
number of stacking spaces required under Article 24, Parking Requirements.
SEC. 13.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 80
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
Required stacking shall not interfere with vehicular traffic on-site, or on the
adjacent roadway entering or leaving the site. Adequate maneuvering room shall
be provided to allow vehicles to by-pass or leave the stacking lane.
(b) No eating shall be permitted while in a parked vehicle on-site.
(c) Sufficient number of outdoor litter receptacles shall be provided to prevent
blowing paper and other articles moving off site onto surrounding properties.
(d) The drive-through service speaker location and/or amplification shall not cause
noise that is audible from adjacent residences.
(e) Access driveways to the site shall be aligned with and/or adequately separated
from existing driveways on the opposing and same sides of the street to minimize
disruptions of off-site circulation and traffic.
24. Any commercial establishment or professional or commercial services not specifically
stated or implied elsewhere in this Ordinance, which in the determination of the Planning
Commission are consistent with the purpose and intent of the C-2 District.
SEC. 13.2A (Added 3/14/10) USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which would be in
violation of any State or Federal Law.
SEC. 13.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
All principal uses and special land uses in the C-2, General Commercial District, shall comply
with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading and unloading for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
4. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
5. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
6. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
7. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
8. The following specific requirements shall apply within a C-2, General Commercial
District:
SEC 13.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 81
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
(a) The above specified stores, shops or businesses shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold on the premises at retail only. Manufacturing of products
for distribution or sale at off-premises locations shall be prohibited in the C-2
District.
(b) Such store activities, shops or businesses, except where specifically permitted by
this Article, shall be conducted entirely within a building.
(c) All warehousing and storage of goods associated with permitted uses in the C-2
district shall be limited to that which is normally associated with the permitted use
and/or shall be restricted to that amount necessary to support on-site operations of
the principal use.
(d) All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose exterior
is structurally altered, shall incorporated brick and/or stone building materials on
all exterior walls that are highly visible from public roads or adjacent residential
properties as determined by the Planning Commission. Brick? or decorative block
accent bands, borders and/or sill walls and other details of different colors and/or
textures shall be used to enhance and differentiate the surface of the wall to define
and accent window and door openings. All buildings shall comply with Section
28.14, Building Design Standards.
(e) The outdoor areas described in Section 13.2 shall be surfaced with asphalt or
concrete or other similar dustproof surface.
(f) Products made incident to a permitted use shall be sold at retail only.
(g) Compliance with Section 28.5, Environmental Performance Requirements, is
required for all uses, including any processing, treatment or production of
products.
(h) Yard Grading and Drainage.? All yard and open space areas in a C-2 General
Commercial District shall be graded as specified in Section 28.15 of this
Ordinance.
(i) All structures shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and shall
comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(j) Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(k) Lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
? ? SEC. 13.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 82
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
(l) The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles.
(m) Commercial facilities in this district that are primarily automobile oriented, shall
provide pedestrian facilities and amenities within the project and connect to
adjacent residential areas whenever possible. Such facilities shall include
walkways, pedestrian level lighting, seating areas, landscaping and other
amenities to both enable and encourage pedestrian access. Pedestrian walkways
connecting the development with the surrounding area shall be provided
whenever practical.
(n) Fencing. In the General Commercial District it shall be unlawful for any person to
build, repair or relocate a fence without first having secured a Zoning Compliance
and/or Building permit from the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the Planning
Commission as part of special land use and/or site plan approval shall be, subject
to the following:
1) Protective or Security Fencing: Protective or security fencing shall be
considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous
land either in whole or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion
onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from
without or straying from within. The following shall govern the height,
location and placement of protective or security fencing:
a) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or
security fence shall be four (4) feet.?
b) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall
not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided
if such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of
not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material and shall have
an angle at, the top of not less than ninety (90) degrees. The fence
shall comply with the requirements of the applicable requirements
of the State Construction Code enforced by the Township.
Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing with plastic or other types of
strips intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence shall be
prohibited. ?
? SEC. 13.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 83
Article 13: C-2 General Commercial District
c) Placement: No fence shall be built closer to the street than the
front setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to the Article
20, Schedule of Regulations, provided no fence shall be built
closer to the street than the established front building line along
said street or in front of the principal building on the lot that is
closest to the street setback.
d) The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, permit alternative
fence placements, heights or materials in keeping with the spirit
and intent of this Ordinance and deemed necessary to provide
adequate protection for the abutting properties.
(o) Street trees shall be provided between the street or road pavement and sidewalk
along all public rights-of-way.
?
? SEC. 13.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 84
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.1 PREAMBLE
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR
DISTRICT
ARTICLE XIV
ARC ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
SEC. 14.1 PREAMBLE
1. District Established
Recognizing the importance of a viable Ann Arbor corridor with well-planned, quality
development, and further recognizing that a unified approach is the most effective, the City of
Plymouth and the Charter Township of Plymouth have jointly established the ARC, Ann
Arbor Road Corridor District. This zoning district is based upon careful evaluation, study and
plans completed by the two communities with considerable input from the corridor
businesses.
It has been agreed by both the City and the Township, as the foundation for this zoning
district that creation of a common ARC zoning district presents opportunities for
intergovernmental coordination, cost savings, consistent land use regulation, sound planning
and reflects the traditional spirit of cooperation in the Plymouth community.
It is further acknowledged that creation of the ARC District does not change the independent
authorities and powers of each unit of government to adopt, enforce and amend its zoning
ordinance; however it is the intent of both bodies in creating this district that the regulations
and effect of the ARC remain the same in both the City and the Township. Therefore, by
mutual agreement, variations which are not approved by both the Township and the City are
contrary to the intent of this district.
2. Boundaries Defined
The boundaries of the ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor District shall be as shown on the
Zoning Map which accompanies this ordinance with all notations, references and other
information shown there on and as prescribed on the official zoning maps of the City of
Plymouth and Plymouth Charter Township, Wayne County, Michigan.
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
1. Purpose
The Ann Arbor Road Corridor Zoning District is intended to establish uniform regulations
applicable to the use of land, dimensions for building and site development, parking,
landscaping and signage which accommodate and promote land uses which are compatible
with the desired character of the corridor, and which conserve property values and long term
stability of office, commercial and limited light industrial uses along the Ann Arbor Road
Corridor. The Ann Arbor Road Corridor District is intended to accommodate a mixture of
office, business and limited light industrial uses designed to serve the commercial needs of
the general community in an attractive, well designed and functional environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of
the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 85
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
(a) Medical and dental offices, clinics, and other professional offices.
(b) Administrative, executive and editorial offices.
(c) Real estate and other general business offices.
(d) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar financial institutions.
(e) Schools for arts and crafts, photography, and studios for music or dancing; training
centers, business schools or private schools operated for profit.
(f) Private clubs and lodge halls.
(g) Mortuaries.
(h) Churches, temples, and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental
thereto, provided that the uses do not meet the definition of large scale churches, and
subject to the conditions of Section 28.61.
(i) Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises such as: shoe
repair, dry cleaning shops (without on-site processing), tailors and dressmakers shops,
beauty parlors and barbershops, or any service establishment of an office-showroom
or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker,
printer, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio, television or home appliance
repair, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require a retail
adjunct and are of no more objectionable character than the aforementioned subject to
the following provision: No more than five (5) persons shall be employed at any time
in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods.
(j) Retail establishments whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an
enclosed building, including sales of groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or
other foods, drugs, dry goods and notions or hardware.
(k) Business services such as mailing, copying and data processing.
(l) Restaurants, taverns, bars/lounges and other uses serving food and/or alcoholic
beverages, where patrons are served while seated within a building occupied by such
establishments.
(m) Bus stations.
(n) Commercial parking garages.
(o) Public schools
(p) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
3. Special Land Uses
The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the conditions
hereinafter imposed for each use, including the review and approval of the site plan by the
Planning Commission; and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the
Commission, are necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and the procedures and
requirements set forth in this Ordinance for special land use approval, including a public
hearing.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 86
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
(a) Any other use not specified as a principal permitted use which the Planning
Commission finds to not be inconsistent with the purposes of this Article and which
will not impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties.
(b) Child care centers not including overnight sleeping facilities, subject to the following
conditions:
1) For each child permitted at the maximum licensed capacity of the facility,
there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of five hundred (500)
square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum
area of not less than 3,000 square feet and shall be fenced and screened from
any adjoining lot in any residential district.
2) All child care facilities shall be registered with or licensed by the State of
Michigan where required, and shall comply with the minimum state standards
for such facilities, in addition to those standards specified in this Ordinance.
Proof of compliance shall be provided to the Township upon request.
3) Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall be provided. Vehicles must be
able to easily circulate within and through the site to a designated pickup/
drop-off area without impeding circulation on the site or traffic on nearby
roads. Adequate stacking space for the pick-up/drop-off area shall be
provided.
(c) Commercial, medical and dental laboratories, not including the manufacturing of
pharmaceutical or other products for general sale or distribution.
(d) Parochial and private schools.
(e) Municipal facilities, including municipal or other governmental offices, fire stations,
post offices, community buildings, libraries, parks, playgrounds and park-n-ride lots.
(f) Hospitals and convalescent homes.
(g) Communication facilities, public utility transformer stations, sub-stations and gas
regulator stations without outdoor service or storage yards subject to the following:
1) A front yard setback of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be provided and two
(2) side yards and a rear yard shall be provided, each shall not be less than
twenty-five (25) feet in width.
2) When a transmission or relay tower, etc. is proposed as part of the facility, the
tower shall be so located that it does not present a nuisance to abutting
residential properties. The tower shall be so located on the subject property
that the distance from the base of the tower to all points on each property line
shall be not less than one and one-half (1½) times the height of the tower.
3) Such use shall be screened and buffered from nearby public rights-of-way and
property in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(h) Large scale institutional uses, including large scale churches, subject to the following:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 87
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
1) The site shall have at least 150 feet of frontage on a major thoroughfare with
an existing or planned right-of-way of not less than 120 feet. All ingress and
egress to the site shall be directly onto such major thoroughfares.
2) The site shall be located within one half mile of interchange access to I-275,
as measured along major thoroughfares.
3) All buildings, structures, and parking and loading areas shall be setback a
minimum of 100 feet from any abutting residential zoning district. Such
setback area shall be heavily landscaped so as to create a complete visual and
physical separation between the two (2) unlike land uses, forming an effective
screen in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
4) Traffic from events (including church worship services), and other large
assemblies shall be controlled by the institution or by its agents so as to not
create congestion or unreasonable delays on the public street. A schedule of
expected frequency of events (including church worship services) and
assemblies, a description of the method(s) of traffic control, and a traffic
impact study and shall be presented to the Planning Commission for approval
after review and comment on the plan by the Police Department.
5) Associated uses on the site such as schools, (if not the primary use) recreation
centers, retreat facilities, conference centers, convents, and others shall meet
all requirements of this Ordinance for such uses.
6) All parking spaces and aisles shall be screened from off-site view by any one
or a combination of the following:
a) Screening mound or berm.
b) Dense landscaping
c) Solid wall with planting strip
d) Changes in grade through the use of retaining walls, or topographic
features.
Screening shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 14.8.
7) There shall be no outside loudspeakers or amplified sound outside of a totally
enclosed building.
8) Storage of buses, trucks, and maintenance equipment shall be entirely within a
totally enclosed building.
(i) Hotels and motels subject to the following:
1) Each hotel or motel shall provide minimum side yards of not less than twentyfive
(25) feet each; minimum rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet;
minimum front yard of twenty-five (25) feet except that when parking is
provided between the building and a street, the minimum front yard and/or
side yard shall be not less than seventy-five (75) feet.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 88
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
2) When the front yard and/or side yard abuts a street and is used to provide an
access road and/or off-street parking, the area shall be screened in compliance
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
3) Each motel or hotel unit shall contain not less than two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of floor area.
4) Kitchen or cooking facilities may be provided in new motels or hotels upon
demonstration by the applicant that the provisions of all applicable fire
prevention and building codes have been met. No existing motel units shall
be converted for use of cooking and/or kitchen facilities unless the applicant
can demonstrate compliance with all applicable fire prevention and building
codes and obtains a certificate of occupancy for each unit being converted.
5) Where a unit is provided as a residence for the owner or the manager, the
following minimum floor area requirements shall be provided: one (1)
bedroom unit, 600 square feet; two (2) bedroom unit, 800 square feet; three
(3) bedroom unit, 1,000 square feet; four (4) bedroom unit, 1,200 square feet.
(j) Sales rooms, and/or sales lots for new and/or used automobiles, recreation vehicles or
trucks, subject to the following:
1) Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to
permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall
be high pressure sodium, metal halide or other type of lighting approved by
the Commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high
pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and
designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential
areas and shall comply with the requirements of Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
2) All service and repair facilities shall be contained within an enclosed building
except for the storage of repaired and wrecked cars. All areas used to store
repaired or wrecked cars shall be located behind the building and screened in
compliance with the requirements of Section 14.8.
3) An obscuring wall must be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are
zoned for residential use, in accordance with Section 14.8 of this Ordinance.
4) No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot.
5) Where a sales lot for new and/or used automobiles, or trucks, abuts a street, a
planting strip shall be established in accordance with Section 14.8 Specific
Landscaping, Screening and Buffering Requirements. The planting strip shall
comply with the standards for Ann Arbor Road streetscape or parking area
buffering based upon the street fronted upon, and shall provide a proper buffer
in the determination of Planning Commission. The required shrubbery
plantings may be modified at the discretion of the Planning Commission, to
break up the areas without circumventing the total view of the product.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 89
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
6) No loudspeakers for outdoor broadcasting shall be permitted.
7) Rental facilities for vehicles shall be permitted only as an accessory use to a
permitted vehicle sales use under this Section.
8) All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or
other similar dust-proof surface.
(k) Motorcycle, motorbike, personal watercraft, snow mobile and all-terrain vehicle sales,
service, clubs and rental facilities subject to the following:
1) No motorcycle or motorbike rental, sales, service or motorcycle or motorbike
clubs shall be permitted on a parcel of land which is located within two
hundred (200) feet of a residential district.
2) Motorcycle or motorbike clubs may be operated only between the hours of 6
a.m. and 12 midnight.
3) Outdoor storage and/or testing areas shall not be permitted.
4) All service and repair facilities shall be contained within an enclosed building.
5) Where a sales lot and/or outdoor display area abuts a street, a planting strip
shall be established in accordance with Section 14.8, Specific Landscaping,
Screening and Buffering Requirements. The planting strip shall comply with
the standards for Ann Arbor Road streetscape or parking are buffering based
upon the street the sales lot or display area abuts, and shall provide a proper
buffer in the determination of the Planning Commission. The required
shrubbery plantings may be modified at the discretion of the Planning
Commission, to break up the areas without circumventing the total view of the
product.
6) All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or
other similar dust-proof surface.
(l) Indoor recreation uses such as bowling establishments, court sport facilities, tennis
clubs, pool and billiard halls, roller and ice skating rinks, and other general indoor
recreation facilities, subject to the following:
1) The structure housing such facilities shall be located at least fifty (50) feet
from any front, rear, or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent
residential district.
2) Any vehicles or equipment used for servicing the facilities, such as court
cleaners or zambonis, shall be stored only inside a totally enclosed building.
3) The use of any electronic or enhanced sound system shall be contained so as
to not present an unreasonable disturbance to the neighborhood in which it is
located.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 90
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
(m) Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar uses, subject to the following:
1) All operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
2) All buildings shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any
residential district.
(n) Drive-in restaurants and other drive-in establishments excluding outdoor theaters,
subject to the following:
1) Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to
permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall
be high pressure sodium, metal halide or other type of lighting approved by
the Commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high
pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and
designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential
areas and shall comply with the requirements of Section 28.8 Exterior
Lighting.
2) A setback of at least sixty (60) feet from the future right-of-way or street
setback line of any street must be maintained.
(o) Outdoor cafes and eating areas accessory to a permitted restaurant use, subject to the
following:
1) Pedestrian circulation and access to building entrances (both on and off site)
shall not be impaired. A minimum of six (6) feet of sidewalk leading to the
entrance to the establishment shall be maintained free of tables and other
encumbrances. Planters, posts with ropes or other enclosures shall be used to
define the area occupied by the outdoor café.
2) The outdoor café shall be kept clean, litter-free, and with a well-kept
appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of the tables and
chairs. Additional outdoor waste receptacles may be required. Written
procedures for cleaning and waste containment and removal responsibilities
shall be included with all applications and approved by the Planning
Commission. Preparation of food and beverages is prohibited in the outdoor
café area.
3) Tables, chairs, planters, waste receptacles, and other elements of street
furniture shall be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent
buildings, subject to Planning Commission approval.
(p) Veterinary clinics, animal clinics and animal hospitals subject to the following:
1) Any building designed or constructed for such uses shall be used for the sole
purpose of providing medical care for household pets and shall not be
constructed or used as a boarding establishment for household pets.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 91
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
2) If animals eligible for treatment at such establishments are kept overnight on
the premises or for a period longer than regular professional business hours,
then a full-time, duly qualified attendant shall be stationed in charge of said
premises.
3) Open or outdoor runs, kennels or pens shall be prohibited.
4) In no case shall the disposal of rubbish and litter be conducted in such a
manner as to be obnoxious or offensive.
5) In no case shall there be any harboring of vermin or decaying matter on the
premises, and effective provisions shall be made to confine all noise,
confusion and odor, if any, to the premises.
6) The building and ventilation system shall be constructed to prevent any noise
and odors emanating from the area used for the treatment and temporary
keeping of household pets from reaching the building exterior.
(q) A storage garage for commercial vehicles used by a business or other activity when
located on the same contiguous site therewith and not occupying more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the area of such contiguous site.
(r) Commercial (major repair or body shop) garages subject to the following:
1) All operations of the commercial garage shall be conducted entirely within the
building except for the storage of repaired and wrecked cars. All areas used to
store repaired or wrecked cars shall be screened from view off site in
compliance with Section 14.8.
2) All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or
other similar dust-proof surface.
(s) Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children’s amusement parks,
miniature golf courses, subject to the following:
1) The children’s amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a four (4)
foot, six (6) inch wall or fence.
2) Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be
fenced with a four (4) foot, six (6) inch high wall or fence where adjacent to
the use.
(t) Open air display and sales areas, including nursery plants and materials; lawn
furniture; playground equipment and swimming pools; garden supplies and similar
open-air displays, subject to the following conditions:
1) The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products shall meet all
setback requirements applicable to a building, and shall be screened from
view off-site.
2) All loading and parking shall be provided off-street.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 92
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
3) The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose, unpackaged materials shall
be contained so as to prevent any affects on adjacent uses.
4) Outdoor display and sales of lumber and coal yards, building material sales
establishments, junk yards, used auto parts or wrecking establishments shall
not be permitted.
5) All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or
other similar dust-proof surface.
(u) Auto wash facilities subject to the following:
1) In the case that an auto wash facility includes the storage and/or sale of
gasoline as part of the operation, the requirements of Section 14.2.3,
paragraph w. of this ordinance shall also apply.
2) All washing facilities shall be completely within an enclosed building.
3) Vacuuming facilities may be outside the building, but shall not be in the front
yard and shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential
district. Where such facilities are located in a side or rear yard abutting a
street, such use shall be screened from the street by one or a combination of
the following:
a) A solid wall of at least four (4) feet in height and six (6) to eight (8)
foot wide planting strip on the street side. Such planting strip shall
contain as a minimum, one (1) deciduous small ornamental tree for
every twenty (20) lineal feet of planting strip required.
b) Mounding or berming of not less than four (4) feet in height with side
slopes no steeper than 3:1 (three feet horizontal to one foot vertical). A
minimum of one (1) deciduous small ornamental tree shall be planted
for every twenty (20) lineal feet of berm or mound.
4) Driveway entrances into the auto wash structure shall be from within the lot
and no entrance into the building shall be directly from a street or alley. No
alley shall be used as a means of serving an auto wash facility. Drains shall be
provided at all entrances and exits at the street setback line. Auto wash
facilities shall not, in general, be located within two hundred (200) feet of an
intersection of any two (2) roads when either of the two (2) roads is
considered to carry moderate to heavy traffic levels.
5) A hard surfaced driveway of either one or more lanes shall be constructed on
the site in such a manner as to provide a continuous movement of cars into the
wash rack.
6) The driveways, so provided, shall be not less than twelve (12) feet wide for a
single lane and not less than twelve (12) additional feet, in width, from each
additional lane.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 93
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
7) The use of steam in the cleaning process shall be permitted when confined
within an enclosed building.
8) Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to
permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall
be high pressure sodium, metal halide or other type of lighting approved by
the Commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high
pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and
designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential
areas and shall comply with the requirements of Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
9) All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided space off
the street right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.4.
(v) Minor automotive repair, such as muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops,
tire stores, undercoating shops, minor engine repair and small engine repair, subject to
the following conditions:
1) Access to such use shall be directly to a major or collector street.
2) Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited.
3) Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for more than
24 hours unless awaiting repair for which a work order, authorized by the
owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to be visible from outside
the vehicle and not to exceed seven (7) days. Space for vehicles awaiting
repair shall be designated on the site plan and shall be screened as determined
necessary by the Planning Commission.
4) Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for
the storage of vehicles awaiting repair.
5) All vehicle servicing or repair, except minor repairs such as, but not limited
to, tire changing and headlight changing shall be conducted within a building.
6) Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts
and such containers shall be screened from public view.
(w) Gasoline service stations subject to the following:
1) Gasoline service stations shall provide a front yard and side yards of not less
than twenty (20) feet each. No part of a service station canopy shall extend
into a required yard.
2) Gasoline service stations, including any part of the facade, and other structure
or part of any other structures on the same lot, shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) feet in height.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 94
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
3) Open space on the gasoline service station site may be used for parking or
maneuvering of vehicles being serviced, waiting to be serviced or serviced
vehicles waiting to be picked up. The use of the open space for parking of
vehicles for storage, sale or rental or for any other use other than that defined
in the definition of gasoline service station under this Ordinance is prohibited.
4) Hoists or other equipment used in servicing of motor vehicles shall be located
within an enclosed building.
5) Pump islands shall be setback not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the
street setback line of any street to which the pump island is perpendicular and
nineteen (19) feet from the street setback line of any street to which the pump
island is parallel and not less than nineteen (19) feet from any residential
boundary line. Additional setback may be required if determined necessary
by the Planning Commission to provide for adequate site circulation and
maneuvering. The setback areas shall include a minimum ten (10) foot
planting strip located along and between the street setback line and the pump
islands. No servicing shall be permitted on any vehicle while said vehicle is
resting wholly or partly on a sidewalk or on a public street or highway rightof-
way.
6) No gasoline service station, service garage, auto wash facility, or other
establishment where gasoline is stored and sold, which because of their nature
unavoidably invite vehicle traffic, depend on standing vehicles while awaiting
service and route such traffic across curb lines and sidewalks, shall be located
and no property shall be used as such nearer than one hundred (100) feet in
any direction as measured from any point on the property line of any church,
school (public or parochial), police station, fire station or buildings used for
public assembly and five hundred (500) feet from any hospital.
7) Gasoline service stations shall be located on a plot of ground having frontage
of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet as measured from the street
setback line. When the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot the
minimum frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall apply to frontage on
both streets as measured from the street setback line. Each gasoline service
station shall, in addition to the minimum frontage requirement, provide a
minimum area of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Such
station shall be composed of the building housing the office and the facilities
for servicing, greasing and/or washing and the pumps for dispensing gasoline.
Such facilities shall contain not more than five (5) units (as defined below).
Any station designed for more than five (5) units shall provide an additional
area of three thousand (3,000) square feet for each additional unit. For the
purpose of this section, a unit shall mean (a) a set of pumps or (b) a stall for
one vehicle within the building for servicing, greasing or washing.
8) All gasoline and other combustible fuels used to propel internal combustion
motors shall be stored in compliance with the all applicable State, Federal and
municipal codes.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 95
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
9) There shall be provided, on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential
district, a six (6) foot completely obscuring wall, consistent with the
requirements of Section 14.8.
10) Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to
permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall
be high pressure sodium metal halide or other type of lighting approved by the
Commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high
pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and
designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential
areas and shall comply with the requirements of Section 28.8 Exterior
Lighting.
11) All restroom doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and residential
districts.
12) Gasoline service stations with restaurant or “fast food” facilities (with or
without drive-through) and/or convenience store and/or car wash facilities
shall meet all separate Ordinance standards for these individual uses.
Additionally, stacking, service and circulation lanes, and parking for the
individual uses shall be designed and laid-out so as to minimize the potential
for traffic circulation and vehicle-pedestrian conflicts. Landscaped islands
and buffer strips shall be used to separate and screen stacking and service
lanes.
13) Outside storage and display shall be limited to small quantities of oil and other
supplies needed for servicing at the pumps. No retail sale items such as soda
pop, windshield solvent, landscape mulch or other merchandise shall be
displayed or sold outside. All outdoor storage and display areas must be
identified on the site plan and approved by the Planning Commission.
(x) Arcades and any commercial establishment in which the primary purpose of such
establishment is the operation of mechanical or electrical amusement devices subject
to the following:
1) All activities shall be conducted entirely within a building.
2) No such business shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 9:00 a.m.
3) The building housing such use shall be so constructed an maintained as to
insure that all interior noises shall be kept from reaching the building exterior.
4) The Planning Commission shall review the proposed use to determine the
need for bicycle parking spaces. Said spaces shall be designed to permit the
orderly parking of said bicycles and permit them to be secured. These parking
areas shall be so located as to prevent the disruption of on-site and off-site
pedestrian and automobile traffic flow.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 96
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
5) Any part of the lot occupied by such use shall not be located within three
hundred (300) feet of any residential district or within five hundred (500) feet
of the property line of any public, parochial or private school.
6) Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major thoroughfares
as defined in the future land use plan. Access from a street other than a major
thoroughfare shall be prohibited.
(y) Drive through restaurants or drive through facilities, accessory to any principal
permitted use in the ARC District, subject to the provision of a separate stacking lane
designed to accommodate the minimum number of stacking spaces required under
Section 14.4.1.k. Table of Parking Requirements. Required stacking shall be
positioned in such a manner that stacking will not interfere with vehicular traffic on
site, on the adjacent roadway, or entering or leaving the site and the stacking lane
shall be striped or otherwise delineated on site. Adequate maneuvering room shall be
provided to allow vehicles to by-pass or leave the stacking lane as determined by the
Planning Commission. No eating shall be permitted while on site and in a parked
vehicle. A sufficient number of outdoor litter receptacles shall be provided to prevent
blowing paper and other materials moving off site onto surrounding properties. The
drive-through service speaker location and/or amplification shall not cause noise that
is audible from adjacent residences.
(z) Limited uses of a wholesale, warehousing or light industrial nature, subject to the
following conditions:
1) General Conditions:
a) External physical effects shall be restricted, so as to protect nearby
uses from hazards, noise, and other radiated disturbances.
b) Such uses shall be located only in the general vicinity of the railroad
tracks, described as east of the Plymouth Township Hall site to the
westerly boundary of the railroad right-of-way on the north side of
Ann Arbor Road, and east of General Drive to the westerly boundary
of Arbor Village Subdivision on the south side of Ann Arbor Road.
c) Each use shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
2) Uses permitted under this classification shall be as follows, and shall be
further subject to the specific standards listed:
a) Wholesale and warehousing businesses, storage buildings, resale
shops, commercial laundries, cleaning establishments and frozen food
lockers.
b) The manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment or testing of such products as bakery goods, candy, soap
(cold mix only), cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, dairy and food
products, hardware and cutlery; tool, die, gauge and machine shops.
The manufacturing, processing and assembling from basic raw
materials shall be prohibited.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 97
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
c) The manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment or testing of articles of merchandise form the following
previously prepared materials which have been manufactured
elsewhere: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber,
fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semi-precious
metals, or stones, sheet metal (excluding large stampings such as
automobile body panels), ferrous and non-ferrous metals (excluding
large casting and fabrications), shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire,
yarn, wood (excluding saw and planting mills) and paint (not
employing boiling process).
d) Research, testing, laboratory and office uses related to permitted
industrial operations.
e) The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas.
f) Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or
rubber or other small molded rubber products (not including
pneumatic tires).
g) Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs.
h) Laboratories --experimental, film, or testing.
i) Communication facilities with buildings, public utility buildings,
telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations
and gas regulator stations, communication and relay stations
without outdoor storage subject to the following:
A front yard setback of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be provided
(irrespective of the yard requirements of the district) and two (2) side
yards and a rear yard shall be provided; each of which shall not be less
than twenty-five (25) feet in width.
j) Research and industrial parks subject to the following:
1) The research and industrial park shall be platted as an
industrial subdivision.
2) All permitted uses allowed under Section 14.2.3.(z) a)–k) shall
be allowed in an approved research and industrial park
without separate special land use approval.
3) The industrial park shall meet the following area, lot and yard
requirements:
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 sq. ft
Minimum Lot Frontage 100 ft
Front Yard Dept 40 ft
Side Yard Width, Each 25 ft
Side Yard Adjacent to Residential 50 ft
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 98
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
Side Yard Adjacent to a Street 40 ft
Rear Yard 40 ft
Rear Yard Adjacent to Residential 50 ft
Maximum Height 35 ft*
Maximum Percent Lot Coverage 50%
*The height of a building may be increased one (1) foot for
each one (1) foot by which its setback is in excess of the
required yard setbacks, up to a maximum height of fortyfive
(45) feet.
4) All setback areas shall be landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs
and/or other plantings, and may include reflecting pools,
retaining walls and other landscape construction harmonious
with the overall landscape scheme. Parking and loading areas
may be located in side and rear setback areas but shall be
prohibited from the front yard setback. Parking and loading
areas shall be screened in compliance with this Ordinance.
k) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses, excluding outdoor storage.
4. Development Requirements
(a) Required Conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the ARC Ann
Arbor Road Corridor District shall comply with the following requirements:
1) The following requirements shall apply to all businesses and uses except for
permitted limited wholesale, warehouse and light industrial uses:
a) All such businesses shall be retail or service establishments dealing
directly with consumers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale
distribution off of the premises is not permitted.
b) All goods produced and services performed on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
2) All business, servicing, or processing, shall be conducted entirely within a
completely enclosed building except where specifically permitted by this
Article.
3) There shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or equipment unless
otherwise permitted by this Article.
4) Commercially used or licensed vehicles used in the normal operation of a
permitted retail or service use on the site shall be parked in non-required
parking spaces and the rear only. Such vehicles shall not be parked in a
manner to be used as an advertisement and shall be screened from view offsite.
This provision shall also apply to operable vehicles that are moved on
and off of the site on a regular basis.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 99
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
5) Development in the ARC District shall comply with the Access Managements
and Driveways Standard in Section 14.5.
6) All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose
exterior is structurally altered, which faces a street or which is adjacent to
property zoned or used as residential shall be designed, treated and finished in
a uniform manner consistent with the exterior of the front of the building.
Such buildings which are erected, extended or structurally altered, shall be
designed to compliment the Ann Arbor Road streetscape through means which
include but are not limited to use of brick, stone, black wrought iron accents,
peaked roof elements, building architectural detail to enhance door and
window openings, and other elements approved by the Planning Commission.
7) Compliance with the Environmental Performance Requirements of this
Ordinance is required for all uses.
8) All yard and open space areas in the ARC District shall be graded in a manner
which shall avoid the ponding of stormwater unless said conditions have been
designed to occur as part of a storm detention plan which has been approved
by the municipality and such grading shall comply with the engineering
design standards for the municipality prior to issuance of a permit.
9) All structures shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and
shall comply with the municipality’s Fire Prevention Ordinance.
10) Sidewalks shall be provided along all public street frontage and within the
interior of the project boundaries. Interior walks shall be a minimum four (4)
feet in width except where such walk directly abuts a parking area. In cases
where sidewalks abut a parking area, the minimum width required shall be six
(6) feet. Sidewalks located along public streets shall be five (5) feet in width.
All sidewalks both exterior and interior shall conform to the standards as
established by the Municipality.
11) The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission
for approval. If dumpsters are proposed they shall be screened in a manner
acceptable to the Planning Commission and are subject to the requirements of
this Ordinance Section 28.9 Waste Receptacles.
12) All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the Planning
Commission as part of special land use approval and/or site plan approval
shall be permitted.
13) Protective or security fencing shall be considered a structure enclosing a piece
of land or separating contiguous land either in whole or part, serving the
purpose of preventing intrusion onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or
tract of unplatted land from without or straying from within. The following
shall govern the height, location and placement of protective or security
fencing:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 100
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
a) Permit Required: In the ARC District, it shall be unlawful for any
person to build, repair or relocate a protective or security fence
without first having secured a fence permit therefore from the
Building Department.
b) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security
fence shall be four (4) feet, except as otherwise provided herein. For
uses subject to special approval, the Planning Commission may permit
protective or security fencing not to exceed six (6) feet in height.
c) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of the
Building Department. Fences shall not be made of or contain barbed
wire, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or pointed
projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of
pickets, the pickets shall be made of not less than one (1) inch by
three (3) inch material and shall have an angle at the top of not less
than ninety (90) degrees. The fence shall comply with the
requirements of the building code. Cyclone fencing or cyclone
fencing with plastic or other types of strips intertwined or otherwise
attached to the fence shall be prohibited.
d) Placement: No fence shall be built closer to the street than the front
setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to Section 14.3,
provided however, that no fence shall be built closer to the street than
the established front building line along said street or in front of the
building closest to the street on the fenced premise.
14) Exterior lighting shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance
Section 28.8, Exterior Lighting.
(b) Site Plan Review. Site plan review and approval is required for all uses in
accordance with the requirements of Article 29, Site Plan and Development
Approval.
(c) Other Development Requirements.
1) Unless specifically modified by this Article, all uses shall comply with all
standards and requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
2) Off-street parking for all uses shall be as specified in this Article 14.
3) Off-street loading and unloading shall be as specified in this Article 14.
4) Screening and land use buffers for all uses shall be as specified in this Article
14.
5) Signs for all uses shall be as specified in this Article 14.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 101
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.2 ARC, ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT
SEC. 14.3 SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
SEC. 14.3 SCHEDULE OF REGULATION
1. Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements
(a) All buildings and uses in the Ann Arbor Road Corridor District are subject to the
area, height, bulk, and placement requirements as follows:
1) For all buildings and uses, except those uses permitted by special approval
under Section 14.2.3, paragraph x. (light industrial uses, warehouse and
limited wholesale) the following shall be required:
Minimum Lot Area: None
Minimum Lot Width: None
Maximum Lot Coverage: None
Maximum Height: 2 stories, 30 feet (f)
Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front: 10 feet (a)
Side, Minimum: Minimum 10 feet, total of two is
2 feet (b)(c)(d)
Sides, Total of Two: 20 feet (c)
Rear: 20 feet
2) For uses permitted by special approval under Section 14.2.3, paragraph x.
(limited wholesale, warehouse and light industrial uses) of the Ann Arbor
Road Corridor District, the following shall be required:
Minimum Lot Area: None
Minimum Lot Width: None
Maximum Lot Coverage: None
Maximum Height: 35 feet (f)
Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front: 50 feet
Side, Minimum: 20 feet (e)
Sides, Total of Two: 40 feet
Rear: 20 feet
2. Notes to Schedule
(a) When parking is furnished between the building and the street, a front yard of not less
than seventy-five (75) feet shall be provided.
(b) When a side yard is adjacent to a residential use, a side yard of not less than twenty
(20) feet shall be provided.
(c) Side yards are not required along an interior side parcel line, where all walls of
buildings abutting such interior side parcel line are wholly without windows or other
openings and are of fireproof construction, but if the side wall is not of fireproof
construction, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided. When an
interior business parcel abuts a residential parcel, a side yard of not less than twenty
(20) feet shall be required in addition to the required screening and land use buffer.
The Planning Commission may require additional setbacks based on its review. The
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 102
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.3A USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
Planning Commission shall review the aesthetic impact of such walls and may require
visual enhancement.
(d) When parking is furnished in the side yard on the street side of a corner parcel, a side
yard of not less than seventy-five (75) feet shall be provided.
(e) When such a use is adjacent to a residential district and not separated there from by a
street, a side yard and/or a rear yard of not less than seventy-five (75) feet shall be
provided.
(f) The Commission shall have the authority to approve an increase in building height up
to a maximum of thirty-eight (38) feet, provided the building does not exceed two (2)
stories and conforms with one of the following criteria:
1) The additional height is necessary to achieve two (2) stories due to the
particular nature and functions of the approved use.
2) The additional height is necessary to accommodate architectural features that
enhance the character of the building and the district.
SEC. 14.3A USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED (added 3/14/10)
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which would be in
violation of any State or Federal Law.
SEC. 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT, STANDARDS, AND OFFSTREET
LOADING AND UNLOADING
1. Off-Street Parking Requirements
Within the Ann Arbor Road Corridor zoning district, off-street parking facilities for the
storage or parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and
patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of this
Article, shall be provided and maintained as provided herein and in accordance with Sections
14.4.2 and 14.4.3. Such space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long
as said main building structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are
provided elsewhere in conformance with this Article.
(a) Parking Space vs. Loading Space and Stacking Space. Loading space as required in
Section 14.4.3, stacking spaces as required per this Article and parking spaces as
required in Section 14.4.1 shall be considered separate and distinct requirements and
as such shall be considered as separate components on the proposed site plan. In no
case shall facilities provided to satisfy the requirements of this Article or Ordinance
for one component be construed as meeting the requirements for another required
component.
(b) Fractional Requirements. When units or measurements determining the number of
required parking spaces result in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 103
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
to one-half (1/2 ) shall be disregarded and fractions including one-half(1/2) and over
shall require one (1) parking space.
(c) Barrier Free Parking Spaces. Barrier free parking spaces shall be required and
included as part of the total parking space requirement of Section 14.4.1, paragraph k.
A barrier free space shall mean a parking space eight (8) feet wide with a five (5) foot
aisle and shall be marked off in blue handicapper paint. A sign located approximately
six (6) feet above grade inscribed with the international wheelchair symbol or a
reasonable facsimile thereof shall identify the handicapper space.
Barrier free parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the Michigan
Department of Labor, Construction Code Commission, Barrier Free Design Division.
A summary of parking space requirements is listed below:
TOTAL
PARKING SPACES
PROVIDED
REQUIRED NUMBER OF BARRIER FREE SPACES
(include barrier free spaces within total required
parking)
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 per each 100 total spaces over 1,000
Barrier free spaces shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways
and entry areas. Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk
surface, an inclined curb approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one
(1) foot in twelve (12) feet and a width of not less than four (4) feet shall be provided
for wheelchair access.
(d) Existing Use - Increase in Floor Area. When a use requiring off-street parking is
increased in floor area and such use is located in a building existing on or before the
effective date of this ordinance, additional parking space for the additional floor area
shall be provided and maintained in amounts hereinafter specified for that use.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 104
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
(e) Usable Floor Area. For the purpose of applying the requirements of Section 14.4.1,
paragraph k, "usable floor area" shall be as follows:
1) In the case of office, merchandising or service types of uses excluding
shopping centers, usable floor area, shall equal the sum of the gross horizontal
floor area of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior
walls used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public or
customers, patrons, clients or patients. This shall include areas occupied by
fixtures and equipment used for display or sales of merchandise.
2) Usable floor area shall not include area used principally for non-public
purposes, such as storage, incidental repairs, processing or packaging of
merchandise, shop windows, offices incidental to the management or
maintenance of stores or buildings toilets or restrooms, utilities or areas for
dressing, fitting or alterations.
3) Applications for approval of required parking shall clearly indicate through
the use of floor plans and calculations the area designated as "usable area"
above and the use of areas not considered as "usable floor area". If such
information is not submitted, parking requirements shall be based on eighty
(80%) percent of the sum of the gross horizontal floor area of the several
floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
4) In the case of shopping centers, usable floor area shall be based on eighty
(80%) percent of the sum of the gross horizontal floor area of the several
floors of the buildings occupied by the shopping center measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls. However, if floor plans and calculations
of usable floor area are submitted which demonstrate otherwise, usable floor
area may be adjusted accordingly.
(f) Parking Location.
1) One and Two Family Dwellings: Parking facilities for one and two family
dwellings shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the dwelling they are
intended to serve. Said facilities shall consist of a driveway, parking strip,
parking space and/or private garage. No parking shall be permitted elsewhere
on the lot or abutting public right-of-way except upon a paved street where
such parking is otherwise permitted.
2) Other Residential Uses including Multiple Family: The off-street parking
facilities for other residential uses including multiple family shall be located
on the same lot or parcel as the building they are intended to serve. In the
case of multiple family residential and similar uses where there are several
buildings on one parcel, the required parking shall generally be located within
three hundred (300) feet of the building that it is intended to serve.
3) All Other Uses:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 105
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
a) Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the
same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve,
measured by public right-of-way from the nearest point of the building
to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. When any required
off-street parking is provided, not upon the same lot, but on a lot
within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, documentation
meeting the requirements for recording at the Register of Deeds, shall
be provided reflecting that the ownership of the parcel (upon which
parking is located) has given to the owner of the parcel (upon which
the building requiring the parking is located), a permanent right of use
for the required number of parking spaces.
b) Whenever the Township Board or City Commission shall establish
off-street parking facilities by means of a special assessment district or
other means, or the Board or City Commission approves, after
recommendation by the Planning Commission, of a joint off-street
parking facility cooperatively developed by a number of property
owners, the Board or City Commission may determine upon
completion of said facility that all buildings erected or uses established
thereafter within the special assessment district or districts or on
properties owned by the cooperating property owners at the time of
completion of the facility, shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section for supplying off-street parking facilities on their
individual lot, parcel or site.
(g) Use Not Mentioned. In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is
not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned and
to which said use is similar, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall apply.
(h) Collective Parking Facilities. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
collective provisions of off-street parking or loading facilities for two or more
buildings or uses, provided collectively, such facilities shall not be less than the sum
of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance
with the table.
(i) Extension of Building into Existing Parking Lot. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the extension of, or an addition to, a building into an existing parking area, which is
required or the original building, when the same amount of space taken by the
extension or addition is provided by an enlargement of the existing parking lot, or an
additional area located on the same lot or parcel as the building said facility is
intended to serve.
(j) Continuing Character of Parking Obligation. The requirements for off-street parking
applicable to newly erected or substantially altered structures, shall be a continuing
obligation of the owner of the parcel on which any such structure is located so long as
the structure is in existence.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 106
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
1) It shall be unlawful for an owner of any building affected by this ordinance to
discontinue, change or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance, sale or
transfer of such structure, without establishing alternate parking space which
meets with the requirements of and is in compliance with this Article and
Ordinance.
2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use such building
without acquiring such land for vehicle parking which meets the requirements
of and is in compliance with this Article and Ordinance.
(k) Table of Parking Requirements. The amount of required off-street parking space for
new uses or buildings, and additions or alterations to existing buildings, as specified
in preceding paragraphs, shall be determined in accordance with the following table.
The space so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and
certificate of occupancy and shall be a continuing obligation of the owner, except as
provided in Section 14.4.1, paragraph i., above.
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
RESIDENTIAL
One family dwelling, two family dwelling. TWO (2) per dwelling unit
Multiple dwelling, terrace apartment dwellings
and efficiency apartments, townhouses and
stacked flats.
TWO (2) per dwelling unit
Elderly Housing – Assisted Living ONE (1) per four (4) units
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
Elderly Housing – Congregate Care ONE (1) per two (2) units
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
Elderly Housing – Independent Living ONE (1) per unit
plus
ONE(1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
INSTITUTIONAL
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 107
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Churches, temples or auditoriums incidental to
schools
ONE (1) per 3 seats
or
ONE (1) per 6 feet of bench in main assembly
unit based on maximum seating capacity
Hospitals ONE (1) per 2 beds
plus
One (1) per employee including staff doctors
and nurses based on the greatest number of
employees in any one shift.
Sanitariums, extended care facilities, nursing
and convalescent homes or similar uses
ONE (1) per 4 beds
plus
ONE (1) per employee including staff doctors
and nurses based on the greatest number of
employees in any one shift.
Elementary and junior high schools ONE AND ONE HALF (1 ½) per teacher,
employee and administrator
plus
Requirements for an assembly hall, stadium or
sports arena. If no auditorium or assembly
hall is provided, two (2) spaces per classroom
shall be provided in addition to the above
High schools, trade schools, commercial or
vocational schools or colleges
ONE AND ONE HALF (1 ½) per teacher,
employee and administrator
plus
ONE (1) per ten (10) students
plus
Requirements for an assembly hall, stadium or
sports arena
Private clubs and lodge halls ONE (1) per 3 persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load established by
local, county or state fire, building or health
codes
Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs,
tennis clubs or other similar uses
ONE (1) per 2 member families or
individual members
Stadiums, sport arenas or similar place of
outdoor assembly
ONE (1) per 3 seats
or
ONE (1) per 6 feet of bench
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 108
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Theaters and auditoriums (other than incidental
to schools)
ONE (1) per 3 seats based on maximum
seating capacity
plus
ONE (1) per 2 employees based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
Convent, nurses' home or other dormitory ONE (1) per 2 bedrooms
plus
TWO (2) for manager
Libraries, museums ONE (1) per 500 square feet of gross floor
space
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
Post Office ONE (1) per 200 square feet of usable floor
area
plus
ONE (1) space per employee based upon the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
Public utility ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
Child care centers, day care centers, nursery
schools
ONE (1) per 400 square feet of usable floor
area
plus
ONE (1) per employee based upon the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
Municipal Offices ONE (1) per 4 seats based on the maximum
seating capacity of the main meeting room
plus
ONE (1) per 2 employees based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
COMMERCIAL
Beauty parlor and barber shops TWO (2) per chair or station
plus
ONE (1) per each employee based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
Bowling alleys SEVEN (7) per alley
plus
Requirements for accessory uses
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 109
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Pool or billiard parlors, dance halls, roller and
skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly
halls without fixed seats
ONE (1) per 3 persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load as established by
local, county or state fire, building or health
codes
Establishments for sale and consumption on the
premises of alcoholic beverages, food or
refreshments
ONE per 2 persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load and/or maximum
seating capacity as established by local,
county or state fire, building or health codes
or
ONE (1) per two (2) seats
plus
ONE (1) per each employee based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift,
whichever is greater
Furniture and appliance, household equipment
repair shops, showroom of plumber, decorator,
electrician or similar trade, clothing and shoe
repair, wholesale stores and machinery sales
ONE (1) per 800 square feet usable
floor area
plus
ONE (1) per each employee based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
Gasoline filling stations ONE (1) for
each vehicle fueling position,
plus
ONE (1) Per lubrication, stall, rack or pit,
plus
ONE (1) per 350 square feet of usable floor
area in any convenience store area.
Requirements for fast food shall be calculated
separately.
plus
ONE (1) per employee based upon the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
Laundromats and coin operated dry cleaners ONE (1) per each washing and/or dry
cleaning machines
Miniature golf courses TWO (2) for each one hole
plus
ONE (1) for each employee based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
Mini storage rental units ONE (1) for each employee
plus
ONE (1) for each 50 storage units to be
located at the office
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 110
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Mortuaries or funeral homes ONE (1) per fifty (50) square feet of
floor space in the parlors or individual
funeral service rooms
Motel, hotel, or other commercial lodging
establishments
ONE (1) per unit
plus
ONE (1) per each employee based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
plus
Parking required for accessory uses
such as restaurant or bar.
Motor vehicle sales and service establishment ONE (1) per two hundred (200) square feet of
sales room floor space,
plus
ONE (1) per one (1) automobile service stall,
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
Quick oil change facility ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
plus
FOUR (4) stacking spaces per service stall or
lane.
Service garages, auto salesrooms, auto repair,
collision or bumping shops
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift,
plus
TWO (2) spaces for each grease rack or stall
for servicing automobiles
Shopping centers--For the purpose of this
section shopping centers shall be defined as a
structure or group of structures located on the
same zoning lot or parcels which provide a
variety of commercial uses and also provide
common off-street parking facilities, pedestrian
areas, and vehicular movement areas
ONE (1) per 200 square feet of usable floor
area
Retail stores except as otherwise specified
herein
ONE (1) per 200 square feet of usable
floor area
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 111
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Drive-in restaurants and roadside stands ONE (1) per 15 square feet of usable
floor area
plus
ONE (1) per each employee based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
Drive-through restaurant facilities; i.e.
establishments with service windows or similar
arrangements for the purpose of serving
customers in their vehicles
FIVE (5) stacking spaces per window
plus
Required off-street parking space per
designated use
Drive through facilities, other than for
restaurants or ‘fast food’, such as pharmacies.
FIVE (5) stacking spaces per window
plus
Required off-street parking per designated use
Automobile wash ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift.
plus
Off-street stacking spaces at the rate of twelve
(12) spaces per bay for a fully automatic car
wash; fifteen (15) for a semi-automatic
(motorist must leave auto); three (3) spaces
per bay for a self-serve car wash.
OFFICE
Banks, business or professional offices of
lawyers, landscape architects, architects,
engineers, or similar or allied professions
ONE (1) per 200 square feet of usable
floor area
Professional office of doctors and dentists ONE (1) per 20 square feet of floor
space in waiting room
plus
ONE (1) per examining room, patient
treatment station dental chair or similar use
plus
ONE (1) per each employee based on the
greatest number of employees in any one shift.
Medical clinics, outpatient care centers, 24 hour
medical stations, urgent care centers and similar
facilities
TWO (2) per exam, procedure or operating
room
plus
ONE (1) per laboratory or recovery room
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 112
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Drive-through facilities; i.e. establishments with
service windows or similar arrangements for the
purpose of serving customers in their vehicles,
such as banks
FIVE (5) stacking spaces per window
plus
Required off-street parking space per
designated use
INDUSTRIAL
Industrial establishments including
manufacturing research and testing etc.
ONE (1) per four hundred (400) square feet of
usable floor area.
Warehouse and storage buildings ONE (1) per 400 square feet of usable
floor space area.
RECREATION FACILITIES
Indoor tennis or racquetball facility Six (6) for each court
plus
Spaces as required for each accessory
use such as a full service bar or restaurant
Amusement arcade ONE (1) for each game table
plus
ONE (1) for each amusement device
Municipal recreation centers FIVE (5) per one-thousand (1,000) square feet
of usable floor area,
plus
Any required spaces for outdoor courts, fields
and facilities,
or
ONE (1) per three (3) persons allowed within
the maximum occupancy load as established
by local, county, state fire, building or health
codes, whichever is greater
Athletic clubs, exercise establishments,
health studios, sauna baths, judo clubs and other
similar uses
ONE (1) for each three persons
allowed within the maximum occupancy load
as established by local, county, or state fire,
building or health codes
plus
ONE (1) space per employee, or one
space for each 1 ½ clothing lockers,
whichever is greater
Batting Cage THREE (3) per cage
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 113
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
2. Requirements for the Development, Maintenance and Layout of Parking Facilities
In all instances, except private residences, where off-street parking facilities are required or
where vehicular parking is provided as an accessory to the lawful use of property, such offstreet
parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained subject to the following
regulations:
(a) An application for site plan approval to construct a parking lot, shall be submitted to
the municipality, in compliance with Article 29, which shall issue a permit for said lot
after necessary reviews and the following mandatory provisions have been provided
for:
1) Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided to met approval of the Planning
Commission and the agency having jurisdiction of the road right-of-way.
Additionally, driveway location, spacing and design shall meet the standards
of Section 14.5, Access Management and Driveway Standards, and this
Ordinance.
2) The lots shall be graded and proper drainage facilities provided to dispose of
all surface water to meet the approval of the Building Department or
Municipal Engineer.
3) Such parking lot, including areas for ingress and egress, shall be constructed
in compliance with the standards as adopted by the Building Department.
This minimum specification shall not be construed as a substitute for
sufficient pavement thickness where traffic conditions and/or soil conditions
require more substantial pavement designs.
(b) Screening and land use buffers are provided as specified in Sections 14.7, 14.8 and
14.9 of this Ordinance.
(c) Such parking lots shall be used solely for parking private passenger vehicles for
periods of less then one (1) day and no commercial activity, such as washing,
greasing, sale or merchandise, repair work or servicing or any kind, shall be done
thereon.
(d) Lighting shall be provided and so arranged and designed as to reflect light away from
any residential use adjacent to the area and in an amount which shall be sufficient to
permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. Lighting shall further
comply with the standards of the municipality and this Ordinance for exterior lighting.
Parking lot lighting shall be extinguished no later than one-half (1/2) hour after the
closing of business transacting hours. This shall exclude minimum lighting levels
required for parking lot security. When such property is closed at night so that no
vehicles may enter or leave, then no lighting need be provided. Lighting fixtures shall
use high pressure sodium lamps or other lighting methods approved by the Planning
Commission. Where the proposed project is part of a larger project, the type of
lighting (high-pressure sodium, metal halide or approved equivalent) should be
consistent throughout the project.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 114
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
(e) Concrete curbs or other features as approved by the Planning Commission shall be
provided and maintained to protect against damage to adjoining properties and
planting areas.
(f) All parking spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes.
Maneuvering directly onto a street shall be prohibited.
(g) Ingress and egress to a parking lot located in an area zoned for nonresidential uses
shall not be across land zoned for single family residential uses.
(h) Plans for the development of any such parking lot must be approved by the Building
Department before construction is started.
(i) All parking areas shall be maintained so that the surface of the lot shall be safe and
clean. Cracks, pot holes or litter found on the lot shall be repaired and/or removed
after notification by the Building Inspector.
(j) All parking facilities and business establishments shall keep the exterior lot and
grounds free of debris and flying paper.
(k) No land shall be used for parking purposes until approved by the Building
Department; provided whenever the lot does not meet the specifications and/or
regulations set forth in this Article, the Building Department shall give notice to the
property owner to correct the same within a specified time, and if such corrections are
not made in accordance with such notice, he shall order the lot closed forthwith; and
such land or lot shall not be used for parking until corrections have been made and
approved by the Building Department.
(l) All parking lots shall be striped and maintained showing the individual parking bays.
Said stripes shall conform with the minimum layout requirement as found in
paragraph m. of this Section 14.4.2 and the approved layout plan.
(m) Plans for the layout and striping of off-street parking lots shall comply with the
following minimum requirements:
PARKING LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Parking
Pattern
(in degrees)
Maneuvering
Lane
Width
Parking
Space
Width
Parking
Space
Length
Total Width of One
Tier of Spaces Plus
Maneuvering Lane
Total Width of Two
Tiers of Spaces Plus
Maneuvering Lane
0 (parallel
parking) 12 ft. 9 ft. 23 ft. 21 ft. 30 ft.*
38 ft. **
30 to 53 12 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 33 ft. 54 ft.
54 to 74 15 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft. 6 in. 58 ft.
75 to 90 20 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft. 60 ft.
Footnotes: * One way aisle ** Two way aisle
(n) Stacking spaces shall be 10 feet wide by 20 feet long.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 115
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
3. Off-Street Loading and Unloading
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for
manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods, display, department store, wholesale store, market,
hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 116
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC 14.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT,
STANDARDS AND OFF-STREET
LOADING/UNLOADING
SEC 14.5 ACCESS MANAGEMENT & DRIVEWAY
STANDARDS
the same lot adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services in order to avoid
undue interferences with public use of the streets or alleys and parking areas. Such space,
unless otherwise adequately provided for in the determination of the Planning Commission as
provided below, shall include a ten (10) foot by fifty (50) foot loading space, with a fourteen
(14) foot height clearance and shall be provided according to the following table:
REQUIRED LOADING SPACES
Ground Floor Area (Square Feet) Loading and Unloading Spaces
1 - 2,000 None required
2,000 - 20,000 One (1) space
20,000 - 100,000 One (1) space plus one (1) space for each
20,000 square feet in excess of 20,000
square feet.
100,000 - 500,000 Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for
each
40,000 square feet in excess of 100,000
square feet
Over 500,000 Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) space for
each 80,000 square feet in excess of
500,000
The Planning Commission may modify the above dimensions and requirements upon making
the determination that another standard would be more appropriate because of the number or
type of deliveries experienced by a particular business or use as demonstrated on the site plan.
The location of loading and unloading areas shall be reviewed at the time of site plan
submission to ensure that adequate protection is afforded to adjacent districts, in particular,
residential districts from noise and other disruptive elements normally associated with such
facilities.
SEC. 14.5 ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND DRIVEWAY STANDARDS
1. Statement of Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide access standards which will facilitate through traffic
operations, ensure public safety along roadways, and protect the public investment in the street
system; while providing property owners with reasonable, through not always direct, access.
The standards are specifically designed for streets whose primary function is the movement of
through traffic, as opposed to local streets whose primary function is access to adjacent
properties.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 117
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.5 ACCESS MANAGEMENT & DRIVEWAY
STANDARDS
2. Application of Standards
(a) The standards of this section shall be applied to the Ann Arbor Road Corridor Zoning
District.
(b) The access standards contained herein shall be required in addition to, and where
permissible shall supersede, the requirements of the Michigan Department of
Transportation (MDOT).
(c) The standards contained in this Section 14.5 shall apply to all uses, except permitted
single-family and two-family dwelling units.
(d) For expansion and/or redevelopment of existing sites where the Planning Commission
determines that compliance with all standards of this section is unreasonable, the
standards shall be applied to the maximum extent possible. In such situation, suitable
alternatives which substantially achieve the purpose of this section may be accepted by
the Planning Commission, provided that the applicant demonstrates all of the following
apply:
1) Size of the parcel is insufficient to meet the dimensional standards.
2) The spacing of existing, adjacent driveways or environmental constraints
prohibit adherence to the access standards at a reasonable cost.
3) The use will generate less than five hundred (500) total vehicle trips per day or
less than seventy-five (75) total vehicle trips in the peak hour of travel on the
adjacent street, based on rates developed by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers.
4) There is no other reasonable means of access.
3. General Standards for Driveway Location
(a) Driveways shall be located so as to minimize interference with the free movement of
traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway
grade.
(b) Driveways, including the radii but not including right turn lanes, passing lanes and
tapers, shall be located entirely within the right-of-way frontage, unless otherwise
approved by the Michigan Department of Transportation and upon written certification
from the adjacent property owner agreeing to such encroachment.
4. Standards for the Number of Commercial Driveways
The number of commercial driveways shall be the minimum necessary to provide reasonable
access for regular traffic and emergency vehicles, while preserving traffic operations and safety
along the public roadway. A single means of direct or indirect access shall be provided for each
separately owned parcel. Where possible, this access shall be via a shared driveway or a service
drive. Where it is not possible to provide shared access, this access may be by a single
driveway. Additional driveways may be permitted for a property only under one of the
following:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 118
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.5 ACCESS MANAGEMENT & DRIVEWAY
STANDARDS
(a) One (1) additional driveway may be allowed for properties with a continuous frontage
of over five hundred (500) feet, and one (1) additional driveway for each additional five
hundred (500) feet of frontage, if the Planning Commission determines there are no
other reasonable access opportunities.
(b) Two (2) one-way driveways may be permitted along a frontage of at least one hundred
twenty five (125) feet, provided the driveways do not interfere with operations at other
driveways or along the street.
(c) The Planning Commission may determine addition driveways are justified due to the
amount of traffic generated by the use without compromising traffic operations along
the public street, based upon a traffic impact study submitted by the applicant.
5. Driveway Spacing Standards
(a) Between driveways. The minimum spacing between two commercial driveways on the
same side of the road shall be based upon posted speed limits along the parcel frontage.
The minimum spacings indicated below are measured from centerline to centerline.
DRIVEWAY SPACING STANDARDS
Posted Speed
Limit(MPH)
Minimum Driveway
Spacing (In Feet)
30 155
35 185
40 225
45+ 300
(b) For sites with insufficient street frontage to meet the above criterion, the Planning
Commission may require construction of the driveway along a side street, a shared
driveway with an adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line
farthest from the intersection or require a service/frontage road.
(c) Offsets. To reduce left-turn conflicts, new commercial driveways should be aligned
with driveways or streets on the opposite side of the roadway where possible. If
alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset a minimum of two hundred fifty
(250) feet along an arterial roadway and one hundred fifty (150) feet along other
roadways. Longer offsets may be required depending on the expected inbound left-turn
volumes of the driveways, or sight distance limitations.
(d) Spacing from intersections. Minimum spacing requirements between a proposed
commercial driveway and an intersection either adjacent or on the opposite side of the
street may be set on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Commission during site plan
review but in no instance shall be less than the distances listed below. The following
measurements are from the near edge of the proposed driveway, measured at the throat
perpendicular to the street, to the near lane edge of the intersecting street or pavement
edge for uncurbed sections.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 119
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.5 ACCESS MANAGEMENT & DRIVEWAY
STANDARDS
MINIMUM COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY SPACING FROM STREET
INTERSECTIONS
Location of Driveway Minimum Spacing for a
Full Movement Driveway
Minimum Spacing for a
Channelized Driveway
Restricting Left Turns
Along Ann Arbor Road from
intersection with another
Arterial (Sheldon, Main,
Lilley or Haggerty)
250 feet 250 feet
Along Ann Arbor Road from
intersection with a local street 175 feet 175 feet
For sites with insufficient street frontage to meet the above criterion, the Planning
Commission may require construction of the driveway along a side street, a shared
driveway with an adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line
farthest from the intersection or require a service/frontage road.
6. Standards for Shared Driveways and Service/Frontage Roads
The use of service roads, in conjunction with driveway spacing, is intended to preserve traffic
flow along major thoroughfares and minimize traffic conflicts, while retaining reasonable
access to the property. Where noted above, or where the Planning Commission determines that
reducing the number of access points may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and
safety while preserving the property owner's right to reasonable access, access from a side
street, a shared driveway or service road connecting two or more properties or uses may be
required. In particular, service drives, frontage roads or parking lot maneuvering lane
connection between lots or uses may be required in the following cases:
(a) Where the driveway spacing standards of this section can not be met.
(b) When the driveway could potentially interfere with traffic operations at an existing or
potential traffic signal location.
(c) The site is along a portion of Ann Arbor Road where there is congestion or a relatively
high number of accidents.
(d) The property frontage has limited sight distance.
(e) The fire department recommends a second means of emergency access.
7. Commercial Driveway Design
Commercial driveways shall be designed according to the standards of the MDOT and in
accordance with the following:
(a) For high traffic generators, or for commercial driveways along roadways experiencing or
expected to experience congestion, all as determined by the Planning Commission, two
(2) egress lanes may be required (one (1) being a separate left turn lane).
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 120
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.5 ACCESS MANAGEMENT & DRIVEWAY
STANDARDS
SEC 14.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
(b) Where a boulevard entrance is designed by the applicant or Planning Commission, a
fully curbed island shall separate the ingress and egress lanes. The radii forming the
edges on this island shall be designed to accommodate the largest vehicle that will
normally use the driveway. The minimum area of the island shall be one hundred eighty
(180) square feet and the minimum width ten (10) feet. The Planning Commission may
require landscaping on the section outside the public right-of-way. Such landscaping
shall be tolerant of roadway conditions. Direct alignment of boulevard entrances is
discouraged.
(c) All commercial driveways shall provide an unobstructed clear vision between a height of
three (3) feet and ten (10) feet in a triangular area measured ten (10) feet back from the
point of intersection of the driveway and the street right-of-way.
8. Modification of Standards for Special Situations
During site plan review the Planning Commission shall have the authority to modify the
standards of this Section 14.5 upon consideration of the following:
(a) The standards of this section would prevent reasonable access to the site.
(b) Access via a shared driveway or service/frontage road is not possible due to the presence
of existing buildings or topographic conditions.
(c) Roadway improvements (such as the addition of a traffic signal, a center turn lane or
bypass lane) will be made to improve overall traffic operations prior to project
completion, or occupancy of the building.
(d) The use involves the redesign of an existing development or a new use which will
generate less traffic than the previous use.
(e) The proposed location and design is supported by the MDOT as an acceptable design
under the existing site conditions. The Planning Commission may also request the
applicant provide a traffic impact study to support the requested access design.
(f) The modification shall be of the minimum amount necessary, but in no case shall spacing
of a full-access driveway be less than sixty (60) feet, measured centerline to centerline.
(g) Where there is a change in use or expansion at a site that does not comply with standards
herein, the Planning Commission shall determine the amount of upgrade needed in
consideration of the existing and expected traffic pattern and the capability to meet the
standards herein to the extent practical.
SEC. 14.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
1. Installation
(a) All landscaping shall be installed in a manner consistent with accepted planting
procedures and the approved landscape development plan. This shall include the
quantity, size, type and location of plantings proposed.
1) Major deviations as to quality, type, size and location of plant materials from the
original approved landscape development plan shall require submission and
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 121
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
approval in the same manner as provided in this article for the original
submission.
2) Minor revisions or deviations from the approved landscape development plan
may be permitted if approved by the Chief Building Official or municipality’s
designated expert. In reviewing such changes, the Chief Building Official shall
ensure that the changes do not constitute a whole-sale change of the landscape
development plan and are consistent with the spirit and intent of this article and
the previously approved development plan or site plan.
3) The planting operations and installation shall conform with the standards and
details adopted by the municipality.
(b) Installation of all landscaping, screen walls, etc. shown on the approved landscape plan
shall be made prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the proposed
development; subject to the following:
1) If it is determined that the installation of the landscape materials, screen walls,
etc., would be jeopardized by weather conditions, a temporary Certificate of
Occupancy may be issued provided that the developer submits to the Building
Department a cost estimate for the completion of the landscape plan and provides
to the municipality a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit
in the amount of the approved cost estimate.
2) In no case shall a Certificate of Occupancy or a temporary Certificate of
Occupancy be issued without the aforementioned submission or completion of
the installation. It shall be the responsibility of the Chief Building Official to
see that this policy is carried out. At the time of submission of the cash deposit,
certified check or irrevocable letter of credit, the Chief Building Official shall
indicate the completion date for the installation of all landscaping, screen walls,
etc.
3) Failure to comply with the completion date shall result in forfeiture of the deposit
to the municipality and shall not release the developer from the obligation for
installation and completion of the landscaping consistent with the approved plan.
The Chief Building Official may, however, grant one extension for 60 days after
the written request from the developer, provided circumstances warrant such an
extension.
2. Materials
(a) All plant material shall:
1) Conform to size and description set forth in the current edition of "American
Standard for Nursery Stock" sponsored by the American Association of
Nurseryman, Inc. and approved by the American National Standards Institute,
Inc. (ANSI)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 122
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
2) Be true to name in conformance to "Standardized Plant Names", established by
the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature, or other source
accepted by the municipality.
3) Be typical of its species or variety, have normal habit of growth, well-branched
and densely foliated when in leaf.
4) Be of sound health, vigorous and uniform in appearance with a well developed
root system and free from disease, insect pests, eggs or larvae.
5) Be freshly dug and nursery grown.
6) Be chosen according to soil, climatic conditions and environmental factors for
the proposed development.
(b) Trees shall have straight trunks with leaders intact, undamaged and uncut.
(c) The following trees, because of various problems, shall not be considered as being of a
desirable quality, and therefore shall, in most cases, not be permitted. This does not
preclude the use of existing trees if it can be shown that the removal of the tree would
result in a substantial loss of screening and/or buffering of adjacent lands, uses or public
rights-of-way.
1) Acer negundo - Box Elder
2) Ulmus varieties - Elm varieties
3) Aesculus varieties - Horse Chestnut
4) Populus varieties - Poplar Varieties
5) Salix varieties - Willow Varieties
6) Catalpa varieties - Catalpa Varieties
7) Ailanthus altissima - Tree of Heaven
8) Elaeagnus varieties – Olive varieties
9) Ginkgo biloba – Ginkgo (female only)
10) Fraxinus varieties – Ash varieties
(d) Lawn areas shall be planted in species of grass normally grown as permanent lawns in
southeast Michigan. Grass may be sodded or hydro-seeded and mulched, except that
solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. Sod or seed shall be
clean, free of weeds and noxious pests or disease.
(e) Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole or part shall be planted in such a manner as
to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete after one complete growing
season.
(f) Stone and synthetic materials shall not be used as a groundcover.
(g) Mulch. Planting beds shall present a finished appearance, with shredded hardwood bark
mulch or similar natural material at a minimum depth of three (3) inches. Mulch used
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 123
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
around trees and shrubs shall be a minimum of four (4) inches deep, and shall be pulled
one (1) inch away from three trunks.
Pine bark mulch shall be prohibited. An effective edge treatment must be provided to
minimize the migration of mulch.
(h) Hedges, where provided, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous,
unbroken, solid, visual screen within one full planting season. Where plants are to be
used as a hedge for screening purposes, the maximum spacing will have to be determined
by the plant proposed.
(i) Topsoil. A minimum four (4) inches of topsoil shall be provided for all lawn areas,
ground covers and planting beds.
(j) Artificial plant material shall be prohibited.
(k) Landscaping shall be located and maintained in a manner that minimizes conflicts with
overhead or underground utilities.
(l) Existing vegetation to be preserved shall be protected during construction through the
use of temporary fencing around the drip line.
(m) Where pavement and landscape areas interface, adequate measures shall be taken to
protect plants from vehicle encroachment.
(n) Tree sizes are determined using the following two definitions: Caliper shall be defined as
the diameter of the trunk of a tree at 18 inches above the ground. Diameter breast height
(D.B.H.) is the diameter in inches of a tree measured at four and one-half (4 ½) feet
above the existing grade.
(o) Minimum sizes of plant material.
1) Deciduous shade trees: Shall be species having a trunk which can be maintained
with over seven (7) foot clear stem. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum
caliper of three (3) to three and one half (3 ½) inches at the time of planting.
2) Deciduous small ornamental trees: Small ornamental trees shall be a minimum
caliper of two (2) inches at time of planting, or six (6) feet in height in clump
form.
3) Evergreen trees: Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height at
time of planting.
4) Deciduous Shrubs and Upright Evergreen Shrubs: Shall be a minimum of thirty
(30) inches in height at the time of planting.
5) Spreading Evergreen Shrubs and Dwarf Species Shrubs: Shall be a minimum of
18 to 24 inches in height or five (5) gallon container size at time of planting.
6) Vines: Vines shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in length after one
growing season and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to
meet buffer requirements.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 124
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
3. Variety of Plant Material Sizes at Installation
(a) To ensure adequate variety, and to avoid monotony and uniformity within the site, the
overall landscape plan shall comply with the following:
LANDSCAPING
MATERIALS
PERCENTAGE OF
TOTAL
MINIMUM SIZE AT
INSTALLATION
50% 3.0-3.5 inches caliper
30% 3.5-4.0 inches caliper
Deciduous Shade Trees
20% 4.0 inches caliper
50% 8.0 feet high
30% 10.0 feet high
Evergreen Trees
20% 12.0 feet high
Deciduous Ornamental 50% 6.0 feet high
Trees (Clump Form) 50% 8.0 feet high
50% 2.0 inches caliper
30% 2.5 inches caliper
Deciduous Ornamental
Trees
20% 3.0 inches caliper
Deciduous Shrubs 50% 30.0 inches high
50% 36.0 inches high
Upright Evergreen Shrubs 50% 30.0 inches high
50% 36.0 inches high
(b) Modifications. For specific landscape installations that require uniformity of plant size,
such as hedges, mass plantings of shrubs as ground cover, and plants used as ornamental
design accents, the Planning Commission may approve variations in the above
percentages. Also, for reforestation, wooded area infill, and other applications
determined appropriate by the Planning Commission, small caliper, park-grade trees may
be approved.
4. Maintenance
(a) The owner of the property shall be responsible for all maintenance of site
landscaping as follows:
1) Landscape maintenance procedures and frequencies to be followed shall be
specified on the landscape plan, along with the manner in which the
effectiveness, health and intended functions of the various landscape areas on
the site will be ensured.
2) Landscaping shall be kept in neat, orderly and healthy growing condition,
free from debris and refuse.
3) Pruning shall be minimal at the time of installation, only to remove dead or
diseased branches. Subsequent pruning shall assure proper maturation of
plants to achieve their approved purpose.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 125
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.6 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
SEC 14.7 CHARACTER OF LANDSCAPING,
SCREENING OR BUFFERING AREAS
4) All dead or diseased plant material shall be removed and replaced within six
(6) months after it dies or in the next planting season, whichever occurs first.
For purposes of this Section the planting season for deciduous plants shall be
between March 1 and June 1 and from October 1 until the prepared soil
becomes frozen. The planting season for evergreen plants shall be between
March 1 and June 1. Plant material installed to replace dead or diseased
material shall be as close as practical to the size of the material it is intended
to replace.
(b) The approved landscape plan shall be considered a permanent record and integral
part of the Site Plan Approval. Unless otherwise approved in accordance with the
aforementioned procedures, any revisions to, or removal of, plant materials will
place the parcel in non-conformity with the originally approved landscape plan and
shall be viewed as a violation of this Ordinance and the agreed upon terms of the
final site plan approval.
(c) The developer, at the time of submission of the Final Site Plan Approval, shall
demonstrate to the Planning Commission that adequate provisions have been made to
supply water to all landscape areas, including right-of-way. This shall be
accomplished by installation of an in-ground irrigation system to provide water for
the landscape areas where specified. The Commission shall have the authority to
waive or modify this requirement where it determines that such action would be in
accordance with the purpose and objectives of this Article.
A contract for maintenance of all landscape areas may be required by the Building
Department.
SEC. 14.7 CHARACTER OF LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, OR BUFFERING
AREAS
The selection and placement of plant materials shall be such that the general maintenance and
upkeep of the areas shall be low so that the success of the planting area can be anticipated
without placing undue hardship on the landowner or leasee.
(a) Where landscape treatment is required for screening purposes, the Planning
Commission shall insure that the plan proposed meets the following objectives:
1) The proposed plan effectively forms a complete visual and physical
separation between the two unlike land uses.
2) The proposed plan forms a transition zone between the unlike uses and
affords sufficient protection and is compatible with the character of the
adjacent residential area.
3) The proposed plan effectively reduces the adverse effects of the proposed
use, in particular, glare of headlights, lighting from parking areas, noise,
unsightly areas such as trash pickup points and contrasting views such as
parking areas and access drives.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 126
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING
AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
(b) When the landscape treatment is required as a buffer or green area, the Planning
Commission shall insure that the plan proposed meets the following objectives:
1) The proposed plan breaks up the area and the proposed plant material creates
a partial visual separation.
2) The proposed plan forms a transition zone which helps break up the visual
pattern of paving areas.
3) The proposed plan, through the use of plant material, creates a ground and
overhead area which consists of plant material which is more compatible
with the general character of the community and the residential districts.
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERING
REQUIREMENTS
1. Intent
The ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor District was established for the express purpose of
facilitating implementation of the Ann Arbor Road Corridor Design Plan. The Ann Arbor
Road Corridor Design Plan proposes the installation of specific landscaping and design
elements along the sides of Ann Arbor Road to act as a unifying streetscape. Consistency in
these streetscape features, materials and colors is essential to achieving the community’s
desired aesthetic character, economic enhancement and revitalization, and to support the
public health, safety and welfare.
Therefore, compliance with the following specific standards shall be required in conjunction
with any site development, redevelopment, alteration or expansion or re-occupancy of a
vacant building on an ARC site.
2. Ann Arbor Road Streetscape
(a) Ann Arbor Road streetscape as required herein shall be provided:
1) Along all Ann Arbor Road frontage, and
2) Along other streets within the boundaries of the ARC District, where such
streets have a street setback of fifty (50) feet or greater.
(b) Compliance with Prototype. Landscaping and streetscape improvements, shall be
provided including but not limited to the colored stamped concrete verge, street trees,
perennials, decorative fencing and brick piers, sidewalk and shrubs, and shall be
consistent with the standards and requirements of the Ann Arbor Road Streetscape
Prototype, “Ann Arbor Road Standard Design Details,” as adopted by the Planning
Commission and Plymouth Township DDA, dated October 16, 2003 and as may be
modified from time to time.
(c) Tree and Shrub Quantities. Deciduous shade trees shall be planted along the length
of the site frontage, in an amount equal to minimum of one (1) street tree per forty
(40) feet or fraction thereof of site frontage.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 127
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING
AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
(d) Design Flexibility. Within the intent of this Article, the Planning Commission may
approve alternatives it determines to be necessary to accommodate peculiar
circumstances or unforeseen problems, or to carry out the spirit, intent and purposes
of this Article. Further, where streetscape elements have been accomplished along
Ann Arbor Road by means of earlier development which substantially accomplish
the overall design objectives, the Planning Commission may modify the
requirements to reflect those earlier improvements.
3. Interface with Residential Use or District
(a) Where the Ann Arbor Road Corridor District, adjacent to any single family, two
family, or multi-family residential use or district, screening shall be provided
consistent with the objectives of this Article and shall be accomplished by a solid
wall with planting strip.
The solid wall shall be consistent with the standards and requirements of the Ann
Arbor Road Streetscape Prototype, “Ann Arbor Road Standard Design Details” as
adopted by the Planning Commission and the Plymouth Township DDA, dated
October 16, 2003, and as may be modified from time to time. The solid wall shall
be located at the property line with a planting strip six (6) to eight (8) feet wide
abutting the base and on the interior side of the wall. The planting strip shall be
planted with deciduous shade trees planted thirty-five (35) feet on center.
(b) In general, to achieve the appropriate master planned interface, the solid wall must be
provided consistent with the above standards. Within the context of these standards
and the ARC District, the Planning Commission may approve modifications it
determines necessary to address unusual circumstances.
4. Other Areas Requiring Screening and/or Buffering
(a) General Standards. Other site uses and functions which require screening and/or
buffering shall provide that screening and/or buffering based on the general standards
below. All screening or buffering provided shall be related, consistent and
compatible with the overall Ann Arbor Road design.
1) Solid Wall with Planting Strip: A solid wall shall be at least six (6) feet in
height, constructed of brick with a precast concrete cap. The solid wall shall
be located at the property line with a planting strip six (6) to eight (8) feet
wide abutting the base and on the interior side of the wall. The planting strip
shall be planted with deciduous shade trees with a minimum caliper of three
(3) to three and one half (3 ½) inches, and planted thirty-five (35) feet on
center.
2) Screening Mound or Berm: A screening mound or berm shall have a
minimum height of five (5) to six (6) feet with side slopes no steeper than 3:1
(three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical). The top of all berms shall
have a level horizontal area of at least three (3) feet in width.
The mound or berm shall be designed and graded in a manner which will
blend with existing topography, shall be graded smooth, and shall be
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 128
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING
AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
appropriately sodded, hydro-seeded, and mulched, or planted. Included as
part of the mound or berm shall be deciduous shade trees, small deciduous
ornamental trees, evergreen trees and/or shrubs planted along the berm area.
3) Evergreen Screen: Evergreen screens shall consist of evergreen trees with
year-round screening characteristics. Such trees shall be planted ten (10) to
fifteen (15) feet on center in two staggered rows ten (10) feet apart.
4) Other screening may be considered if it will provide, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, the same screening effect and the objectives specified
in Section 14.7, Character of Landscaping, Screening or Buffering Areas.
(b) Public Utilities.
1) Communication facilities (not including buildings), public utility transformer
stations, sub-stations, and gas regulator stations shall be screened.
The screen shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to insure that it
accomplishes the following objectives:
a) The proposed screen effectively separates the proposed facility from
the public right-of-way and the view of the general public.
b) The proposed screen effectively establishes some form of separation
and human scale between the proposed facility and abutting public
walks.
2) Screening shall meet the aforementioned objectives and shall be
accomplished by any one or a combination of the following:
a) Screening mound or berm.
b) Solid wall with planting strip.
c) Fence with evergreen screen.
(c) Service Areas Screening.
1) For purposes of this Section, service areas are outdoor areas intended to be
accessed by vehicles for purposes of supporting the principal use, including
loading/unloading, deliveries, waste disposal and utility services.
2) All service areas shall be screened or buffered in a manner as determined
necessary by the Planning Commission to meet the aforementioned
objectives of this Article and shall meet the following specific objectives:
a) Service areas shall be completely screened from adjacent residential
areas and screened as determined necessary by the Planning
Commission from view of the public right-of-way.
b) All screening shall be contained within the subject property.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 129
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING
AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
c) Service areas shall be screened by appropriate plant materials, and/or
architectural materials, such as a decorative wall, or a combination of
both, to meet the screening objectives of this Section.
(d) Parking Area Screening.
1) All off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas shall be screened or
buffered in a manner which meets the following specific objective:
a) Off-street parking and vehicular use areas shall be buffered in a
manner that separates the proposed facility from views as seen from
the public right-of-way and creates a scale more appropriate to the
individual and pedestrian.
b) All screening or buffer areas shall be contained within the subject
property.
2) Screening or buffering shall meet the aforementioned objectives of this
Section and Article and shall be accomplished by the following options:
a) A minimum ten (10) foot buffer area between the off-street parking
and/or vehicular use area and the street setback line to include one (1)
tree per forty (40) feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the
parking lot and plantings of at least ten (10) shrubs for every thirty
(30) feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of parking lot.
b) A minimum twenty (20) foot buffer area between the parking lot and
the street setback line to include a three (3) foot high berm not
exceeding 33 percent slope and a minimum of one (1) tree for every
40 feet and five (5) shrubs for every 30 feet or fraction thereof of
street frontage of the parking lot.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 130
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING
AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
c) A minimum six (6) foot buffer area between the parking lot and the
street setback line to include a thirty-six (36) inch high decorative
metal fence. The fencing shall contain four (4) inch spacing between
metal pickets with masonry pilasters spaced twenty-four (24) feet
apart, capped, and at least 16 to 21 inches wide. The minimum
landscaping required in conjunction with the metal fence is one (1)
tree for every 40 feet and five (5) shrubs for every 30 feet or fraction
thereof of street frontage of parking lot.
d) A minimum four (4) foot buffer area between the parking lot and the
street setback line to include a thirty-six (36) inch high masonry
screening wall in conjunction with the minimum landscaping
requirement of one (1) tree for every 40 feet or fraction thereof of
street frontage of the parking lot. The wall shall be constructed of
brick or masonry block and shall also include a concrete stone or
masonry cap providing one-half (½) inch reveal on both sides.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 131
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING
AND BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
Screening and buffering options are summarized in the following chart:
PARKING AREA SCREENING
Parking Area Screening
Options
Minimum Buffer
Dimensions (in feet)
Minimum
Landscaping
Requirements
(a) Landscape strip 10 1 tree per 40 feet
10 shrubs per 30 feet
(b) 3 foot high berm 20 1 tree per 40 feet
5 shrubs per 30 feet
(c) 3 foot high decorative
metal fence
6 1 tree per 40 feet
5 shrubs per 30 feet
(d) 3 foot high wall 4 1 tree per 40 feet
3) If the off-street parking and/or vehicle use area is located such that it requires Ann Arbor
Road streetscape in accordance with Section 14.8.2.(a) then Section 14.8.4.(d)2), above,
shall not apply.
SEC. 14.9 INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
1. Parking Lot Landscaping
(a) Off-street parking areas containing twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces shall provide
internal landscaping, other than that required in a buffer zone or along the street frontage,
protected by a raised standard or rolled concrete curb, in accordance with the following:
1) 25 through 100 spaces. 1 canopy/deciduous tree and 100 s.f. of landscaped area per
10 spaces, rounded upward.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 132
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.8 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND
BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
SEC 14.9 INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
2) 101 through 200 spaces. 1 canopy/deciduous tree and 100 s.f. of landscaped area
per 12 spaces, rounded upward.
3) 201 spaces or more. 1 canopy/deciduous tree and 100 s.f. of landscaped area per 15
spaces, rounded upward.
(b) The minimum size of a landscaped area shall be sixty (60) s.f. and at least six (6) feet in
width.
(c) Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass or other living ground cover.
(d) Required trees shall be located to minimize potential damage by vehicles.
(e) The internal landscaping shall be located and designed to direct traffic flow, particularly
near site entrances. Additional landscaping shall be dispersed through the lot to define
vehicular circulation, improve site aesthetics, provide shade, and installed such that,
when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns
on site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for safety of ingress or egress.
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
1. Purpose (as amended 10/25/07)
The purpose of these sign regulations is to provide for a unified approach to managing the
size, placement, number and appearance of signs within the Ann Arbor Road Corridor
District. Within the framework of the long term cooperative effort between the City and
Charter Township of Plymouth, this Section is intended to promote a balance between
business advertising needs, the aesthetic recommendations of the Ann Arbor Road Plan and
design guidelines, and the safety needs of the passing motorist.
It is further the intent of these sign regulations to regulate the construction, alteration, repair
and maintenance of all signs with respect to structural and fire safety, location, type of sign,
dimensions, height and method of illumination; to avoid visual clutter that obstructs vision or
misleads motorists; to protect the general public from damage and injury caused by
distractions, hazards or obstructions caused by poorly designed or improperly constructed
signage; to authorize the use of signs that are compatible with their surroundings, appropriate
to the use that displays them and legible under the circumstances in which they are seen; to
seek the removal of illegal signs; and to encourage the replacement or removal of
nonconforming signs that are incompatible with the purpose of this Article.
Further, the control of signs is necessary to prevent hazards to life and property and ensure
the continued attractiveness and protect property value within and adjacent to the Ann Arbor
Road Corridor. The Township has determined that, in general, the use of animated,
electronic changeable copy, flashing, or moving signs within the Ann Arbor Road Corridor
would lead to visual clutter, negatively impact traffic safety, and would be inconsistent with
the purposes of this Ordinance.
2. Definitions (as amended 10/25/07)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 133
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
(a) ABANDONED SIGN. A sign which, for ninety (90) consecutive days, fails to
direct a person to or advertise a bona fide business, tenant, owner, product or activity
conducted, or product available on the premises where such a sign is displayed.
(b) ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign, display, device, or portion of a sign which is
designed to provide apparent movement of any part of the sign. Animated signs also
include any portion of a sign that displays any artificial light which is not maintained
stationary or constant in intensity and/or color at all times when the sign is in use
through some other automated method resulting in the appearance of movement,
excluding Time-Temperature and Changeable Copy Signs
(Electronic).
(c) AWNING. A protective, roof like covering, attached to the face
of a building, as might be located over a window or door.
(d) AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN. A sign which is painted on,
printed on or attached flat against the surface of an awning or
canopy.
(e) BUSINESS CENTER. A group of two (2) or more contiguous
stores, businesses or offices, research facilities or industrial facilities developed as a
planned complex which collectively have a name different from the name of any
individual business, are under common ownership or management and share
common parking areas, pedestrian areas, are linked architecturally or otherwise
present the appearance of one (1) development site. Business centers may include
shopping centers and other multi-tenant buildings.
(f) CANOPY: A roof like architectural structure, typically attached
to the face of a building, and used to provide protection from the
elements (e.g., a canopy over a walkway or a gas station
canopy).
(g) CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL). A sign or part of
a sign that is designed so that the message can be changed or
rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign, by
physically replacing the characters, letters, or illustrations, but
not by electric or electronic means.
(h) CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (ELECTRONIC). A sign or part of a sign where
the individual numbers or letters can be changed electronically in display. Such
signs do not include animated signs or flashing or moving signs, as defined herein. A
sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic indication of the time and
temperature shall be considered a Time-Temperature Sign and not an electronic
changeable copy sign
(i) CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A ground or wall sign listing the name of the project
developers, contractors, engineers, or architects on the site being developed.
(j) DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A ground sign located at the entry and/or exit of a business
or commercial establishment which facilitates traffic flow.
(k) DIRECTIONAL SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A monument sign, the sole purpose of
which is to direct traffic to one or more commercial businesses which are located on
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 134
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
premises without frontage on or visual exposure to a major thoroughfare or collector
road. Such businesses shall front on a road or easement which is used for their
primary public ingress and egress from the major thoroughfare or collector road.
The purpose of the off-premises directional sign is to facilitate the flow of traffic,
encourage the concentration of commercial uses, discourage strip commercial
development, and not to advertise the business or products or services offered,
(however, directional signs may have the logo and/or name of the business to which
the sign relates).
(l) FESTOON SIGN. Banners, pennants, incandescent light bulbs, or other such
temporary features which are hung or strung overhead and which are not an integral,
physical part of the building or structure they are intended to serve.
(m) FLASHING OR MOVING SIGN. A sign or any part of a sign that has
intermittently reflecting lights, or signs which use intermittent, flashing, scintillating,
or varying intensity of illumination or color to create the appearance of movement, or
a sign that has any visible portions in motion, either constantly or at intervals,
whether caused by artificial or natural sources (See also ANIMATED SIGN).
(n) GROUND SIGN. A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, braces, or a
masonry base, or a monument placed in or upon the ground surface and not attached
to any building. Ground signs shall include monument and pole signs.
(o) INFLATABLE SIGN. A sign that is either expanded or its full dimensions are
supported by gases contained within the sign, or a sign part, at a pressure greater than
atmospheric pressure.
(p) ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign that is illuminated by a direct or indirect source of
light so shielded that no direct rays from it are visible from any public right-of-way
or from the abutting property.
(q) INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD. A structure containing a surfaced area
upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library,
community center or similar institutions, and the announcement of its services or
activities. Such signs shall exclude animated, flashing, moving or electronic
changeable copy signs, as defined herein.
(r) MARQUEE. A roof like structure, often bearing a sign,
projecting over an entrance to a theater.
(s) MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to a marquee
projecting from and supported by the building.
(t) MENU BOARD OR ORDER BOARD. A sign which is
intended to service patrons using a drive-thru facility.
(u) MONUMENT SIGN. A ground sign that is mounted on a
base which is in contact with or close to the ground. The
base of a monument sign shall be no less than 75% of the greatest horizontal
dimensions of the sign face, and the vertical separation between the lowest point of
the sign face and the highest point of the sign base shall be no greater than twelve
(12) inches.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 135
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
(v) MONUMENT SIGN BASE. The lower part of a monument sign which may appear
as a separate architectural feature, and serves as its ground support.
(w) NEON SIGN. A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon or another gas,
which glows when electric current is sent through it.
(x) NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully
erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and any
amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and
restrictions of this chapter.
(y) OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign which contains a message unrelated to a business
or profession conducted on the premises, or to a commodity, service or activity, not
sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
(z) PANEL SIGN. A sign whose letters and/or symbols are on a panel contained within
a frame, incorporated into a framed background which is an integral part of the sign.
This definition is intended to distinguish between panel signs and signs consisting of
individual freestanding letters and/or symbols.
(aa) PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN. A window sign that is constructed of materials
that do not require replacement on a frequent basis (in contrast to temporary paper
window signs).
(bb) POLE SIGN. A ground sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole(s) or other
support(s) with a clear space of eight (8) feet or more between the bottom of the sign
face and the grade.
(cc) POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign, relating to the election of a person or
persons to public office, or relating to a political party, or relating to a matters to be
voted upon in a local, state or national election or referendum.
(dd) PORTABLE SIGN. A freestanding sign not permanently anchored to secured to
either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to trailers, "A" frame and "T"
shaped sign structures, including those mounted on wheeled trailers.
(ee) PREMISES. Any lot or parcel of land, or building or site as otherwise used in this
ordinance; a unit of contiguous real property under common ownership.
(ff) PROJECTING WALL SIGN. A sign that is attached to and projects from a
building wall at an angle of up to ninety (90) degrees. A projecting wall sign does
not include canopy, awning, roof, marquee, or internally illuminated signs.
(gg) REAL ESTATE SIGN. A non-illuminated sign for the purpose of advertising or
promoting the sale, lease or rental of real estate. A PERMANENT LEASING SIGN
is a real estate sign that is erected for an indefinite period of time for the purpose of
offering space in a building for lease.
(hh) ROOF SIGN: A sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the
roof of any building, with its principal support on the roof structure. For purposes of
this section. any architectural element which is used on the wall of a structure to give
the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or other roof type, shall
be considered as a roof. A vertical plane or fascia which is attached to and located
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 136
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
below the angled plane of a sloped roof and which is less than 6 inches in height,
shall be considered part of the roof.
(ii) SERVICE CLUB ENTRANCE SIGN. A sign, usually located along the main
entrance ways to a community, displaying the names of service clubs and
organizations, their meeting schedule and usually including the service club symbol
or logo. The name of the community and a short salutary message may also be
included.
(jj) SIGN. Any name, identification, description, object, device, structure, display or
illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, service, event, organization, or business by any
means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images.
(kk) SIGNABLE AREA. The area in which a sign is to be located and which is used to
determine the permitted size of that sign, pursuant to Section 14.10.3.(d). The
signable area shall be a continuous surface or wall unobstructed by windows, doors,
other major architectural details, or a change in materials or color.
(ll) TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign regardless of size and materials that is not
permanently fastened to any structure, such as posts with permanent footings, and
that is limited in duration to thirty (30) days, except as otherwise specified.
Temporary signs include paper window signs, inflatable signs, banners and pennants.
(mm) TIME-TEMPERATURE SIGN. A sign, electronic or otherwise, which displays the
current time or outdoor temperature or both and which displays no material except
for the name of a business, product or service. For purposes of this ordinance, a
Time-Temperature sign shall be considered a public service.
(nn) UNDERHANGING SIGN. A sign that is located on the underside of a canopy or
walkway, typically for the benefit of pedestrians.
(oo) VEHICLE BUSINESS SIGN. A sign painted or attached to a vehicle which is
located on a premises primarily for purposes of advertising the business or product
for sale on the premises. Commercially licensed vehicles which are generally used
daily off-site are not included in this definition.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 137
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
(pp) WALL SIGN. A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall
and which does not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached, nor
more than twelve (12) inches there from, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the building wall. Included in the definition of wall signs are signs
mounted flat against the building fascia, provided the sign does not protrude beyond
any boundary of the fascia.
(qq) WINDOW SIGN. A temporary or permanent sign painted on or affixed to a window
surface, suspended so as to hang more or less parallel with the window surface, or
otherwise displayed in a manner intended to be viewed from outside the window.
3. General Standards
The following general standards shall apply to signs in the ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor
District:
(a) Measurement of Sign Area. The entire area within a rectangle or square enclosing the
extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character,
together with any frame, tower, or other material or color or internally illuminated
area forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign, shall be
included in the measurement. Such signs shall be deemed to be a single sign
whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggests a single
unit, notwithstanding any physical separation between parts.
)
Wher
e
(1) Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in
determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed
back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the
area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face, if the two faces are of
equal area, or as the area of the larger face, if the two faces are of unequal
area.
2) For ground signs, the area shall include the entire area of the sign upon which
copy, lettering, drawings or photographs could be placed, excluding
necessary uprights or supports. For monument signs, the base of a monument
sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance to
thirty (30) inches above grade. Streetscape and landscape features which in
the determination of the Planning Commission, are an integral part of the
sign design shall also be excluded from the calculation of sign area.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 138
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
3) For internally-illuminated awnings or canopies, the entire flat surface of the
awning or canopy upon which the message is written shall be included in the
sign area calculation. Signs mounted on awnings and canopies that are not
internally-illuminated shall be subject to the sign area standards of
measurements specified in paragraph (a), above.
4) For paper window signs, the area shall include the entire area of the paper.
Where adjacent paper window signs are within eight (8) inches of each other,
they shall be measured as a single sign.
(b) Sign Setback. Where it is specified that a sign must be setback a minimum or other
certain distance from property lines, street setback lines or public right-of-way lines,
such distance will be measured from the portion of the sign structure nearest to the
specified line. For purposes of this measurement, the property lines, street setback
lines and public right-of-way lines extend perpendicularly from the ground to
infinity.
(c) Sign Height. The height of a ground sign shall be the distance from the average level
of the ground or pavement directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign
structure, including any supportive or decorative appendages, without including any
berm landscaping, grading, or artificially or unnaturally constructed raised portion
of land at the point of measurement.
(d) Signable Area. Where it is specified that the size of a wall sign shall be based on the
signable area, that area shall be delineated as the area of a continuous surface or wall
unobstructed by windows, doors, other major architectural details, or a change in
materials or color. The signable area shall equal the area of (a x b) or (c x d) or (e x f)
in the following illustration, at the choice of the applicant. The signable area for
gable shall be determined by calculating the actual area of the surface or wall of the
gable, unobstructed by any architectural features.
(e) Underground Wiring. Where illumination is desired, underground wiring shall be
required for all signs not attached to a building.
(f) Sign Lettering. Any sign which is proposed to include letters, symbols, emblems or
other figures of similar character, which are larger than 16 inches, shall require
Planning Commission approval.
4. Prohibited Signs (as amended 10/25/07)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 139
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
Except as may be permitted by Section 28.43, the following signs shall be prohibited:
(a) Festoon signs.
(b) Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing of intermittent lights.
(c) Inflatable signs, except as provided in Section 28.43.
(d) Off-premises advertising signs.
(e) Portable signs.
(f) Roof signs. For the purpose of this section any architectural element which is used on
the wall of a structure to give the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard,
gambrel or other roof type shall be considered the same as a roof and sign shall
be permitted upon it. A vertical plane or fascia which is located below the angled
plane of a sloped roof or roof element and which is less than 6 inches in height, shall
be considered part of the roof and not used for signage.
(g) Vehicle business sign.
(h) Banners, pennants, spinners and streamers, except as provided in Section 14.10.5.(n)
and 14.10.6.(h) for banners.
(i) Any sign which revolves or has any scrolling messages, visible moving part, visible
revolving parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent
visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic pulsations, or by mechanical
means, including intermittent electrical pulsations, or by action of normal wind
currents.
(j) A sign or sign structure which is determined by the Building Official to be:
1) Structurally unsafe.
2) A hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation or abandonment.
3) Not kept in good repair.
4) Capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with
it.
(k) Any sign which by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing
the vision of drivers, or by obstructing, or detracting from the visibility of any traffic
sign or control device on public streets and roads.
(l) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window,
fire escape or other required exit.
(m) Signs which make use of such words as “Stop”, “Look”, “Danger”, or any other
words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse vehicular traffic.
(n) Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 140
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
(o) Any sign now or hereafter existing which advertises a product, service or business
no longer available at that location, including abandoned signs.
(p) Wall panel signs.
(q) Pole signs.
(r) Electronic changeable copy signs, except as otherwise permitted in this Section
14.10
(s) Animated signs.
(t) Awning and marquee signs.
(u) Canopy signs, except as permitted herein.
(v) Neon, LED, or string lights used to highlight architectural features, or to frame a
window or door, except as may be permitted under Section 28.8 Exterior Lighting.
(w) Neon Signs. Any sign, which requires a permit, that consists of glass tubing filled
with neon or another gas, may only be permitted subject to Planning Commission
approval.
(x) Any type of sign not expressly permitted.
5. Area, Height, Placement and Other Regulations for Permitted Signs (as amended
10/25/07)
(a) Ground signs.
1) Type: All ground signs shall be monument signs.
2) Location: Ground signs shall be located wholly within the boundaries of the
property to which the sign relates, exclusive of the street setback or road
right-of-way area.
3) Setback: On premises with street frontage less than 200 feet, ground signs
shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from the existing right-of-way or
street setback line, whichever is greater. On premises with a street frontage
of 200 feet or greater, ground signs shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet.
4) Sign Area:
a) On premises with street frontage less than 200 ft., the maximum sign
area shall be twenty five (25) square feet at the five (5) foot setback
line. However, the maximum sign area shall be permitted to increase
one (1) square foot for each additional foot of setback, to a maximum
area of forty two (42) square feet. The base of a monument sign shall
be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty
(30) inches above grade.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 141
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA
PREMISES WITH STREET FRONTAGE LESS THAN 200 FEET
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum
Height
Maximum Sign
Area
5 ft. 8 ft. 25 sq. ft.
6 ft. 8 ft. 26 sq. ft.
7 ft. 8 ft. 27 sq. ft.
8 ft. 8 ft. 28 sq. ft.
9 ft. 8 ft. 29 sq. ft.
10 ft. 8 ft. 30 sq. ft.
11 ft. 8 ft. 31 sq. ft.
12 ft. 8 ft. 32 sq. ft.
13 ft. 8 ft. 33 sq. ft.
14 ft. 8 ft. 34 sq. ft.
15 ft. 8 ft. 35 sq. ft.
16 ft. 8 ft. 36 sq. ft.
17 ft. 8 ft. 37 sq. ft.
18 ft. 8 ft. 38 sq. ft.
19 ft. 8 ft. 39 sq. ft.
20 ft. 8 ft. 40 sq. ft.
21 ft. 8 ft. 41 sq. ft.
22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
b) On premises with a street frontage of 200 feet or greater, the
maximum sign area shall be forty two (42) square feet at the ten (10)
foot setback line. However, the maximum sign area shall be
permitted to increase based upon each additional foot of setback, to a
maximum area of sixty (60) square feet in accordance with the
following chart. The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from
the calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty (30) inches above
grade.
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA
PREMISES WITH STREET FRONTAGE 200 FEET OR GREATER
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum
Height
Maximum Sign
Area
10 ft. 10 ft. 42 sq. ft.
11 ft. 10 ft. 43 sq. ft.
12 ft. 10 ft. 45 sq. ft.
13 ft. 10 ft. 46 sq. ft.
14 ft. 10 ft. 48 sq. ft.
15 ft. 10 ft. 49 sq. ft.
16 ft. 10 ft. 51 sq. ft.
17 ft. 10 ft. 52 sq. ft.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 142
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA
PREMISES WITH STREET FRONTAGE 200 FEET OR GREATER
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum
Height
Maximum Sign
Area
18 ft. 10 ft. 54 sq. ft.
19ft. 10 ft. 55 sq. ft.
20 ft. 10 ft. 57 sq. ft.
21 ft. 10 ft. 58 sq. ft.
22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
5) Height: The maximum height shall be as follows:
a) On premises with a street frontage less than 200 feet: eight (8) feet.
b) On premises with a street frontage of 200 feet or greater: ten (10)
feet.
6) Number: One (1) ground sign shall be permitted per street frontage on any
parcel. However, only one (1) sign shall be permitted on lots having frontage
on more than one street if a single sign can be located such that it is visible
from both streets. In multi-tenant buildings or shopping centers, the sign area
may be allocated for use by individual tenants.
7) Planning Commission Review; Design Standards: The Planning Commission
shall review all ground sign applications to assure compliance with the
design, placement and dimensional standards of this Article. The following
design standards shall apply:
a) Monument signs shall have a brick base or an approved equal subject
to Planning Commission approval. Signs shall harmonize with the
Ann Arbor Road Streetscape materials, and be incorporated into the
streetscape design. Brick shall be Wyandotte Modular consistent
with the standards and requirements of the Ann Arbor Road
Streetscape Prototype, “Ann Arbor Road Standard Design Details” as
adopted by the Planning Commission and the Plymouth Township
DDA, dated October 16, 2003, and as may be modified from time to
time.
b) The base of any ground sign shall be landscaped to create a year
round buffer for the sign.
c) Lettering style shall be clean and simple to assure readability and
shall be in harmony with the style of architecture of the building.
Generally, no more than two (2) different fonts shall be used on each
sign.
d) It is the intent of this Ordinance to require signs to be in harmony
with the building color and architecture, therefore generally, no
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 143
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
more than three (3) colors may be used per sign and one (1) uniform,
background color. Established company logos are exempt from color
limitations. An established company logo is one that has historically
been used as a symbol representing the company. For the purposes
of this regulation, black and white shall be considered colors.
e) Sign messages shall be located at least thirty (30) inches above the
ground to allow for snow accumulation and plant growth.
8) Changeable Copy Signs: Manual changeable copy monument signs shall be
permitted, subject to all of the requirements for ground signs specified
herein, and the following additional requirements:
a) Letter height shall not exceed four (4) inches, except that numbers up
to nine (9) inches in height may be permitted for fuel prices on gas
station signs.
b) Electronic changeable copy signs are not permitted.
c) The area of the changeable copy sign shall be counted toward the
maximum ground sign area.
d) The base of the sign shall be brick, with limestone capped brick piers
on the two ends of the sign. The changeable copy sign shall not
project above the brick piers by more than one-half of the message
area’s height.
(b) Wall signs.
1) The maximum wall sign area permitted shall be fifty (50) percent of the
signable area, up to a maximum wall sign area of forty-two (42) square feet.
On a premises with an Ann Arbor Road street frontage of 200 feet or greater,
permitted wall sign area shall be thirty (30) percent of the signable area, up to
a maximum of ninety (90) square feet (see Table). The wall sign must be
located within the signable area that is used to determine the maximum size
of that wall sign.
In the case of a wall sign which advertises more than one business or tenant,
the maximum permitted sign area shall be allocated between the business or
tenants.
MAXIMUM WALL SIGN AREA
INDIVIDUAL LETTERS
Signable Area Maximum Percent of
Signable Area
Maximum Wall
Sign Area
20 sq. ft. 50% 10 sq. ft.
30 sq. ft. 50% 15 sq. ft.
40 sq. ft. 50% 20 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft. 50% 25 sq. ft.
60 sq. ft. 50% 30 sq. ft.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 144
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
70 sq. ft. 50% 35 sq. ft.
80 sq. ft. 50% 40 sq. ft.
84 sq. ft. 50% 42 sq. ft.
Above 84 sq. ft. 42 sq .ft.
2) Maximum height of a wall sign shall be the height of the wall to which the
sign is attached, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
3) One (1) wall sign shall be permitted on each facade which has a separate
public means of ingress and egress. In the case of a building located on a
corner lot, one (1) additional wall sign shall be permitted on a separate façade
that faces a public or private street, regardless of a separate public means of
ingress and egress. In the case of a building with more than one tenant, such
as a shopping center or business center, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted
for the center itself and for each tenant that has its own separate door to the
outside to provide public access.
4) Tenants that occupy a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be
permitted to have one (1) sign on each facade of the building which has a
separate direct pedestrian access to that office or business establishment from
the outside. Where several tenants use a common entrance in a multi-tenant
structure, only one (1) wall sign shall be permitted, but the total sign area
should be allocated on an equal basis to all tenants.
5) Where separately owned businesses occupying a single building on a single
parcel of land (such as a multi-tenant building, business center or shopping
center) use individual wall signs, all such signs on the building or within the
center shall be of a common style, e.g., individual freestanding letters shall
be utilized with other signs composed of individual freestanding letters.
MAXIMUM WALL SIGN AREA
200 FT. OR GREATER FRONTAGE ON ANN ARBOR ROAD
Signable Maximum Percent of
Signable Area
Maximum Wall Sign
Area
50 sq. ft. 30% 15 sq. ft.
75 sq. ft. 30% 22.5 sq. ft.
100 sq. ft. 30% 30 sq. ft.
125 sq. ft. 30% 37.5 sq. ft.
150 sq. ft. 30% 45 sq. ft.
175 sq. ft. 30% 52.5 sq. ft.
200 sq. ft. 30% 60 sq. ft.
225 sq. ft. 30% 67.5 sq. ft.
250 sq. ft. 30% 75.0 sq. ft.
275 sq. ft. 30% 82.5 sq. ft.
300 sq. ft. 30% 90 sq. ft.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 145
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
Above 300 sq. ft. 90 sq. ft.
6) Manual Changeable Copy Wall Signs: Manual changeable copy wall signs
shall be permitted, subject to all of the requirements for wall signs specified
herein, and the following additional requirements:
a) Letter height shall not exceed four (4) inches.
b) Electronic changeable copy wall signs are prohibited.
c) The area of the changeable copy sign shall be counted toward the
maximum wall sign area.
7) Panel signs, other than a manual changeable copy sign, shall be prohibited,
except that the Planning Commission may permit panel signs upon finding
that other types of permitted signs would not be practical or feasible because
of the shape, character or configuration of the building or site and/or because
of the nature of the message being conveyed.
(c) Projecting signs. Instead of wall or marquee sign, a business may be permitted to
have a projecting sign, subject to the following specifications:
1) The maximum area of a projecting sign shall be twenty-five (25) square feet
on buildings located ten (10) feet or less from the street setback line. The
maximum area of a projecting sign shall be permitted to increase one (1)
square foot for each additional foot of setback greater than ten (10) feet to a
maximum area of forty-two (42) square feet.
2) One (1) projecting sign shall be permitted on each façade which has a
separate public means of ingress and egress.
3) Projecting signs shall be permitted only on zoning lots of fifty (50) feet or
more on the side on which the sign is to be mounted.
4) Projecting signs shall extend no higher than the height of the wall to which
the sign is attached and no higher than the window sill of second story
windows. Eight (8) feet, six (6) inches of clearance is required beneath
projecting signs.
5) Signs must project at a ninety (90) degree angle to the building surface to
which it is attached. Angular projection at the corner of a building is
prohibited.
6) Signs shall not project more than five (5) feet over the property line and more
than four (4) feet from the face of the building or one-third of the sidewalk
width, whichever is less.
7) Projecting signs shall be attached directly to a building through building
mounts or hung from a mast arm. These support members may also include
decorative appurtenances, but external bracing such as guy wires and metal
framework shall be prohibited.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 146
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
8) Projecting signs shall be spaced a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet apart.
9) Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated.
10) Projecting signs shall not contain changeable copy.
(d) Underhanging Signs. Where the roof structure of a building containing more than
one business is extended over a walkway along the outer edge of the building, one
pedestrian oriented underhanging sign may be permitted for each business in the
building provided:
1) All signs are of identical size, shape, lettering style, and color scheme.
2) All signs shall contain the name of the business only.
3) Maximum of six square feet.
(e) Window Signs
1) A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the glass surface of the window
segment in which the sign is located may be used for window signs.
2) No such signs shall be permitted in windows above the first story.
3) No more than two (2) temporary window signs shall be permitted.
(f) Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a corporation or award flags subject to the
following:
1) Such corporation or award flags shall be displayed on flag poles only.
Attachment to any other site fixture or feature shall be prohibited.
2) A maximum of two (2) such flags shall be permitted for each flag pole
provided.
3) The maximum number of flag poles permitted per individual business shall
be determined in accordance with the following table:
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FLAG POLES PERMITTED
Street Frontage in Feet Maximum Number of Flag
Poles Permitted
0-210 1
211-300 3
301 or greater 5
4) Placement of flag poles shall be in a manner and location subject to the
following requirements:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 147
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
a) The placement shall not impact adjacent properties, in particular,
those of a residential nature.
b) The height of flagpoles shall conform to the height restrictions of the
ARC District for buildings and structures. A flagpole shall be
deemed to a structure under all provisions of this Ordinance.
Flagpoles shall comply with the setback requirements for structures.
c) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or
impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
d) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination of said flags
shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular
or pedestrian traffic flow.
e) No flag shall be permitted to project into the road right-of-way at full
extension of the flag.
5) Flag poles shall not be located on the roof of a building.
(g) Directional Signs. Directional signs intended to assist vehicular traffic flow subject
to the following:
1) On-Premises Directional Signs:
a) Directional signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per side, nor
exceed two (2) sides.
b) Said signs may incorporate a corporation or business logo provided
the main theme of the sign shall be to facilitate vehicular traffic flow.
c) Placement shall be within the subject property; no such signs shall be
permitted within the street setback area or right-of-way.
d) The size, content, coloring, placement or manner of illumination shall
not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or
pedestrian traffic flow.
e) Directional ground signs shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet and
may be located one (1) at each driveway entrance.
f) No more than one (1) directional wall sign may be located at each
building entrance.
2) Off-Premises Directional Signs:
a) In order to encourage the clustering of businesses, and minimize strip
commercial development in accordance with the community Master
Plan, while still allowing necessary and reasonable identification of
businesses, facilitating the orderly flow of traffic, and avoiding
unnecessary proliferation and excessive size of signs on major
thoroughfares, off-premises directional signs may be permitted on a
limited basis.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 148
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
b) Off-premises directional signs are permitted only upon review and
approval of the Planning Commission, subject to compliance with the
following conditions:
1) Approval of the sign would serve to further the purposes
specified in Section 14.10.5 paragraph (h) 2) a) above.
2) The Planning Commission shall determine that the ARC
zoned business has no frontage or access from a major
thoroughfare; the premises of said business are within one
thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of said thoroughfare; said
business is not visible from a major thoroughfare, or is visible
from a major thoroughfare but with no clear indication of
how to access the business; and that adequate identification of
the business and direction of traffic to the business would not
be possible without an off-premises directional sign.
3) No off-premises directional sign shall be permitted without a
recorded easement or executed agreement that accomplishes
all of the following:
a) states that the owner of the parcel on which the sign
is to be placed grants permission for the offpremises
directional sign to be located on the
parcel,
b) stipulates which parcel(s) are entitled to use of the
off-premises directional sign, and
c) specifies how the sign is to be maintained and
establishes a means to assure that maintenance runs
with the life of the sign.
4) Off-premises directional signs shall be located only on land
zoned ARC and direct traffic to only land also zoned ARC.
5) Off-premises directional signs shall be permitted only at the
intersection of the access road for the business and a major
thoroughfare, and only one such sign permitted at each
intersection. The business access road may be a public street,
private road, or recorded access easement over which the
general public has ingress/egress rights. Said sign shall be in
reasonable proximity to the intersection to enable the sign to
direct traffic to the site of the business being identified by the
sign. If multiple businesses served by the same access road
require the use of the same intersection for an off-premises
business directional sign, the same sign shall be used.
6) Off-premises directional signs shall be located entirely on
private property and no closer than thirty (30) feet from the
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 149
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
centerline of the street, private road, or recorded access
easement which provides access to the business. The sign
shall be located a minimum of sixty (60) feet from the
centerline of the major thoroughfare. The sign location shall
comply with all other setback and visibility requirements of
the municipality.
PLANNED
NO. OF
USERS
ON SIGN
MAXIMUM
SIGN
AREA
MAXIMUM
SIGN
HEIGHT
1 12 sq. ft. 4.5 ft.
2 24 sq. ft. 6 ft.
3 or more 36 sq. ft. 8 ft.
7) Off-premises directional signs shall be monument signs with
the minimum dimensions necessary to accomplish the
purpose of directing traffic; however, in no case shall the sign
area and height exceed the following dimensions.
The base of an off-premises directional sign shall be excluded
from the calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty (30)
inches above grade.
8) Space shall be allocated on the sign to allow identification of
all businesses which use the same access road to use the offpremises
directional sign. A common font and no more than
one uniform background color shall be used. The sign shall
state only the name of the business(es) being identified. A
directional arrow may also be included on the sign. The sign
base shall be of brick or decorative masonry block.
9) The ground within five (5) feet of the base of the off-premises
directional sign shall be landscaped in low shrubbery, ground
cover or flowers, and said landscaping shall be maintained in
presentable condition.
10) Off-premises directional signs may be illuminated provided
the illumination creates no perceptible glare on private
property at a distance greater than ten (10) feet from the sign
and on public streets and the access drive.
c) The off-premises directional sign shall be maintained in a sound and
presentable condition. If a business that is identified on the offpremise
directional sign ceases to exist at its location or changes its
name, the appropriate deletion or change to the copy of the sign shall
be made within thirty (30) days of the change in the business.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 150
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
d) The existence of an off-premise directional sign shall not affect the
permission of any other signage that is otherwise permitted by the
municipality, including the following:
1) any other signage on the same parcel as the off-premises
directional sign.
2) any other signage on the same parcel as the business
identified by the off-premises directional sign.
(h) Menu and/or Order Board. Menu and/or order board for a drive-thru facility subject
to the following:
1) Said signs shall be located on the interior of the lot or parcel and shall not be
readable from the exterior of the lot.
2) Said signs shall be intended to service the public utilizing the drive-thru
facilities only.
3) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair
vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow in any manner.
4) The size, content, coloring or manner or illumination shall not constitute a
traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow.
5) The volume on order boards shall be maintained at the minimum level
necessary so that it is audible to users, so as to minimize extraneous noise
traveling off the site.
(i) Institutional Bulletin Boards. Institutional bulletin boards which comply with the
standards for ground signs, herein.
(j) Political Signs. Political signs subject to the following:
1) Political signs shall be removed within ten (10) days following that election
or event.
2) Said signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet from any
polling place entrance and shall obtain permission from the owner of the
property upon which the sign is to be located.
3) No political sign is to exceed eight (8) square feet in area, and in the case of a
ground-mounted political sign, the height may not exceed four and one-half
(4.5) feet.
(k) Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs subject to the following:
1) Temporary Real Estate Signs.
a) Such signs shall be limited to ground or wall signs only. One (1) sign
shall be permitted per parcel, regardless whether the property is
represented by more than one real estate agency.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 151
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
b) Maximum sign area shall not exceed forty-two (42) square feet.
c) Sign height shall not exceed four and one half (4.5) feet for a ground
sign or eight (8) feet for a wall sign.
d) Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which
the sign pertains.
e) The sign may be erected at the time the property is offered for sale
and shall be removed within ten (10) days of the sale or lease of the
property.
2) Permanent Leasing Signs: Permanent leasing signs erected for a period of
one (1) year or longer shall be subject to the following:
a) If the permanent leasing sign is a ground sign, it shall be a monument
sign and it shall be subject to the location, setback, and other
applicable standards in Section 14.10.5.(a).
b) If the permanent leasing sign is a wall sign, it shall be subject to the
applicable standards in Section 14.10.5.(b).
c) Permanent leasing signs shall comply with the maximum sign area
and sign height requirements that apply to temporary real estate
signs.
d) Such signs shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be replaced
or renovated when weathered or worn.
(l) Temporary Construction Signs. Temporary construction signs subject to the
following:
1) Such signs shall be limited to ground or wall signs. One (1) sign shall be
permitted per street frontage.
2) Total area of all temporary construction signs on a premises shall not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet.
3) Sign height shall not exceed four and one half (4.5) feet for a ground sign or
eight (8) feet for a wall sign.
4) Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign
pertains.
5) The sign shall not be erected prior to issuance of a building permit for the
proposed construction project and shall be removed upon issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
(m) Banners. Banners used to draw attention to vehicle dealerships are permitted,
provided that there is a maximum of one (1) banner on each pole, and provided that
they have no written message or corporate identity. Each banner shall not exceed a
maximum area of twenty (20) square feet.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 152
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
(n) Gasoline Service Station Signs. Because of the nature of the use, gasoline service
stations have sign needs that are unique from other uses. Gasoline service stations
are relatively high traffic facilities and typically located at very high traffic locations
and intersections. Such locations offer limited opportunity for driver indecision,
increasing the importance of good signage to communicate and avoid traffic
accidents. Further, the public expects to see automotive fuel prices posted in a
consistent and clear format. In keeping with the design and uniformity purposes of
the Ann Arbor Road District, gasoline service stations shall meet the design
requirements of the Ann Arbor Road District Architectural Standards. However, to
reflect the above-referenced character and needs of the use, signs for gasoline service
stations shall be permitted as follows:
1) One (1) monument sign, subject to the requirements of Section 14.10.5(a).
The Township understands that the traveling public expects to see updated,
clear, and precise automotive fuel pricing from off-site, and further, that fuel
prices change from day to day. If automotive fuel is not visible, or is
unavailable or removed, it would cause great inconvenience to residents of
the Township and the traveling public. Further, it is documented, by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and others, that it
is dangerous to distract a driver’s attention from the road. Clear and accurate
price numerals may help to reduce the number of traffic accidents associated
with the distraction of drivers from inaccurate and unclear gasoline pricing.
While in general electronic changeable copy signs are not consistent with the
established, planned and desired appearance of the Ann Arbor Road corridor,
for the limited application of automotive fuel pricing only, the Township
finds it acceptable. In consideration of these factors, changeable copy may be
permitted as part of a monument sign for a gasoline service station subject to
the following:
a) Only the individual fuel price numbers shall be permitted to be
changeable copy. The changeable copy portion of the sign shall be
manual or electronic.
b) The fuel price number height shall not exceed nine (9) inches.
c) The changeable copy portion of the sign shall consist of no more than
1 background color and 1 number color.
d) The base of any monument sign containing fuel price changeable
copy shall be brick, with limestone capped brick piers on the two
ends of the sign. The sign shall not project above the brick piers by
more than one-half of the message area’s height.
e) The area of the changeable copy shall be counted toward the
maximum sign area.
f) All electronic numbers used in the price of fuel shall be designed to
automatically adjust their brightness under varying light conditions to
maintain legibility, avoid glare, and eliminate visual impact on
nearby areas of the Township.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 153
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
2) One (1) wall sign, subject to the requirements of Section 14.10.5(b).
3) One (1) canopy sign per street frontage, (up to a maximum of two (2), and
limited to no more than one (1) sign on any canopy face, subject to the
following conditions:
a) The length of the canopy sign shall not exceed 10% of the length of
the canopy façade (See Canopy Sign Example diagram).
b) The sign shall be a minimum of six (6) inches from the top and six
(6) inches from the bottom of the canopy façade (See diagram).
Further, the sign shall have a minimum separation of six (6) inches
from any accent color on the fascia.
(Refer to Section 14.2.4(c) Ann Arbor Road Corridor Architectural Standards for detailed
standards on gas station canopies).
(o) Time-Temperature Signs. Time-Temperature signs subject to the following:
1) Time-Temperature signs incorporate information that is considered a public
service for the benefit of the traveling public, and therefore may be permitted
as part of the sign face of a ground sign.
2) The electronic numerals used in the Time and Temperature portion of the
sign shall not scroll, blink, move, flash, exit or enter from the outside area of
the copy or across the face of the sign or otherwise create a sense of
movement. The sign may display either the time or the temperature or both
together, but shall not switch between time and temperature. The electronic
numerals shall only change when there is an actual change in time or
temperature. In no case shall any such change occur in intervals of less than
one minute.
6. Permit Required; Permit Exemptions
Except as noted in this sub-section, all signs shall require a permit prior to installation. The
following signs shall be permitted without obtaining a sign permit:
Canopy Sign Example
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 154
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
(a) Street Address Signs (Required). For purposes of identification by emergency
personnel (fire, police, EMS) all businesses, offices, and industrial buildings shall
prominently display their street address on the front side (facing the street) of their
building or upon freestanding signs or building entranceways. All street addresses
shall be in Arabic numerals, each numeral shall be large enough to be easily read
from the street, but in no event smaller than four (4) inches high by two and one half
( 2 ½) inches wide, except for numeral one (1) which shall have a width in
proportion to its height. Street Address Signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet
in area. All numerals shall contrast with the surface they are applied to (light
numerals on dark surfaces, dark numerals on light surfaces) shall be mounted high
enough to be seen from the street, and shall not be obstructed from view by trees,
shrubs or any other material. If the business cannot be seen from the street, an
additional street address sign shall be displayed in an area where it can be seen from
the street. Street Address Signs shall not be counted in the maximum sign area or
maximum number of signs allowed on a parcel.
(b) Name plates identifying the occupant or address of a parcel of land not exceeding
two (2) square feet in area.
(c) Window signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area indicating the hours of
operation for a business, and whether a business is open or closed.
d) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any
masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
(e) For Sale signs attached to vehicles.
(f) Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational
institution or non-profit organization.
(g) Traffic safety and control signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body, or
other municipal signs such as the following: legal notices, railroad crossing, danger
and other emergency notices as may be approved by the municipality.
(h) Community special event signs including municipal streetscape banners approved by
the municipality.
(i) Private traffic control signs which conform to the requirements of the Michigan
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published in accord with Section 508 of
Public Acts 300 or 1949, as amended.
(j) Park and playground signs.
(k) Political signs, subject to the requirements in Section 14.10, sub-section 5.(k).
(l) Temporary real estate signs.
(m) Any sign required by the municipality to be posted.
(n) Community entrance and streetscape signs erected by the municipality.
7. Nonconforming Signs
(a) Any sign lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this amendment which does
not fully comply with all provisions shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 155
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
and may be permitted to remain as long as the sign is properly maintained and not
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(b) Continuance. Nonconforming signs shall not:
1) be expanded or changed to another nonconforming sign;
2) be relocated, or altered so as to prolong the life of the sign, or so as to change
the shape, size, type, placement, or design of the signs structural or basic
parts;
3) be enhanced with any new feature including the addition of illumination;
4) be repaired, except if such repair brings the sign into conformance with this
ordinance, if such repair involves any of the following:
a) expense which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the sign’s appraised
value as determined by the designated municipal official;
b) necessitates the replacement of both the sign frame and sign panels;
c) replacement of the signs primary support pole(s) or other support
structure;
d) for signs without framework for sign panels, requires replacement of
the sign panels;
5) be replaced;
6) be re-established after the activity, business, or use to which it related has
been discontinued for ninety (90) days or longer.
(c) Permitted Modification. The following modifications may be permitted:
1) a change solely in the wording of the copy; and routine repair to maintain the
sign in a safe and aesthetic condition exactly as it existed at the time of the
enactment of this amendment.
(d) Elimination of Nonconforming Signs. The municipality may acquire by purchase,
condemnation, or by other means any nonconforming sign which it deems necessary
to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the community’s residents.
8. Modification to Sign Requirements
In consideration of the overall site and building design, the Planning Commission may
modify the specific sign requirements outlined herein, provided that any such adjustment is
in keeping with the intent of this Section and the Ordinance in general. In determining
whether a modification is appropriate, the Planning Commission shall consider the
following:
(a) Topographic features or other unique features of the site that create conditions under
which strict application of the sign regulations would be impractical or infeasible.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 156
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
(b) Vehicular circulation, site access, and motorist visibility as related to sign placement
and traffic safety.
(c) Impact of proposed modifications on surrounding properties.
(d) The extent to which the public benefit intended by the sign regulations could be
better achieved with a sign that varies from the requirements specified herein.
9. Variances
The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have authority to vary the restrictions relating to
the ARC District upon finding that practical difficulties exist and that the strict application of
this Article would place the applicant at a substantial and significant disadvantage with
respect to other signs controlled by the Article. Comparisons to existing nonconforming
signs shall not be considered by the ZBA.
10. Noncommercial Message Permitted
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, a sign structure permitted in this
chapter as an on-premise advertising sign or an off-premises advertising sign may contain
a non-commercial message.
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide for coordination by which the City and the
Township may amend the text and/or district boundaries of the ARC, Ann Arbor Road
Corridor District. Amendments which would affect the continuity of the boundaries, or
uniformity of the District’s regulations by creating differences between the City and
Township lands, are contrary to the intent of the ARC District.
2. Amendment Requirements (as amended on 9/30/07)
The Township Board or the City Commission may, from time to time, on recommendation
from its respective Planning Commission, on its own initiative or on petition, amend,
supplement, modify or change the district boundaries or regulations herein, pursuant to the
authority of its respective enabling legislation (Michigan P.A., as amended). Amendments
to the text of the ARC District and amendments which would remove land from the ARC
District shall require approval of both the City Commission and Township Board.
Amendments which would add land to the ARC District shall require approval from only the
municipality having jurisdiction over that land.
END OF ARTICLE 14.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 1
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
ALL AMENDENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XIV (14)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 2
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XIV (14)
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
SEC. 14.10 SIGNS
1. Purpose
The purpose of these sign regulations is to provide for a unified approach to managing the
size, placement, number and appearance of signs within the Ann Arbor Road Corridor
District. Within the framework of the long term cooperative effort between the City and
Charter Township of Plymouth, this Section is intended to promote a balance between
business advertising needs, the aesthetic recommendations of the Ann Arbor Road Plan and
design guidelines, and the safety needs of the passing motorist.
2. Definitions
(a) Abandoned sign. A sign which, for ninety (90) consecutive days, fails to direct a
person to or advertise a bona fide business, tenant, owner, product or activity
conducted, or product available on the premises where such a sign is displayed.
(b) AWNING. A protective, rooflike covering,
attached to the face of a building, as might be
located over a window or door.
(c) Awning OR CANOPY sign. A sign which is
painted on, printed on or attached flat against
the surface of an awning or canopy.
(d) BUSINESS CENTER. A group of two (2) or
more contiguous stores, businesses or offices,
research facilities or industrial facilities developed as a planned complex which
collectively have a name different from the name of any individual business, are
under common ownership or management and share common parking areas,
pedestrian areas, are linked architecturally or otherwise present the appearance of
one (1) development site. Business centers may
include shopping centers and other multi-tenant
buildings.
(e) CANOPY: A rooflike architectural structure, typically
attached to the face of a building, and used to provide
protection from the elements (e.g., a canopy over a
walkway or a gas station canopy).
(f) CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign that is
designed so that the message can be changed, by
physically replacing letters or by electric or electronic means.
(g) CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A ground or wall sign listing the name of the project
developers, contractors, engineers, or architects on the site being developed.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 3
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
(h) DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A ground sign located at the entry and/or exit of a business
or commercial establishment which facilitates traffic flow.
(i) DIRECTIONAL SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A monument sign, the sole purpose of
which is to direct traffic to one or more commercial businesses which are located on
premises without frontage on or visual exposure to a major thoroughfare or collector
road. Such businesses shall front on a road or easement which is used for their
primary public ingress and egress from the major thoroughfare or collector road.
The purpose of the off-premises directional sign is to facilitate the flow of traffic,
encourage the concentration of commercial uses, discourage strip commercial
development, and not to advertise the business or products or services offered,
(however, directional signs may have the logo and/or name of the business to which
the sign relates).
(j) FESTOON SIGN. Banners, pennants, incandescent light bulbs, or other such
temporary features which are hung or strung overhead and which are not an integral,
physical part of the building or structure they are intended to serve.
(k) FLASHING, ANIMATED, OR MOVING SIGN. A sign that has intermittently
reflecting lights, or signs which use intermittent, flashing, scintillating, or varying
intensity of illumination to create the appearance of movement, or a sign that has any
visible portions in motion, either constantly or at intervals, whether caused by
artificial or natural sources.
(l) GROUND SIGN. A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, braces, or a
masonry base, or a monument placed in or upon the ground surface and not attached
to any building. Ground signs shall include monument and pole signs.
(m) INFLATABLE SIGN. A sign that is either expanded or its full dimensions are
supported by gases contained within the sign, or a sign part, at a pressure greater than
atmospheric pressure.
(n) ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign that is illuminated by a direct or indirect source of
light so shielded that no direct rays from it are visible from any public right-of-way
or from the abutting property.
(o) INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD. A structure containing a surfaced area
upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library,
community center or similar institutions, and the
announcement of its services or activities.
(p) MARQUEE: A rooflike structure, often bearing a sign,
projecting over an entrance to a theater.
(q) MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to a marquee
projecting from and supported by the building.
(r) MENU BOARD OR ORDER BOARD. A sign which is
intended to service patrons using a drive-thru facility.
(s) MONUMENT SIGN. A ground sign that is mounted on
a base which is in contact with or close to the ground. The base of a monument sign
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 4
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
shall be no less than 75% of the greatest horizontal dimensions of the sign face, and
the vertical separation between the lowest point of the sign face and the highest point
of the sign base shall be no greater than twelve (12) inches.
(t) MONUMENT SIGN BASE. The lower part of a monument sign which may appear
as a separate architectural feature, and serves as its ground support.
(u) NEON SIGN. A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon or another gas,
which glows when electric current is sent through it.
(v) NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully
erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and any
amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and
restrictions of this chapter.
(w) OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign which contains a message unrelated to a business
or profession conducted on the premises, or to a commodity, service or activity, not
sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
(x) PANEL SIGN. A sign whose letters and/or symbols are on a panel contained within
a frame, incorporated into a framed background which is an integral part of the sign.
This definition is intended to distinguish between panel signs and signs consisting of
individual freestanding letters and/or symbols.
(y) PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN. A window sign that is constructed of materials
that do not require replacement on a frequent basis (in contrast to temporary paper
window signs).
(z) POLE SIGN. A ground sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole(s) or other
support(s) with a clear space of eight (8) feet or more between the bottom of the sign
face and the grade.
(aa) POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign, relating to the election of a person or
persons to public office, or relating to a political party, or relating to a matters to be
voted upon in a local, state or national election or referendum.
(bb) PORTABLE SIGN. A freestanding sign not permanently anchored to secured to
either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to trailers, "A" frame and "T"
shaped sign structures, including those mounted on wheeled trailers.
(cc) PREMISES. Any lot or parcel of land, or building or site as otherwise used in this
ordinance; a unit of contiguous real property under common ownership.
(dd) PROJECTING WALL SIGN. A sign that is attached to and projects from a
building wall at an angle of up to ninety (90) degrees. A projecting wall sign does
not include canopy, awning, roof, marquee, or internally illuminated signs.
(ee) REAL ESTATE SIGN. A non-illuminated sign for the purpose of advertising or
promoting the sale, lease or rental of real estate. A PERMANENT LEASING SIGN
is a real estate sign that is erected for an indefinite period of time for the purpose of
offering space in a building for lease.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 5
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
(ff) ROOF SIGN: A sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the
roof of any building, with its principal support on the roof structure. For purposes of
this section. any architectural element which is used on the wall of a structure to give
the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or other roof type, shall
be considered as a roof. A vertical plane or fascia which is attached to and located
below the angled plane of a sloped roof and which is less than 6 inches in height,
shall be considered part of the roof.
(gg) SERVICE CLUB ENTRANCE SIGN. A sign, usually located along the main
entrance ways to a community, displaying the names of service clubs and
organizations, their meeting schedule and usually including the service club symbol
or logo. The name of the community and a short salutary message may also be
included.
(hh) SIGN. Any name, identification, description, object, device, structure, display or
illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, service, event, organization, or business by any
means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images.
(ii) SIGNABLE AREA. A continuous surface or wall unobstructed by windows, doors
and other major architectural details. The signable area shall equal the area of (a x b)
or (c x d) or (e x f) in the following illustration, at the choice of the applicant.
(jj) TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign regardless of size and materials that is not
permanently fastened to any structure, such as posts with permanent footings, and
that is limited in duration to thirty (30) days, except as otherwise specified.
Temporary signs include paper window signs, inflatable signs, banners and pennants.
(kk) TIME-TEMPERATURE SIGN. A sign which displays the current time or outdoor
temperature or both, and which displays no material except for the name of a
business, product or service.
(ll) UNDERHANGING SIGN. A sign that is located on the underside of a canopy or
walkway, typically for the benefit of pedestrians.
(mm) VEHICLE BUSINESS SIGN. A sign painted or attached to a vehicle which is
located on a premises primarily for purposes of advertising the business or product
for sale on the premises. Commercially licensed vehicles which are generally used
daily off-site are not included in this definition.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 6
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
(nn) WALL SIGN. A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall
and which does not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached, nor
more than twelve (12) inches therefrom, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the building wall. Included in the definition of wall signs are signs
mounted flat against the building fascia, provided the sign does not protrude beyond
any boundary of the fascia.
(oo) WINDOW SIGN. A temporary or permanent sign painted on or affixed to a window
surface, suspended so as to hang more or less parallel with the window surface, or
otherwise displayed in a manner intended to be viewed from outside the window.
3. General Standards
The following general standards shall apply to signs in the ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor
District:
(a) Measurement of Sign Area. The entire area within a rectangle or square enclosing the
extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character,
together with any frame, tower, or other material or color or internally illuminated
area forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign, shall be
included in the measurement. Such signs shall be deemed to be a single sign
whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggests a single
unit, notwithstanding any physical separation between parts.
1) Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in
determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed
back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the
area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face, if the two faces are of
equal area, or as the area of the larger face, if the two faces are of unequal
area.
2) For ground signs, the area shall include the entire area of the sign upon which
copy, lettering, drawings or photographs could be placed, excluding
necessary uprights or supports. For monument signs, the base of a monument
sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance to
thirty (30) inches above grade. Streetscape and landscape features which in
the determination of the Planning Commission, are an integral part of the
sign design shall also be excluded from the calculation of sign area.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 7
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
3) For internally-illuminated awnings or canopies, the entire flat surface of the
awning or canopy upon which the message is written shall be included in the
sign area calculation. Signs mounted on awnings and canopies that are not
internally-illuminated shall be subject to the sign area standards of
measurements specified in paragraph (a), above.
4) For paper window signs the area shall include, the entire area of the paper.
Where adjacent paper window signs are within eight (8) inches of each other,
they shall be measured as a single sign.
(b) Sign Setback. Where it is specified that a sign must be setback a minimum or other
certain distance from property lines, street setback lines or public right-of-way lines,
such distance will be measured from the portion of the sign structure nearest to the
specified line. For purposes of this measurement, the property lines, street setback
lines and public right-of-way lines extend perpendicularly from the ground to
infinity.
(c) Sign Height. The height of a ground sign shall be the distance from the average level
of the ground or pavement directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign
structure, including any supportive or decorative appendages, without including any
berm landscaping, grading, or artificially or unnaturally constructed raised portion of
land at the point of measurement.
(d) Underground Wiring. Where illumination is desired, underground wiring shall be
required for all signs not attached to a building.
(e) Sign Lettering. Any sign which is proposed to include letters, symbols, emblems or
other figures of similar character, which are larger than 16 inches, shall require
Planning Commission approval.
4. Prohibited Signs
Except as permitted by Section 28.43, the following signs shall be prohibited:
(a) Festoon signs.
(b) Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing of intermittent lights.
(c) Inflatable signs, except as provided in Section 28.43.
(d) Off-premises advertising signs.
(e) Portable signs.
(f) Roof signs. For the purpose of this section any architectural element which is used on
the wall of a structure to give the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard,
gambrel or other roof type shall be considered the same as a roof and no sign shall be
permitted upon it. A vertical plane or fascia which is located below the angled plane
of a sloped roof or roof element and which is less than 6 inches in height, shall be
considered part of the roof and not used for signage.
(g) Vehicle business sign.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 8
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
(h) Banners, pennants, spinners and streamers, except as provided in Section 14.10.5.(n)
and 14.10.6.(h) for banners.
(i) Any sign which revolves or has any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or
visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement
achieved by electrical, electronic pulsations, or by mechanical means, including
intermittent electrical pulsations, or by action of normal wind currents, except those
actions associated with street time/temperature signs.
(j) A sign or sign structure which is determined by the Building Official to be:
1) Structurally unsafe.
2) A hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation or abandonment.
3) Not kept in good repair.
4) Capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with
it.
(k) Any sign which by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing
the vision of drivers, or by obstructing, or detracting from the visibility of any traffic
sign or control device on public streets and roads.
(l) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire
escape or other required exit.
(m) Signs which make use of such words as “Stop”, “Look”, “Danger”, or any other
words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse vehicular traffic.
(n) Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
(o) Any sign now or hereafter existing which advertises a product, service or business no
longer available at that location, including abandoned signs.
(p) Wall panel signs.
(q) Pole signs.
(r) Electronic or electric changeable copy signs, except as permitted Time-Temperature
signs.
(s) Neon or string lights used to highlight architectural features, or to frame a window or
door, except as may be permitted under Section 28.8 Exterior Lighting.
(t) Any type of sign not expressly permitted.
5. Area, Height, Placement and Other Regulations for Permitted Signs
(a) Ground signs.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 9
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
1) Type: All ground signs shall be monument signs.
2) Location: Ground signs shall be located wholly within the boundaries of the
property to which the sign relates, exclusive of the street setback or road
right-of-way area.
3) Setback: On premises with street frontage less than 200 feet, ground signs
shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from the existing right-of-way or
street setback line, whichever is greater. On premises with a street frontage
of 200 feet or greater, ground signs shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet.
4) Sign Area:
a) On premises with street frontage less than 200 ft., the maximum sign
area shall be twenty five (25) square feet at the five (5) foot setback
line. However, the maximum sign area shall be permitted to increase
one (1) square foot for each additional foot of setback, to a maximum
area of forty two (42) square feet. The base of a monument sign shall
be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty
(30) inches above grade.
maximum sign area
premises with street frontage less than 200 feet
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum
Height
Maximum Sign
Area
5 ft. 8 ft. 25 sq. ft.
6 ft. 8 ft. 26 sq. ft.
7 ft. 8 ft. 27 sq. ft.
8 ft. 8 ft. 28 sq. ft.
9 ft. 8 ft. 29 sq. ft.
10 ft. 8 ft. 30 sq. ft.
11 ft. 8 ft. 31 sq. ft.
12 ft. 8 ft. 32 sq. ft.
13 ft. 8 ft. 33 sq. ft.
14 ft. 8 ft. 34 sq. ft.
15 ft. 8 ft. 35 sq. ft.
16 ft. 8 ft. 36 sq. ft.
17 ft. 8 ft. 37 sq. ft.
18 ft. 8 ft. 38 sq. ft.
19 ft. 8 ft. 39 sq. ft.
20 ft. 8 ft. 40 sq. ft.
21 ft. 8 ft. 41 sq. ft.
22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
(b) On premises with a street frontage of 200 feet or greater, the
maximum sign area shall forty two (42) square feet at the ten (10)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 10
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
foot setback line. However, the maximum sign area shall be
permitted to increase based upon each additional foot of setback, to a
maximum area of sixty (60) square feet in accordance with the
following chart. The base of a monument sign shall be excluded
from the calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty (30) inches
above grade.
MAXIMUM Sign Area
Premises with Street Frontage 200 Feet or Greater
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum
Height
Maximum Sign
Area
10 ft. 10 ft. 42 sq. ft.
11 ft. 10 ft. 43 sq. ft.
12 ft. 10 ft. 45 sq. ft.
13 ft. 10 ft. 46 sq. ft.
14 ft. 10 ft. 48 sq. ft.
15 ft. 10 ft. 49 sq. ft.
16 ft. 10 ft. 51 sq. ft.
17 ft. 10 ft. 52 sq. ft.
18 ft. 10 ft. 54 sq. ft.
19ft. 10 ft. 55 sq. ft.
20 ft. 10 ft. 57 sq. ft.
21 ft. 10 ft. 58 sq. ft.
22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
5) Height: The maximum height shall be as follows:
a) On premises with a street frontage less than 200 feet: eight (8) feet.
b) On premises with a street frontage of 200 feet or greater: ten (10)
feet.
6) Number: One (1) ground sign shall be permitted per street frontage on any
parcel. However, only one (1) sign shall be permitted on lots having
frontage on more than one street if a single sign can be located such
that it is visible from both streets. In multi-tenant buildings or
shopping centers, the sign area may be allocated for use by individual
tenants.
7) Planning Commission Review; Design Standards: The Planning Commission
shall review all ground sign applications to assure compliance with the
design, placement and dimensional standards of this Article. The following
design standards shall apply:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 11
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
a) Monument signs shall have a brick base or an approved equal subject
to Planning Commission approval. Signs shall harmonize with the
Ann Arbor Road Streetscape materials, and be incorporated into the
streetscape design. Brick shall be Wyandotte Modular consistent
with the standards and requirements of the Ann Arbor Road
Streetscape Prototype, “Ann Arbor Road Standard Design Details” as
adopted by the Planning Commission and the Plymouth Township
DDA, dated October 16, 2003, and as may be modified from time to
time.
b) The base of any ground sign shall be landscaped to create a year
round buffer for the sign.
c) Lettering style shall be clean and simple to assure readability and
shall be in harmony with the style of architecture of the building.
Generally, no more than two (2) different fonts shall be used on each
sign.
d) It is the intent of this Ordinance to require signs to be in harmony
with the building color and architecture, therefore generally, no more
than three (3) colors may be used per sign and one (1) uniform,
background color. Established company logos are exempt from color
limitations. An established company logo is one that has historically
been used as a symbol representing the company. For the purposes of
this regulation, black and white shall be considered colors.
e) Sign messages shall be located at least thirty (30) inches above the
ground to allow for snow accumulation and plant growth.
8) Changeable Copy Signs: Changeable copy ground monument signs shall be
permitted, subject to all of the requirements for ground signs specified herein,
and the following additional requirements:
a) Letter height shall not exceed four (4) inches,
b) Electronic or electric changeable copy signs are not permitted.
c) The area of the changeable copy sign shall be counted toward the
maximum ground sign area.
d) The base of the sign shall be brick, with limestone capped brick piers
on the two ends of the sign. The changeable copy sign shall not
project above the brick piers by more than one-half of the message
area’s height.
(b) Wall signs.
1) The maximum wall sign area permitted shall be fifty (50) percent of the
signable area letters, up to a maximum wall sign area of forty-two (42)
square feet. On a premises with an Ann Arbor Road street frontage of 200
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 12
Article 14: ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
Amendments
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
feet or greater, permitted wall sign area shall be thirty (30) percent of the
signable area, up to a maximum of ninety (90) square feet (see Table).
Maximum Wall Sign Area
200 FT. OR GREATER FRONTAGE ON ANN ARBOR ROAD
Signable Maximum Percent of Signable
Area
Maximum Wall Sign Area
50 sq. ft. 30% 15 sq. ft.
75 sq. ft. 30% 22.5 sq. ft.
100 sq. ft. 30% 30 sq. ft.
125 sq. ft. 30% 37.5 sq. ft.
150 sq. ft. 30% 45 sq. ft.
175 sq. ft. 30% 52.5 sq. ft.
200 sq. ft. 30% 60 sq. ft.
225 sq. ft. 30% 67.5 sq. ft.
250 sq. ft. 30% 75.0 sq. ft.
275 sq. ft. 30% 82.5 sq. ft.
300 sq. ft. 30% 90 sq. ft.
Above
300 sq. ft.
90 sq. ft.
Maximum Wall Sign Area
Individual Letters
Signable Area Maximum Percent of
Signable Area
Maximum Wall
Sign Area
20 sq. ft. 50% 10 sq. ft.
30 sq. ft. 50% 15 sq. ft.
40 sq. ft. 50% 20 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft. 50% 25 sq. ft.
60 sq. ft. 50% 30 sq. ft.
70 sq. ft. 50% 35 sq. ft.
80 sq. ft. 50% 40 sq. ft.
84 sq. ft. 50% 42 sq. ft.
Above 84 sq. ft. 42 sq .ft.
In the case of a wall sign which advertises mores than one business or tenant, the
maximum permitted sign area shall be allocated between the businesses or tenants.
2) Maximum height of a wall sign shall be the height of the wall to which the
sign is attached, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
3) One (1) wall sign shall be permitted on each facade which has a separate
public means of ingress and egress. In the case of a building with more than
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
one tenant, such as a shopping center or business center, one (1) wall sign
shall be permitted for the center itself and for each tenant that has its own
separate door to the outside to provide public access.
4) Tenants that occupy a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be
permitted to have one (1) sign on each facade of the building which has a
separate direct pedestrian access to that office or business establishment from
the outside. Where several tenants use a common entrance in a multi-tenant
structure, only one (1) wall sign shall be permitted, but the total sign area
should be allocated on an equal basis to all tenants.
5) Where separately owned businesses occupying a single building on a single
parcel of land (such as a multi-tenant building, business center or shopping
center) use individual wall signs, all such signs on the building or within the
center shall be of a common style, e.g., individual freestanding letters shall
be utilized with other signs composed of individual freestanding letters.
6) Panel signs shall be prohibited, except that the Planning Commission may
permit panel signs upon finding that other types of permitted signs would not
be practical or feasible because of the shape, character or configuration of the
building or site and/or because of the nature of the message being conveyed.
(c) Projecting signs. Instead of wall or marquee sign, a business may be permitted to
have a projecting sign, subject to the following specifications:
1) The maximum area of a projecting sign shall be twenty-five (25) square feet
on buildings located ten (10) feet or less from the street setback line. The
maximum area of a projecting sign shall be permitted to increase one (1)
square foot for each additional foot of setback greater than ten (10) feet to a
maximum area of forty-two (42) square feet.
2) One (1) projecting sign shall be permitted on each façade which has a
separate public means of ingress and egress.
3) Projecting signs shall be permitted only on zoning lots of fifty (50) feet or
more on the side on which the sign is to be mounted.
4) Projecting signs shall extend no higher than the height of the wall to which
the sign is attached and no higher than the window sill of second story
windows. Eight (8) feet, six (6) inches of clearance is required beneath
projecting signs.
5) Signs must project at a ninety (90) degree angle to the building surface to
which it is attached. Angular projection at the corner of a building is
prohibited.
6) Signs shall not project more than five (5) feet over the property line and
more than four (4) feet from the face of the building or one-third of the
sidewalk width, whichever is less.
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
7) Projecting signs shall be attached directly to a building through building
mounts or hung from a mast arm. These support members may also include
decorative appurtenances, but external bracing such as guy wires and metal
framework shall be prohibited.
8) Projecting signs shall be spaced a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet apart.
9) Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated.
10) Projecting signs shall not contain changeable copy.
(d) Underhanging Signs. Where the roof structure of a building containing more than
one business is extended over a walkway along the outer edge of the building, one
pedestrian oriented underhanging sign may be permitted for each business in the
building provided:
1) All signs are of identical size, shape, lettering style, and color scheme.
2) All signs shall contain the name of the business only
3) Maximum of six square feet.
(e) Awning, Canopy and Marquee Signs. Instead of a wall or projecting sign, a business
may be permitted to have an awning, canopy or marquee sign, subject to the
following specifications:
1) Marquee signs may be permitted, subject to the following:
a) Maximum area shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the signable
area up to a maximum of forty two (42) square feet. For this purpose,
signable area shall be calculated as if the marquee did not exist.
b) Placement. The display surface of the sign shall be attached flat
against, and not extending above, below or beyond, the vertical
surface of the marquee structure.
c) Maximum height - no portion of a marquee sign shall be higher than
the top of the marquee or the eave line of a building.
2) Awning and Canopy Signs. Awning and canopy signs may be permitted,
subject to the following:
a) The maximum area shall not exceed that which is permitted for a wall
sign, based on using the vertical face of the awning or canopy for
calculation of signable area.
b) Placement. Awning and canopy signs shall be affixed or attached flat
against a vertical surface of the awning or canopy, and shall not
extend above, below or beyond the vertical surface of the awning or
canopy.
c) Maximum height. No portion of an awning or canopy sign shall be
higher than the eave line of the building.
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
(f) Window Signs
3) A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the glass surface of the window
segment in which the sign is located may be used for window signs.
2) No such signs shall be permitted in windows above the first story.
3) No more than two (2) temporary window signs shall be permitted.
(g) Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a corporation or award flags subject to the
following:
1) Such corporation or award flags shall be displayed on flag poles only.
Attachment to any other site fixture or feature shall be prohibited.
2) A maximum of two (2) such flags shall be permitted for each flag pole
provided.
3) The maximum number of flag poles permitted per individual business shall
be determined in accordance with the following table:
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FLAG POLES PERMITTED
Street Frontage in Feet Maximum Number of Flag
Poles Permitted
0-210 1
211-300 3
301 or greater 5
4) Placement of flag poles shall be in a manner and location subject to the
following requirements:
a) The placement shall not impact adjacent properties, in particular,
those of a residential nature.
b) The height of flagpoles shall conform to the height restrictions of the
ARC District for buildings and structures. A flagpole shall be
deemed to a structure under all provisions of this Ordinance.
Flagpoles shall comply with the setback requirements for structures.
c) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or
impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
d) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination of said flags
shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular
or pedestrian traffic flow.
e) No flag shall be permitted to project into the road right-of-way at full
extension of the flag.
5) Flag poles shall not be located on the roof of a building.
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
(h) Directional Signs. Directional signs intended to assist vehicular traffic flow subject
to the following:
1) On-Premises Directional Signs:
a) Directional signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per side, nor
exceed two (2) sides.
b) Said signs may incorporate a corporation or business logo provided
the main theme of the sign shall be to facilitate vehicular traffic flow.
c) Placement shall be within the subject property; no such signs shall be
permitted within the street setback area or right-of-way.
d) The size, content, coloring, placement or manner of illumination shall
not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or
pedestrian traffic flow.
e) Directional ground signs shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet and
may be located one (1) at each driveway entrance.
f) No more than one (1) directional wall sign may be located at each
building entrance.
2) Off-Premises Directional Signs:
a) In order to encourage the clustering of businesses, and minimize strip
commercial development in accordance with the community Master
Plan, while still allowing necessary and reasonable identification of
businesses, facilitating the orderly flow of traffic, and avoiding
unnecessary proliferation and excessive size of signs on major
thoroughfares, off-premises directional signs may be permitted on a
limited basis.
b) Off-premises directional signs are permitted only upon review and
approval of the Planning Commission, subject to compliance with the
following conditions:
1) Approval of the sign would serve to further the purposes
specified in Section 14.10.5 paragraph (h) 2) a) above.
2) The Planning Commission shall determine that the ARC
zoned business has no frontage or access from a major
thoroughfare; the premises of said business are within one
thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of said thoroughfare; said
business is not visible from a major thoroughfare, or is visible
from a major thoroughfare but with no clear indication of
how to access the business; and that adequate identification of
the business and direction of traffic to the business would not
be possible without an off-premises directional sign.
3) No off-premises directional sign shall be permitted without a
recorded easement or executed agreement that accomplishes
all of the following:
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
a) states that the owner of the parcel on which the sign
is to be placed grants permission for the offpremises
directional sign to be located on the
parcel,
b) stipulates which parcel(s) are entitled to use of the
off-premises directional sign, and
c) specifies how the sign is to be maintained and
establishes a means to assure that maintenance runs
with the life of the sign.
4) Off-premises directional signs shall be located only on land
zoned ARC and direct traffic to only land also zoned ARC.
5) Off-premises directional signs shall be permitted only at the
intersection of the access road for the business and a major
thoroughfare, and only one such sign permitted at each
intersection. The business access road may be a public street,
private road, or recorded access easement over which the
general public has ingress/egress rights. Said sign shall be in
reasonable proximity to the intersection to enable the sign to
direct traffic to the site of the business being identified by the
sign. If multiple businesses served by the same access road
require the use of the same intersection for an off-premises
business directional sign, the same sign shall be used.
6) Off-premises directional signs shall be located entirely on
private property and no closer than thirty (30) feet from the
centerline of the street, private road, or recorded access
easement which provides access to the business. The sign
shall be located a minimum of sixty (60) feet from the
centerline of the major thoroughfare. The sign location shall
comply with all other setback and visibility requirements of
the municipality.
7) Off-premises directional signs shall be monument signs with
the minimum dimensions necessary to accomplish the
purpose of directing traffic; however, in no case shall the sign
area and height exceed the following dimensions.
PLANNED No.
of Users
On Sign
Maximum Sign
Area
Maximum Sign
Height
1 12 sq. ft. 4.5 ft.
2 24 sq. ft. 6 ft.
3 or more 36 sq. ft. 8 ft.
The base of an off-premises directional sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area
for a distance of thirty (30) inches above grade.
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
8) Space shall be allocated on the sign to allow identification of
all businesses which use the same access road to use the offpremises
directional sign. A common font and no more than
one uniform background color shall be used. The sign shall
state only the name of the business(es) being identified. A
directional arrow may also be included on the sign. The sign
base shall be of brick or decorative masonry block.
9) The ground within five (5) feet of the base of the off-premises
directional sign shall be landscaped in low shrubbery, ground
cover or flowers, and said landscaping shall be maintained in
presentable condition.
10) Off-premises directional signs may be illuminated provided
the illumination creates no perceptible glare on private
property at a distance greater than ten (10) feet from the sign
and on public streets and the access drive.
c) The off-premises directional sign shall be maintained in a sound and
presentable condition. If a business that is identified on the offpremise
directional sign ceases to exist at its location or changes its
name, the appropriate deletion or change to the copy of the sign shall
be made within thirty (30) days of the change in the business.
d) The existence of an off-premise directional sign shall not affect the
permission of any other signage that is otherwise permitted by the
municipality, including the following:
1) any other signage on the same parcel as the off-premises
directional sign.
2) any other signage on the same parcel as the business
identified by the off-premises directional sign.
(i) Menu and/or Order Board. Menu and/or order board for a drive-thru facility subject
to the following:
1) Said signs shall be located on the interior of the lot or parcel and shall not be
readable from the exterior of the lot.
2) Said signs shall be intended to service the public utilizing the drive-thru
facilities only.
3) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair
vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow in any manner.
4) The size, content, coloring or manner or illumination shall not constitute a
traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow.
5) The volume on order boards shall be maintained at the minimum level
necessary so that it is audible to users, so as to minimize extraneous noise
traveling off the site.
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
(j) Institutional Bulletin Boards. Institutional bulletin boards which comply with the
standards for ground signs, herein.
(k) Political Signs. Political signs subject to the following:
1) Political signs shall be removed within ten (10) days following that election
or event.
2) Said signs shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet from any
polling place entrance and shall obtain permission from the owner of the
property upon which the sign is to be located.
3) No political sign is to exceed eight (8) square feet in area, and in the case of a
ground-mounted political sign, the height may not exceed four and one-half
(4.5) feet.
(l) Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs subject to the following:
1) Temporary Real Estate Signs.
a) Such signs shall be limited to ground or wall signs only. One (1) sign
shall be permitted per parcel, regardless whether the property is
represented by more than one real estate agency.
b) Maximum sign area shall not exceed forty-two (42) square feet.
c) Sign height shall not exceed four and one half (4.5) feet for a ground
sign or eight (8) feet for a wall sign.
d) Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which
the sign pertains.
e) The sign may be erected at the time the property is offered for sale
and shall be removed within ten (10) days of the sale or lease of the
property.
2) Permanent Leasing Signs: Permanent leasing signs erected for a period of
one (1) year a longer shall be subject to the following:
a) If the permanent leasing sign is a ground sign, it shall be a monument
sign and it shall be subject to the location, setback, and other
applicable standards in Section 14.10.5.(a).
b) If the permanent leasing sign is a wall sign, it shall be subject to the
applicable standards in Section 14.10.5.(b).
c) Permanent leasing signs shall comply with the maximum sign area
and sign height requirements that apply to temporary real estate
signs.
d) Such signs shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be replaced
or renovated when weathered or worn.
(m) Temporary Construction Signs. Temporary construction signs subject to the
following:
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
3) Such signs shall be limited to ground or wall signs. One (1) sign shall be
permitted per street frontage.
4) Total area of all temporary construction signs on a premises shall not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet.
3) Sign height shall not exceed four and one half (4.5) feet for a ground sign or
eight (8) feet for a wall sign.
4) Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign
pertains.
5) The sign shall not be erected prior to issuance of a building permit for the
proposed construction project and shall be removed upon issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
(n) Banners. Banners used to draw attention to vehicle dealerships are permitted,
provided that there is a maximum of one (1) banner on each pole, and provided that
they have no written message or corporate identity. Each banner shall not exceed a
maximum area of twenty (20) square feet.
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 14.11 AMENDMENTS
2. Amendment Requirements
The Township Board or the City Commission may, from time to time, on recommendation
from its respective Planning Commission, on its own initiative or on petition, amend,
supplement, modify or change the district boundaries or regulations herein, pursuant to the
authority of its respective enabling legislation (Michigan P.A. 184 of 1943, as amended, or
Michigan P.A. 207 of 1921, as amended). Amendments to the text of the ARC District and
amendments which would remove land from the ARC District shall require approval of both
the City Commission and Township Board. Amendments which would add land to the ARC
District shall require approval from only the municipality having jurisdiction over that land.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 164
Article 15: VP Vehicular Parking District
Amendments:
ARTICLE XV
VP VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
Vehicular Parking Districts (VP) are designed to accommodate off-street parking for the
exclusive use of the patrons or employees of stores, shops or businesses in an adjoining
commercial and/or office service district.
SEC. 15.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. Off-street vehicular parking.
SEC. 15.2 SPECIAL LAND USES?
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance, and further subject to the requirements
listed below.
1. Park and ride lot or other facility of similar nature which, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, will not be detrimental to the orderly development of the adjacent district
and/or uses, in particular, single family residential neighborhoods.
2. Storage lots for new passenger vehicles as accessory to passenger vehicle dealerships,
subject to the following:
(a) The storage lot shall be used solely for the parking of new untagged passenger
vehicles. Vehicles stored shall be limited to automobiles, vans, mini-vans, pickup
trucks and similar vehicles. Commercial vehicles, semi-tractors and trailers,
and construction equipment shall not be permitted.
(b) No sales shall be conducted from the storage lot, nor shall customers be shown
vehicles on the lot.
(c) There shall? be no vehicle cleaning, washing, repair, or servicing of any kind
conducted on the storage lot. No loudspeaker shall be permitted on the site.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 15.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
? SEC. 15.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 165
Article 15: VP Vehicular Parking District
Amendments:
(d) The parking layout for stored vehicles may be permitted to vary from the
requirements of Article 24, Parking Requirements, subject to the approval of the
Township Fire Department and the Planning Commission.
(e) No vehicles shall be mounted on ramps or stored above ground level.
(f) The vehicle storage lot shall be completely screened from adjacent residential
uses or districts, and shall be buffered from view from public right-of-way
consistent with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring Screening
and/or Buffering.
1) If the vehicle storage lot serves a use located in the ARC or OS ARC
District, landscape improvements shall be provided along public rights-ofway
consistent with Sections 14.8 and 14.9 of this ordinance. ?
2) If the vehicle storage lot serves a use in a district other than ARC and OS
ARC, a four (4) foot brick or brick-formed masonry wall shall be provided
parallel to the front lot line. An ornamental fence may be permitted by the
Planning Commission. No wall or fence shall be located closer to the
street than the front setback line applicable to the premises immediately
adjacent along said street. The Planning Commission may approve
variation in this wall location based upon surrounding conditions,
however, in no instance shall such wall setback be no less than ten (10)
feet. Front lot line walls shall also be subject to an approved landscape
plan.
3) The front setback area between the front lot line and the four foot
screening wall or fence shall be landscaped to buffer the storage lot and
present an attractive appearance from the sidewalk and public right-ofway.
A minimum ten (10) foot wide planting strip shall be established
between the street setback line and any pavement or building. The
planting strip shall consist of a minimum of (1) deciduous shade tree for
every thirty (30) linear feet of frontage, and grass. Street trees shall also
be provided. The Planning Commission may approve alternatives as
consistent with the spirit and intent of this section.
(i) All lighting shall be focused downward and shielded so as not to glare off-site or
into the public right-of-way, or negatively impact residential uses.
(j) A plan for site security shall be submitted for review by the Planning
Commission.
(k) No off-site storage lot shall be used to satisfy off-street parking requirements for
the principal use.
(l) There shall be no loading or unloading of new vehicles at the storage lot. All
vehicles deliveries shall be made to the principal site and vehicles transferred to
the off-site storage lot. The vehicle travel/transfer route between the principal site
? SEC. 15.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 166
Article 15: VP Vehicular Parking District
Amendments:
and the storage lot shall not use residential streets, and shall be designated on the
site plan for approval by the Planning Commission.
(m) Signage shall be limited to one (1) name plate or address sign only, not to exceed
two (2) square feet in area.
SEC. 15.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal permitted uses and special land uses in the VP Vehicular Parking District shall
comply with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to the
following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking design and layout, as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance, unless
approved otherwise under Section 15.2.2 (e).
3. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers, as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
4. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
5. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance
6. The following specific requirements shall apply within a VP Vehicular Parking District:
(a) The parking area shall be used solely for parking private passenger vehicles, for
periods of less than one (1) day, unless otherwise approved pursuant to this
Article.
(b) Signs shall be limited to entrance and exit signs and one additional sign indicating
the conditions of use, unless otherwise permitted by this Article.
(c ) No building shall be erected on the premises except for a shelter for attendants
which shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall be set back a minimum
of twenty-five (25) feet from the street setback line.
(d) Control devices may be used to regulate the egress and ingress to the lot if
approved by the Planning Commission.
(e) Where a Vehicular Parking District is intended to serve as ingress/egress to an
adjacent Commercial and/or Office Service district, the Planning Commission,
prior to granting approval of the proposed layout, shall insure that the proposed
development will not be detrimental to the orderly development of the adjacent
districts and/or uses, in particular, single family residential neighborhoods.
(f) Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this ordinance.
? SEC. 15.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 167
Article 15: VP Vehicular Parking District
Amendments:
(g) All structures shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and shall
comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(h) Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this ordinance.
(i) Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards of Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
(j) The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles
(k) Fencing. All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the
Planning Commission as part of Site Plan Approval shall be permitted.
1) Protective or Security Fencing: Protective or security fencing shall be
considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous
land either in whole or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion
onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from
without or straying from within. The following shall govern the height,
location and placement of protective or security fencing: ?
a) Permit Required: In all Vehicular Parking Districts it shall be
unlawful for any person to build, repair or relocate a protective or
security fence without first having secured a fence permit therefore
from the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
b) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security
fence shall be four (4) feet.
c) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material
unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall
not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided
if such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of
not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material and shall have
an angle at the top of not less than 90 degrees. The fence shall
comply with the requirements of applicable requirements of the
State Construction Code enforced by the Township. Chain link or
“cyclone” fences shall be prohibited. Plastic or other type of strips
intertwined in fencing shall be prohibited.
d) Placement: No fence shall be built closer to the street than the
front setback line applicable to the, premises pursuant to the
Schedule of Regulations (Article 20), provided no fence shall be
built closer to the street than the established front building line
? ? SEC. 15.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 168
Article 15: VP Vehicular Parking District
Amendments:
along said street or in front of the building closest to the street on
the fenced premises. ?
(l) Front yard and street yard landscaping shall be provided consistent with the
requirements for the adjacent commercial or office district which the VP use
serves, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
SEC. 15.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 169
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
ARTICLE XVI
MR MID RISE DISTRICT
PURPOSE ?
A primary planning goal of Plymouth Township is to provide for a balance and variety of land
uses which are compatible with the community as a whole. It is further intended that uses of high
intensity shall be located in areas which will not adversely impact the orderly development of
existing or future residential areas. Commercial, office, research and testing and residential uses
in structures beyond two (2) and two and one-half (2½) stories in height are more urban in nature
and therefore could be in conflict with the general character of the Charter Township of
Plymouth if not properly regulated in regards to location, relationship to adjacent land uses and
development requirements. The MR Mid Rise District is designed to provide for locations for
these higher intensity uses, separately or in combination, in areas which will not impact the
existing or future land uses of adjacent properties and the community as a whole. It is intended
that the MR Mid Rise Zoning District shall be located in association with limited access highway
interchanges which provide public access to and from the limited access highway and the
community. As a condition of approval of locating a MR Mid Rise District and in addition to
other pertinent criteria, the Planning Commission and the Board of Trustees shall find the
proposed location for the MR Mid Rise District and its relationship to adjacent land uses, both
existing and proposed, meets all of the following criteria:
1. The subject property shall be a minimum of five (5) acres exclusive of all rights-of-way,
existing or proposed.
2. The subject property shall be located within a half mile (2,640 feet) from a limited access
highway interchange which provides access to and from the limited access highway and
the community. The distance shall be measured along a major thoroughfare road only,
and shall be the distance from the nearest on/off ramp and the nearest boundary of the
proposed MR District.
3. The proposed location shall be compatible with the orderly development of adjacent
properties. In no case shall a MR District directly abut properties zoned for single family
residential use unless the Future Land Use Plan designates the area for a high intensity
use which could be considered compatible with the proposed MR District.
4. The proposed location and relationship to adjacent properties shall be such that traffic to
and from the site will not be hazardous or adversely impact abutting properties or conflict
with the normal traffic flow of the general area. In reviewing this particular aspect the
Commission and the Board shall consider the following:
(a) Conflicts with convenient routes for pedestrian traffic, particularly of children.
(b) The relationship of the site to major thoroughfares and street intersections.
? PURPOSE
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 170
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
5. The intensity of uses associated with this District and such noises, vibrations, odors,
glare, reflection of light, heat or other external effects which would normally be a product
of this District shall be compatible with the existing land uses of the abutting properties
and shall be compatible with the future orderly development of same.
6. The foregoing requirements shall not apply to an existing completed development located
in an MR Zoning District and constructed in compliance with all applicable MR zoning
district requirements under pre-existing Plymouth Township Zoning Ordinance No. 47.
SEC. 16.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES ?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Office uses including the following:
(a) Medical and dental offices and clinics excluding veterinary clinics.
(b) Professional, administrative, executive and editorial offices.
(c) Real estate and other general business offices.
(d) Schools for arts and crafts, photography and studios for music or dancing.
2. Commercial uses including the following:
(a) Department stores and specialty shops.
(b) Retail establishments whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an
enclosed building; outdoor storage or display is prohibited.
(c) Hotels and motels subject to the following:
1) Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred and fifty (250) square
feet of floor area.
2) Kitchen or cooking facilities may be provided in new motels or hotels
upon demonstration by the applicant that the provisions of all applicable
fire prevention and building codes have been met. No existing motel units
shall be converted for use of cooking and/or kitchen facilities unless the
applicant can demonstrate compliance with all applicable fire prevention
and building codes and obtains a certificate of occupancy for each unit
being converted.
3) Where a unit is provided as a residence for the owner or the manager, the
following minimum floor area requirements shall be provided:
? SEC. 16.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 171
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
Number of
Bedrooms Minimum Floor Area
1 600 square feet
2 800 square feet
3 1,000 square feet
4 or more 1,200 square feet
3. Research, testing and training uses including the following:
(a) Industrial or scientific research, development and testing laboratories and offices.
(b) Food research and pharmaceutical research, development and testing laboratories
provided there is no emission of odors.
(c) Any use approved by the Planning Commission as being in keeping with the spirit
and intent of this District, such as those requiring academic or technical training
to perform its function.
(d) Housing facilities for academic or technical training shall comply with Article
16.1.2(c).
4. Mid Rise Residential uses subject to the following: ?
(a) The overall density of the particular area used for residential shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre. When an area is proposed which
combines uses to include residential units, the Planning Commission upon review
of the proposed site layout and the type of office, commercial and research use
used in combination with the residential units shall determine the area to be used
in computing residential densities.
(b) Private Outdoor Living Space: Private outdoor living space shall be provided for
each dwelling unit. Such space shall be located adjacent to the unit with direct
access from the unit, which it is intended to serve and the total area shall equal or
exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the unit.
(c) Outdoor Recreation Space: A minimum of one-tenth (0.1) square foot of land per
square foot of gross floor area for the total project shall be provided as common
recreation space for the residents. Recreation space shall include areas for passive
recreation such as outdoor sitting areas and active recreation such as lawn
bowling, shuffleboard and tennis courts. The Planning Commission shall review
the proposed location of said recreation areas to insure conformity with the
purpose and intent of the Ordinance. If developed in phases, the recreation space
improvements shall be completed in proportion to the gross floor area constructed
in each phase.
? SEC. 16.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 172
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
(d) Retail services associated with residential uses shall be located totally within the
principal building.
5. Housing for the elderly, including congregate elderly housing, subject to the conditions of
Section 28.65.
6. Public elementary, secondary, and intermediate schools (excluding child care centers
provided for in Section 28.64) provided such uses do not meet the definition of “largescale
institutional uses” and subject to the following requirements:
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
7. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 16.2 SPECIAL LAND USES ?
1. Municipal facilities including park and ride facilities, libraries and community buildings
which meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses”, subject to the conditions of
Section 28.63.
2. Nursing and convalescent homes subject to the following conditions. Homes that meet
the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” shall also be subject to the conditions of
Section 28.63.
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(b) Adequate outdoor open space, in a park-like setting, shall be provided for use by
the residents.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks
along adjacent public or private streets.
(d) All facilities shall be licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
? SEC. 16.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 173
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
3. Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto,
which meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses” or “large scale churches”
subject to the conditions of Section 28.63 and the following requirements:
(a) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height Exceptions.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may permit
secondary access from local streets.
(c) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located adjacent to a
single-family residential district or use, in accordance with Section 26.11,
Methods of Screening.
4. Charter and private schools, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools (excluding child care or day care facilities provided for in Section
28.64) offering courses in general education, subject to the following conditions. Public,
charter and private schools that meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses” shall
also be subject to the conditions specified in Sections 28.63.
(a) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets.
(b) All schools shall be licensed by the State of Michigan. Documentation shall be
provided by the proprietor relative to such facility’s ability to obtain a license.
5. Hospitals which meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses”, subject to the
following conditions and Section 28.63:
(a) Hospital sites shall have a minimum gross land area of ten (10) acres.
(b) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector road, as
classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow
secondary access from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation
shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through
the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the
site or traffic on nearby roads.
(c) Minimum setback distances for any two (2) story main or accessory building shall
be at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines or street setback lines.
The minimum setback distances shall be increased by twenty (20) feet for each
additional story, provided that no such building shall exceed six (6) stories in
height.?
(d) Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be screened from adjacent
residential districts and uses a six (6) foot decorative masonry wall or other
method deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
? SEC. 16.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 174
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
(e) Hospitals shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in conformance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
6. Mortuaries and funeral homes which meet the definition of “large-scale institutional
uses” subject to the following conditions and Section 28.63.
(a) Adequate off-street vehicle assembly space shall be provided for funeral
processions and similar activities. This space shall be required in addition to the
required off-street parking and loading areas, except where the Planning
Commission determines that an alternative arrangement will be adequate to serve
the proposed activities.
(b) All loading and unloading areas shall be adequately screened from adjacent
residential districts or uses and street rights-of-way.
(c) A caretaker’s residence may be permitted as an accessory use to a mortuary or
funeral home, provided that:
1) The caretaker’s residence shall be contained within the mortuary building
or may be provided in an accessory building after review and approval by
the Planning Commission.
2) The caretaker’s residence shall be constructed in accordance with the
adopted building code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom,
and kitchen facilities.
3) In no case shall the caretaker’s residence be used as a permanent singlefamily
dwelling by anyone other than a watchman or caretaker.
7. Child care centers, subject to the standards of Section 28.64.
SEC. 16.2A USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED (added 3/14/10)
No building of land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which would be in
violation of any State or Federal Law.
SEC. 16.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal permitted uses and uses subject to special conditions shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
1. Site Plan and Development Approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading and unloading as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
? SEC. 16.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 175
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
4. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
5. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance.
6. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
7. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
8. The following specific requirements shall apply within a MR Mid Rise District:
(a) Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The ratio of the floor area of a building to its lot area
shall be a minimum one (1) square foot of land area for each one (1) square foot
of floor space (FAR = 1.0).
(b) Underground utilities shall be provided as required by Section 28.10.
(c) Elevators shall be required to serve all floors. ?
(d) The minimum distance between buildings shall equal twenty (20) feet plus four
(4) feet for each story of the higher building plus two (2) feet for each ten (10)
feet of the length of the facing wall of the higher building, provided that no part of
a building shall be less than thirty-five (35) feet fro?m any other building.
(e) Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
(f) All structures shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and shall
comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(g) Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(h) Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards of Section 28.8, Exterior
Lighting.
(i) The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles.
(j) All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose exterior
is structurally altered, which faces a street or which is adjacent to property zoned
or used as residential shall be designed, treated and finished in a uniform manner
consistent with the exterior of the front of the building. All such buildings shall
comply with Section 28.14, Building Design Standards.
?
? ? SEC. 16.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 175a
Article 16: MR Mid Rise District
(k) Fencing. All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the
Planning Commission as part of site plan approval shall be permitted. No other
fencing shall be permitted unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission. ?
(l) Street trees shall be required.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 176
Article 17: OR Office Research District
ARTICLE XVII
OR OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
The purpose of the Office Research District (OR District) is to provide a high quality
environment conducive to the development of offices, research and development functions, and
high tech uses. The uses allowed in this district are more limited than in the TAR district, and the
restrictions of this district are based on operating characteristics and land use impacts rather than
type of service or product. The OR District will permit those uses of the TAR District that are
office-oriented and more compatible with nearby residential properties and uses. Manufacturing,
assembly, warehousing/distribution centers, and truck transfer station operations are not
permitted in the OR District.
The OR District requires a campus-type environment with generous landscaping and attractive
buildings. The OR District must be located so that uses will be developed without creating
negative impacts on adjacent uses from characteristics and conditions such as heavy truck traffic,
noise, glare or emissions which are commonly found in a traditional Industrial District. Suitable
areas for the OR District are often visible from freeways and high image locations.
SEC. 17.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES ?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Offices, laboratories, and other facilities for basic and applied research, and
experimentation, development testing, product design, technology development,
consulting, and business development.
2. Business schools and indoor training facilities.
3. Office buildings, providing for such uses as corporate offices in accordance with the
purpose of this district, including any of the following occupations: executive,
administrative, professional, accounting, engineering, planning, architecture, drafting,
writing, clerical, stenographic, and sales provided that no display shall be visible from the
exterior of the building, and that such sales shall be clearly incidental to the principal
office use in the determination of the Planning Commission.
4. Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic
data processing equipment.
5. Any use charged with the principal function of research in the area of photonics/optics,
robotics, and electronic equipment.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 17.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 177
Article 17: OR Office Research District
6. A high technology service use, which has as its principal function the providing of
services including computer information transfer, communication, distribution,
management, processing, administrative, laboratory, experimental, developmental,
technical, or testing services.
7. Research, development, engineering, design, prototyping, and accessory office, sales and
administrative uses.
8. Medical offices, clinics, research, and medical supply facilities, including auxiliary or
accessory laboratories. Such uses may include sports medicine, medical wellness,
physical therapy, physical medicine, and similar facilities. Substance abuse (drugs and
alcohol) treatment facilities, and facilities principally for emergency services or that
provide 24 hour services shall not be permitted.
9. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
excluding outdoor storage. Accessory storage of products and materials necessary to the
permitted operation shall be provided within the completely enclosed building, to the
extent required by the Planning Commission.
10. Child care centers, recreation and fitness facilities, cafeterias, health care services,
financial services and similar uses may be permitted as accessory uses if such use is
located wholly within the building of the principal use which it serves (except for outdoor
recreation and fitness facilities), is conducted primarily for the convenience of the
employees of the principal use, and has no exterior advertising or displays.
SEC 17.2 SPECIAL LAND USES?
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7, Special Land Uses, and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Motels and hotels.
2. Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities, such as fire stations.
3. Banks, credit unions, and other similar financial services.
4. Retail uses which, in the determination of the Planning Commission, are incidental and
complementary to the principal office research uses, including business services such as
printing, copying, and mailing.
5. Restaurants or other places serving food and/or beverages without open front windows,
drive-ins or drive through service.
6. Child care centers unlimited by size and as licensed by the State of Michigan, subject to
the standards of Section 28.64.
? SEC. 17.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 178
Article 17: OR Office Research District
7. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet, irrespective of the yard requirements of the district in which it is located, and
two (2) side yard and a rear yard setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width
each.
8. Limited outdoor storage which, in the determination of the Planning Commission, is
incidental and complementary to the principal permitted use and cannot be
accommodated within a structure.
9. Uses otherwise permitted in this district that involve, as an accessory function only, the
receipt of finished goods in an unassembled state requiring minor reassembly on site
prior to use.
10. Any other use of the same nature or class of uses listed in this district as either a principal
permitted use or a special land use which the Planning Commission finds not to be
inconsistent with the purpose of this Article, and which will not impair the present or
potential use of adjacent properties. When considering other uses, the Planning
Commission shall review the nature, functions and proposed location of the use to ensure
that it will not conflict with other permitted uses in the district.
SEC 17.2A USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED (added 3/14/10)
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which would be in
violation of any State or Federal Law.
SEC. 17.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal permitted uses and special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance, except that
uses in the OR District shall provide one parking space for every two hundred (200)
square feet of useable floor area, useable floor area being defined as eighty (80) percent
of gross square footage. The Planning Commission may modify the above requirement,
if in its sole determination, the use does not require the number of parking spaces
specified above.
3. Off-street loading and unloading for all uses as determined necessary by the Planning
Commission.
4. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses unless otherwise specified shall
be in accordance with Article 26 of this Ordinance.
5. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance, except that pole signs shall
not be permitted.
? SEC. 17.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 179
Article 17: OR Office Research District
6. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
7. Height, area, lot coverage, and yard regulations as specified in Article 20, Schedule of
Regulations of this Ordinance.
8. All uses, including storage of products and materials used and excluding surface parking,
recreational activities, and utilities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building, unless approved as a special land use.
9. No use shall be permitted which is either prohibited under Section 18.3 of this Ordinance
or is a similar use which may create unusual danger for fire, explosion, toxic or noxious
matter, radiation or which may cause noxious, offensive, unhealthful or harmful odors,
fumes, dust, smoke, light, waste, noise or vibration.
10. The following specific requirements shall apply within the OR Office Research District:
(a) Environmental Performance Requirements. Compliance with Section 28.5,
Environmental Performance Requirements, is required for all uses. In no case
shall such impacts be detectable from districts in which residential occupancy is
permitted within the Charter Township of Plymouth. ?
?(b) Landscaping and Screening.
1) Overall: The overall landscaping plan shall enhance the site and create a
campus-like appearance and shall be in compliance with Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
2) Setback Areas: All setback areas shall be landscaped with lawns, trees,
shrubs and/or other plants, and may include reflecting pools, retaining
walls and other landscape construction harmonious with the overall
landscape scheme.
3) Parking and Loading Location and Screening: Parking and loading areas
may be located in side and rear setback areas, but shall be prohibited from
the front yard setback. On a corner lot, one of the front yards may be
designated a side yard. Parking provided in a side or rear yard setback
shall be provided with a twenty (20) foot greenbelt or acceptable substitute
in the determination of the Planning Commission, located between the
parking area and site boundary. All parking and loading areas shall be
screened in compliance with Article 26 of this Ordinance.?
4) Interior Parking Lot Landscaping: A minimum of fifteen (15) square feet
of interior parking lot landscaped area per parking space must be provided.
Interior parking lot landscaping shall also meet the requirements of Article
26 of this Ordinance.
?
?
? ? SEC. 17.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 180
Article 17: OR Office Research District
(c) Fencing and Screen Walls. Fences and screen walls shall require review and
approval by the Planning Commission as a part of the site plan approval. In an
OR Office Research District protective or security fencing shall be considered a
structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous land, either in whole
or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion onto or across a lot of record
or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from without or straying from within. The
following shall govern the height, location and placement of protective or security
fencing:
1) Permit Required: In the OR District it shall be unlawful for any person to
build, repair or relocate a protective or security fence without first having
secured a fence permit therefore from the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement.
2) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security fence
shall be six (6) feet.
3) Material: Fences will not be constructed of old or used material unless
such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of the Department
of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall not be made of or contain
barbed wire, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or pointed
projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of pickets,
the pickets shall be made of not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch
material and shall have an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90)
degrees. Any chain link fences must be black and vinyl-coated. The fence
shall comply with the requirements of applicable requirements of the State
Construction Code enforced by the Township. Plastic or other type of
strips intertwined in cyclone fencing shall be prohibited.
4) Placement: Except as part of a special land use approval, no fence shall be
built closer to the street than the front setback line applicable to the
premises pursuant to the Article 20, Schedule of Regulations, provided no
fence shall be built closer to the street than the established front building
line along side streets or in front of the building closest to the streets on
the fenced premises.
(d) Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this ordinance. ?
(e) Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(f) Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8,
Exterior Lighting.
(g) The method of trash removal shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles.
(h) Building Design Standards.
? SEC. 17.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 181
Article 17: OR Office Research District
1) All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose
exterior is structurally altered, which faces a street or which is adjacent to
property zoned or used as residential shall be designed, treated and
finished in a uniform manner consistent with the exterior of the front of
the building. Standard concrete or block shall be prohibited. All such
buildings shall comply with Section 28.14, Building Design Standards.
2) Site layouts and building orientations shall be designed to minimize
adverse visual impacts of developments on residential uses in the area.?
3) Building elevations and landscaping provided on sites which abut a
limited access highway shall be of equal importance and present an
attractive appearance, comparable to the building front.
4) Elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment, vents,
ducts, pipes and other similar apparatus shall be screened from view from
off-site by a penthouse or structure equal in height to the height of the
equipment being screened. The outside finish materials shall be the same
as or complimentary to the building facade finish materials to which it is
attached. The Planning Commission may modify this requirement at site
plan review.
(i) Vehicular and Pedestrian Circulation.
1) Access to the development shall be provided in such locations and number
so as not to create unnecessary traffic hazards on exterior roadways,
considering the need to provide safe and efficient internal traffic
circulation.
2) The site plan shall be designed to provide safe and efficient internal traffic
circulation and to protect pedestrians from unnecessary exposure to
vehicular safety hazards.
(j) Emergency Access. All buildings shall be readily accessible by fire and
emergency vehicles and shall comply with the Township Fire Prevention
Ordinance.
(k) Underground utilities shall be provided as required by Section 28.10.
(l) Environmental Features.?
1) The developer shall make every attempt to preserve any natural features
on the site that exist prior to development. Existing natural features shall
be shown on the site plan.
? SEC. 17.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 181a
Article 17: OR Office Research District
SEC. 17.3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
2) If natural features need to be altered or removed, it shall be the
responsibility of the developer to provide a written report explaining the
rationale for such actions.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 182
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
ARTICLE XVIII
TAR TECHNOLOGY AND RESEARCH DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
Advances in industry and technology have created uses which are related to industry and office uses,
but may not be appropriate or function adequately in a typical industrial or office zoning district.
These uses have been identified as "high tech" uses. The purpose of the Technology and Research
District (TAR) District is to provide an environment where high tech uses and functions such as
engineering, design, research and development, photonics/optics, computer assisted design, robotics
search, numerical control equipment (CAD/CAM), prototype development and limited
manufacturing, biotechnology, lasers, medical research, food; and materials testing,
telecommunications, and related storage, warehousing and limited assembly operations associated
with principal permitted uses can be located.
The TAR District is intended to be developed in a campus-type environment, with generous
landscaping and attractive buildings, where permitted uses will not be negatively impacted by the
elements and conditions (such as extensive heavy truck traffic) commonly found in a traditional
Industrial District. Such areas are often visible from freeways and high image locations.
SEC. 18.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
1. Laboratories, offices and other facilities for basic and applied research, experimentation,
testing, product design, technology development, consulting and business development.
2. Business schools and training facilities.
3. Office buildings, providing for uses such as corporate offices in accordance with the purpose
of this district, including any of the following occupations: Executive; administrative;
professional; accounting; engineering; planning; architecture; drafting; writing; clerical;
stenographic; and sales provided that no display shall be visible from the exterior of the
building, and that such sales shall be clearly incidental to the principal office use in the
determination of the Planning Commission.
4. Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic data
processing equipment.
5. Any use charged with the principal function of research in the area of photonics/optics,
robotics, and electronic equipment.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 18.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 183
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
6. A high technology service use, which has as its principal function the providing of services
including computer information transfer, communication, distribution, management,
processing, administrative, laboratory, experimental, developmental, technical, or testing
services.
7. A high technology industrial use, which has as its principal function light manufacturing,
assembly, fabrication or machining from processed materials. Such uses shall include but
are not limited to agricultural technology, biological or pharmaceutical research, software
technology, telecommunications, biomedical technology, fluid transfer and handling
technology, defense and aerospace technologies or other technology oriented or emerging
industrial or business activity. Permitted high technology industrial uses shall not include
heavy manufacturing, heavy stamping operations, any manufacturing from raw unprocessed
materials or uses specifically prohibited in Section 18.3.
8. Research, development, engineering, design, assembly, fabrication and limited light
manufacturing of high-technology equipment, including equipment involved in any high
technology industrial activity as defined in Subsection 7 above, instrumentation or
associated computer software. ?
9. Engine product research, fluid transfer and handling product research, development,
engineering, design, testing, assembly, production, and related office, sales and
administrative uses.
10. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, subject to
the following:
(a) Accessory storage of products and materials necessary to the permitted operation
may be provided within the building. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
(b) Child care centers, recreation and fitness facilities, cafeterias, health care services,
financial services and similar uses may be permitted as accessory uses, if such uses
are located wholly within the principal building (except for outdoor recreation and
fitness facilities), conducted primarily for the convenience of the employees of the
principal use and have no exterior advertising or displays.
SEC. 18.2 SPECIAL LAND USES?
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted only
after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure and
standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements listed
below:
1. Medical offices, clinics research, and medical supply facilities, including auxiliary or
accessory laboratories. Such uses may include sports medicine, medical wellness, physical
therapy, physical medicine, and similar facilities. Substance abuse (drugs and alcohol)
? SEC. 18.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
? SEC. 18.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 184
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
treatment facilities, and facilities principally for emergency services or that provide 24 hour
services shall not be permitted.
2. Motels and hotels.
3. Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities, such as fire stations.
4. Outdoor uses, such as testing facilities for prototype products and facilities used for training
employees in activities applicable to the permitted use. Such facilities shall be screened
from adjacent properties and street rights-of-way in accordance with Section 26.11, Methods
of Screening.
5. Banks, credit unions and other similar financial services.
6. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service or
storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty (50)
feet, irrespective of the yard requirements of the district in which it is located, and two side
yard and a rear yard setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width each.
7. Retail uses which in the determination of the Planning Commission are incidental and
complementary to the principal technology and research uses, including the following
business services such as printing, copying and mailing.?
8. Restaurants or other places serving food and/or beverages without open front windows,
drive-ins or drive through service, and located within a building containing one or more
other principal uses.
9. Corporate fitness centers, health spas, racquetball clubs, bowling alleys or similar forms of
recreation, except as otherwise provided herein.
10. Child care centers subject to the standards of Section 28.64.
11. Limited accessory outdoor storage subject to the following:
(a) Evidence satisfactory to the Planning Commission shall be provided that the open
storage is essential to the approved principal permitted use.
(b) Open storage of raw materials, junk vehicles which are wrecked, disabled, worn out,
abandoned, or incapable of movement, waste materials, parts, assemblies, and similar
items shall be prohibited.
(c) Evidence satisfactory to the Planning Commission shall be provided that the storage
cannot reasonably be enclosed in a building.
(d) Evidence satisfactory to the Planning Commission that the storage will not cause an
undue hardship to other uses or the Township.
? SEC. 18.2 SPECIAL LAND US
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 185
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
(e) All open storage shall be completely screened on all sides by a decorative masonry
or brick obscuring wall which matches the main building, or a berm eight (8) feet in
height, located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the street setback line when
the area abuts a streets. An eight (8) foot wide planting strip shall be located on the
street side of the wall or berm. When the side and/or rear yard does not abut a street,
the wall or berm shall be located on the property line. The combined use of a wall
and a berm shall be permitted.
(f) Within the intent of this Section, the Planning Commission may approve alternatives
as it deems necessary to accommodate peculiar or unforeseen circumstances.
12. Wireless communication facilities, subject to the conditions of Section 28.11.
13. Any other use of the same nature or class as uses listed in this district as either a principal
permitted use or a special land use which the Planning Commission finds not to be
inconsistent with the purpose of this Article, and which will not impair the present or
potential use of adjacent properties. When considering other uses, the Planning Commission
shall review the nature, function and proposed location of the use to ensure that it will not
conflict with other permitted uses in the district.
SEC 18.2A USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED (added 3/14/10) (Refer also to sec 18.3)
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which would be in
violation of any State or Federal Law.
SEC. 18.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any of the following uses:
1. The following uses shall be considered as not meeting the minimum standards of this
Ordinance as to performance and potential negative impacts on surrounding properties:
(a) Processing of corrosive acid, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster.
(b) Distillation of bone, coal, tar, petroleum refuse, grain or wood.
(c) Processing or storage of explosives.
(d) Processing of fertilizer or storage of compost.
(e) Processing of products from animal refuse or offal including glue, size or gelatin.
(f) Processing using steam or board hammers or forging presses.
(g) Tanning, curing or storage of raw, green or salted skins or hides.
? SEC. 18.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 186
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
(h) Manufacturing of sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric, picric, carbolic, hydrochloric or other
corrosive acid, however the use of corrosive acids in connection with any permitted
use is not prohibited.
(i) Petroleum or asphalt refining, mixing or manufacturing.
(j) Slaughtering of animals, stock yards, livestock feeding yards.
(k) Manufacturing or disposal, above or below ground; of nuclear or radioactive
materials.
(l) Processing of garbage, offal, dead animals, refuse, rancid fats.
2. Any use which may create unusual danger for fire, explosion, toxic or noxious matter,
radiation, or which may cause noxious, offensive, unhealthful or harmful odors, fumes, dust,
smoke, light, waste, noise or vibration.
3. Warehousing, truck transfer or distribution centers as a principal use.
SEC. 18.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal permitted uses and special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, including, but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading and unloading for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance. The
Planning Commission may modify such requirements, if in its sole determination, the use
does not require the number of loading spaces specified in Article 24.
4. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses shall be in accordance with Article
26 of this Ordinance.
5. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance, except that pole signs shall not
be permitted. Freestanding signs shall be of a monument or ground type with a base
constructed predominately of masonry as approved by the Planning Commission.
6. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance. ?
7. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations as specified in Article 20 Schedule of
Regulations of this Ordinance.
8. The following specific requirements shall apply within the TAR Technology and Research
District:
? SEC. 18.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 187
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
(a) Machines Permitted. All machines are permitted when installed and operated so as
not to allow a noise, odor, fumes, dust, smoke, glare or radioactive material
exceeding the limits set by Section 28.5, Environmental Performance Standards. In
no case shall such impacts be detectable from districts in which residence occupancy
is permitted within the Charter Township of Plymouth.
(b) Environmental Performance Requirements. Compliance with Section 28.5,
Environmental Performance Requirements, is required for all uses.
(c) Landscaping and Screening.
1) Setback Landscaping: All setback areas shall be landscaped with lawns,
trees, shrubs and/or other plants, and may include reflecting pools, retaining
walls and other landscape construction harmonious with the overall
landscape scheme.
2) Parking and Loading Location and Screening: Parking and loading areas
may be located in side and rear setback areas, but shall be prohibited from the
front yard setback. Further, all doors designed for vehicles and loading
docks and truck wells shall not be located on the front of the building, and
shall be screened from view from any road.
Parking provided in a side yard setback adjacent to a street shall be provided
with a ten (10) foot landscaped greenbelt, adjacent to that street. On a corner
lot, one of the front yards may be designated a side yard. Parking and
loading areas shall be screened in compliance with Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
(d) Source of Power. Power for any manufacturing or heating process or activity shall
be derived only from electrical energy, smokeless fuels, such as gas or oil, or
smokeless solid fuels containing less than twenty (20) percent of the volatile content
on a dry basis.
(e) Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance.
(f) Emergency Access. All buildings shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency
vehicles and shall comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(g) Sidewalks as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(h) Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8,
Exterior Lighting. ?
(i) The method of trash removal shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. If Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles are proposed, they shall be
? SEC. 18.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 188
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
screened in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles. ?
(j) Fencing, and Screen Walls. Fences and screen walls shall require review and
approval by the Planning Commission as a part of the Site Plan Approval. In a TAR
Technology Research District protective or security fencing shall be considered a
structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous land, either in whole or
part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion onto or across a lot of record or any
parcel or tract of unplatted land from without or straying from within. The following
shall govern the height, location and placement of protective or security fencing:
1) Permit Required: In the TAR District it shall be unlawful for any person to
build, repair or relocate a protective or security fence without first having
secured a Zoning Compliance and/or Building Permit from the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement.
2) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security fence
shall be six (6) feet.
3) Material: Fences will not be constructed of old or used material unless such
material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall not be made of or contain
barbed we, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or pointed
projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of pickets, the
pickets shall be made of not less than one (1) inch by three (3) inch material
and shall have an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90) degrees. The
fence shall comply with the requirements of applicable requirements of the
State Construction Code enforced by the Township. Plastic or other type of
strips intertwined in cyclone fencing shall be prohibited.
4) Placement: Except as part of a special land use approval, no fence shall be
built closer to the street than the front setback line applicable to the premises
pursuant to the Article 20 Schedule of Regulations, provided no fence shall
be built closer to the street than the established front building line along side
streets or in front of the building closest to the streets on the fenced premises.
(k) Building Design Standards.?
1) All exterior building facades shall be of the same finish material as the front
facade of the main building and all materials used shall be recognized as
finished materials (standard concrete or cinder block shall not be permitted).
The exterior finish and scale of the buildings shall be harmonious with the
surroundings area and natural environment. Building shall comply with
Section 28.14, Building Design Standards.
? ? SEC. 18.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 189
Article 18: TAR Technology and Research District
2) Elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment, vents,
ducts, pipes and other similar apparatus shall be screened from view from
off-site by a penthouse or structure equal in height to the height of the
equipment being screened. The outside finish materials shall be the same as
or complimentary to the building facade finish materials to which it is
attached. The Planning Commission may modify this requirement at site
plan review.
3) In accordance with the established development pattern, any such building
which is located on a site with Beck Road frontage shall be finished in brick.
4) Building elevations and landscaping provided on sites which abut a limited
access highway shall be of equal importance and present an attractive
appearance, comparable to the building front.
(l) Environmental Features.
1) The developer shall make every attempt to preserve any natural features on
the site which exist prior to development. Existing natural features shall be
shown in the site plan.
2) If natural features need to be altered or removed, it shall be the responsibility
of the developer to provide a written report explaining the rationale for such
actions.?
SEC. 18.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 190
Article 19: IND Industrial District
ARTICLE XIX
IND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
PURPOSE?
To provide districts for industrial or scientific research, wholesale and service uses and for the
manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling and/or treatment of finished or semifinished
products from previously prepared materials. It is the intent of this Article that
industrial districts be located in areas located adjacent to, and served by, major thoroughfares
and/or railroad tracks. The regulations of this district are intended to protect nearby districts
from hazards, noise and other radiated disturbances.
SEC. 19.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
1. Wholesale and warehousing businesses, storage buildings, resale shops, commercial
laundries, cleaning establishments and frozen food lockers.
2. The manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or testing of
products; such as bakery goods, candy, soap (cold mix only), cosmetics, pharmaceutical,
toiletries, dairy and food products, hardware and cutlery. The manufacturing, processing
and assembling from basic raw materials shall be prohibited.
3. Tool, die, gauge and machine shops.
4. The manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or testing of
articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials which have
been manufactured elsewhere: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber,
fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semi-precious metals, or stones,
sheet metal (excluding large stampings such as automobile body panels), ferrous and
non-ferrous metals (excluding large castings and fabrications), shell, textiles, tobacco,
wax, wire, yarn, wood (excluding saw and planing mills) and paint (not employing
boiling process).
5. Research, testing, laboratory and office uses related to permitted industrial operations.
6. The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only
previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
7. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber or other small
molded rubber products (not including pneumatic tires).
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 19.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 191
Article 19: IND Industrial District
8. Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices,
radios and phonographs.
9. Laboratories--experimental, film or testing.
10. Public utility transformer stations, substations and gas regulator stations without service
or storage yards shall comply with the requirements of Section 26.12, Areas Requiring
Screening and/or Buffering, and shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet, irrespective of the yard requirements of the district in which it is located, and
two (2) side yards and a rear yard setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width
each.
11. Research and industrial parks, subject to the following: ?
(a) The research and industrial park shall be platted as an industrial subdivision, or as
a condominium or “site condominium” subdivision.
(b) The requirements of Article 20, Schedule of Regulations, for IND Industrial
Districts shall be modified as follows:
(c) Height Exceptions. The height of a building may be increased one (1) foot for
each one (1) foot by which its setback is in excess of the required yard setbacks,
up to a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet.
(d) Landscaping. All setback areas shall be landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs
and/or other plantings, and may include reflecting pools, retaining walls and other
landscape construction harmonious with the overall landscape scheme.
(e) Parking and Loading. Parking and loading areas may be located in side and rear
setback areas, but shall be prohibited within the front yard setback. Parking and
loading areas shall be screened in compliance with Article 26 of this Ordinance.
? SEC. 19.1 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
AREA, LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL PARKS
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 sq.ft.
Minimum Lot Frontage 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard Depth 40 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Width, Each Side 25 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Adjacent to Residential 50 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Adjacent to a Street 40 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 40 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Adjacent Residential 50 ft.
Maximum Height 35 ft.
Maximum Percent Lot Coverage 50%
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 192
Article 19: IND Industrial District
Parking provided in a side yard setback adjacent to a street shall be provided with
a ten (10) foot landscaped greenbelt, adjacent to that street. On a corner lot, one
of the front yards may be designated a side yard. Parking and loading areas shall
be screened in compliance with Article 26 of this Ordinance.
12. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
excluding outdoor storage.
SEC. 19.2 SPECIAL LAND USES?
The following uses shall be considered special land uses in this district and shall be permitted
only after review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedure
and standards as found in Section 2.7 of this Ordinance and further subject to the requirements
listed below:
1. Wireless communication facilities as provided for in Section 28.11.
2. Child care centers, subject to the standards of Section 28.64.
3. Indoor and outdoor recreational and sports facilities, recreation centers and sports plazas
including but not limited to, bowling alleys; pool and billiard halls; roller skating, hockey
and ice skating rinks; squash, handball, paddleball, racquetball, tennis and basketball
courts; indoor golf and skiing; and subject to the following;
(a) Accessory recreational and sport equipment sales, rentals and services, restaurants
and snack bars, and health clubs and spas, shall be permitted as accessory uses,
provided that such accessory uses are necessary, ancillary and an integral part of
the principal use.
(b) Such uses shall abut a major thoroughfare.
(c) Outdoor golf, outdoor golf driving ranges and outdoor skiing are prohibited.
(d) Outdoor recreational, training and sports facilities shall be screened from adjacent
properties and street rights-of-way in accordance with Section 26.11, Methods of
Screening.
4. Railroad running and lead tracks, but not including a classification or transfer yard.
5. Commercial television, radio and microwave transmission towers, and public utility
television transmitting towers and their attendant facilities, provided that the distance
from the base of the tower to all property lines shall be not less than one and one-half
(1½) times the tower height.
6. Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to prevent noxious
or nuisance conditions.
? SEC. 19.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 193
Article 19: IND Industrial District
7. Outdoor storage of materials, not including salvage yards and storage of automobiles,
subject to the following:
(a) Outdoor storage of used rags, waste paper or other combustible materials shall be
prohibited. Storage of such materials shall be limited to an enclosed masonry
building of four (4) hour fire construction located a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from all property lines. ?
(b) Outdoor storage shall be located within an area enclosed within an six (6) to eight
(8) foot high obscuring wall or berm set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
from the street setback line. The wall or berm may be located on the property line
where the side and/or rear yard does not abut a street. In all of the
aforementioned cases, the combined use of a wall and a berm shall be permitted.
When the area abuts a street, an eight (8) foot wide planting strip shall be
provided located on the street side of the wall or berm. The planting strip shall
consist of a minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree for every forty (40) lineal
feet of wall or berm and flowering trees and shrubs which will visually break up
the area.
(c) Stored materials shall not be piled to a height of more than eight (8) feet.
(d) A roadway shall be paved, graded and maintained from the street to the rear of the
property, to permit free access to fire trucks at all times.
(e) Waste materials shall be kept in neatly stored containers screened from public
view, and shall be removed and emptied periodically. No wastes shall be piled on
open ground.
(f) Within the intent of this Section, the Planning Commission may approve
alternatives as it deems necessary to accommodate peculiar circumstances or
unforeseen problems and to carry out the spirit and intent of this Article.
8. Salvage yards and the storage of new or used automobiles or automobiles as bonded
under local county or state law or by order of judgment of any competent court of
jurisdiction, subject to the following:?
(a) The yard area shall be so located in the interior of the district so that No property
line of the salvage yard or storage area shall form the exterior boundary of the
IND District.
(b) The yard area shall be located next to a railroad right-of-way, and siding facilities
shall be provided so all salvaged products can be shipped by rail.
(c) The yard area shall be completely enclosed with an eight (8) foot masonry wall or
obscuring fence, (driveway openings excepted), set back a minimum of twenty-
? ? SEC. 19.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 194
Article 19: IND Industrial District
five (25) feet from the street setback line. The wall or fence may be located on
the property line where the yard does not abut a street. Such areas shall also be
planted on the street side of the wall or obscuring fence. The planting strip shall
consist of a minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree for every forty (40) lineal
feet of fence or wall and flowering trees and shrubs which will visually break up
the area. Plastic and/or other stripping intertwined or otherwise attached to
cyclone fencing shall be prohibited.
(d) The burning of tires, oil wastes or other waste products shall not be permitted in
conjunction with any salvage operations.
(e) Customer and employee parking, loading and unloading shall be provided within
the enclosure wall or obscuring fence. Gates shall be designed in a manner which
will obscure objectionable views.
(f) Within the intent of this Section, the Planning Commission may approve
alternatives as it deems necessary to accommodate peculiar circumstances or
unforeseen problems while still achieving the spirit and intent of this subsection
of the Ordinance.
9. Storage of trucks, trailer coaches, campers, buses, mobile homes and recreation vehicles,
subject to the following: ?
(a) All stored vehicles shall be duly licensed pursuant to the applicable statute, and
shall not be wrecked, disabled, abandoned, worn out, junked or incapable of
movement.
(b) Storage of parts, assemblies and other materials shall be prohibited in the area
encompassed by this special land use, including those materials specified in subparagraphs
7 and 8 above.
(c) The yard area shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot to eight (8) foot high fence with
gates to permit usual and normal access to the abutting street.
(d) Where the storage area abuts a public street, the enclosure fence shall be set back
in compliance with the required yard setback for the district and an eight (8) foot
planting strip shall be established on the street side of the fence. The planting
strip shall consist of a minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree for every forty
(40) lineal feet of fence and flowering trees and shrubs which will visually break
up the area.
10. Large scale institutional uses, including large scale churches subject to the conditions and
regulations of Section 28.63, and limited to the following uses and conditions:
(a) Churches, subject to the following conditions:
? SEC. 19.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 195
Article 19: IND Industrial District
1) Buildings may exceed the maximum building height permitted in Article
20, Schedule of Regulations, where permitted by Section 28.23, Height
Exceptions.
2) All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved primary or collector
road, as classified in the Township Master Plan. The Planning
Commission may permit secondary access from local streets.
3) Continuous screening shall be provided wherever such use is located
adjacent to a single-family residential district or use, in accordance with
Section 26.11, Methods of Screening.
(b) Municipal facilities
11. Natural gas or oil processing facilities, including but not limited to “sweetening” plants,
subject to all of the conditions and requirements of Section 28.12. Oil or petroleum
refineries as defined in this Ordinance are specifically prohibited.
12 Outdoor training facilities accessory to a principal permitted use. Outdoor activities shall
be subject to the standards of the permitted use, particularly for the screening
requirements of Article 26.
13. Outdoor theaters, subject to the following:
(a) The lot or parcel shall be located so that at least one (1) property line abuts a
paved primary road, as classified in the Township Master Plan. All vehicular
access to the facility shall be directly from the paved primary road(s).
(b) A minimum of two (2) ticket gates shall be provided. Each ticket gate shall have
a separate entrance lane, and sufficient internal vehicle stacking spaces shall be
provided for vehicles waiting to enter the theater, to avoid back-up onto any
public road right-of-way.
(c) No theater screen shall be closer than 500 feet to any residential zoning district.
Any theater screen(s) shall be located, designed and constructed so that it will not
be visible from any adjacent public road or residential zoning district.
14. Physical, occupational, speech, or similar outpatient therapy services where such services
operate based upon appointments and not on a walk-in basis, provided that the Planning
Commission finds that the nature, function, and proposed location of the use ensures that
it will not conflict with permitted industrial uses.
15. Any other research, office, testing, manufacturing, wholesale service or commercial use
that, in the determination of the Planning Commission, will:
(a) Be consistent with the purpose of this Article, and?
? ? SEC. 19.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 196
Article 19: IND Industrial District
(b) Not impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties. When considering
other uses the Planning Commission shall review the nature, function and
proposed location of the use to ensure it will not conflict with permitted industrial
uses.
SEC. 19.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED ?
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for one or more of the
following specified uses:
1. Manufacturing development activities which create unusual dangers from fire, explosion,
toxic or noxious matter, radiation and other or similar hazards.
2. Any use which causes noxious, offensive, unhealthful or harmful odors, fumes, dust,
smoke, light, wastes, noises or vibrations.
3. Machines or operations which cannot comply with Section 28.5, Environmental
Performance Requirements.
4. New dwellings or conversion of existing dwellings to additional dwelling units.
5. Schools, hospitals, clinics and other institutions for human care, except where incidental
to a permitted principal use or where expressly permitted herein.
6. The use of trailers, as portable dwellings, either singly or in mobile home or trailer parks.
7. Any of the following principal uses, or any principal use which is of like character:
(a) Corrosive acid manufacturing, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster manufacturing.
(b) Distillation of bone, coal, tar, petroleum refuse, grain or wood.
(c) Explosive manufacture or storage.
(d) Fertilizer manufacturing, compost or storage.
(e) Garbage, offal, dead animals, refuse, rancid fats, incinerator, glue manufacturing,
size or gelatin manufacturing where the processes include the refining or recovery
of products from animal refuse or offal.
(f) Livestock feeding yards.?
(g) Mobile home or trailer parks.
(h) Motels.
? SEC. 19.3 USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 197
Article 19: IND Industrial District
(i) Petroleum or asphalt refining, mixing or manufacturing.
(j) Slaughtering of animals, stock yards.
(k) Smelting or refining of metals from ore.
(l) Steam and board hammers and forging presses.
(m) Storage, curing and tanning of raw, green or salted hides or skins.
(n) Sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric picric, carbolic or hydrochloric or other corrosive-acid
manufacturing.
8. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected for any use which
would be in violation of any State or Federal Law. (Added 3/14/10)
SEC. 19.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS?
All principal permitted uses and special land uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance, including, but not limited to the following:
1. Site plan and development approval for all uses as specified in Article 29 of this
Ordinance.
2. Off-street parking for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance. ?
3. Off-street loading and unloading for all uses as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
4. Landscaping, screening and land use buffers for all uses as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
5. Signs for all uses as specified in Article 25 of this Ordinance, except that pole signs shall
not be permitted. Ground signs shall be of a monument type with a base constructed
predominately of masonry as approved by the Planning Commission.
6. Special Provisions, as specified in Article 28 of this Ordinance.
7. Height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations as specified in Article 20 of this
Ordinance.
8. The following specific requirements shall apply within an IND Industrial District:
(a) Each use shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise permitted by this Article.
(b) Machines Permitted. All machines are permitted when installed and operated so
? ? SEC. 19.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 198
Article 19: IND Industrial District
SEC. 19.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
as not to allow a noise, odor, fumes, dust, smoke, glare or radioactive material
exceeding the limits set by Section 28.5, Environmental Performance Standards.
In no case shall such impacts be detectable from districts in which residence
occupancy is permitted within the Charter Township of Plymouth.
(c) Environmental Performance Requirements. Compliance with Section 28.5,
Environmental Performance Requirements, is required for all uses.
(d) The use of flammable gas, enameling and paint spraying operations when
incidental to the principal operation. Such operations shall be completely
contained within a masonry building of four (4) hour fire construction.
(e) Source of Power. Power for any manufacturing or heating process or activity shall
be derived only from electrical energy, smokeless fuels, such as gas or oil,
smokeless solid fuels containing less than twenty (20) percent of the volatile
content on a dry basis, or bituminous coal fired by mechanical equipment.
(f) Yard Grading and Drainage as specified in Section 28.15 of this Ordinance:
(g) All buildings shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles, and shall
comply with the Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(h) Sidewalks shall be provided as specified in Section 28.16 of this Ordinance.
(i) Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8,
Exterior Lighting.
(j) The method of trash removal shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval. Dumpsters and similar waste receptacles are proposed, they shall be
screened in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission subject to the
requirements of Section 28.9, Waste Receptacles.
(k) Building Design Standards.
1) All exterior building facades shall be of the same finish material as the
front facade of the main building, and all materials used shall be
recognized as finished materials (standard concrete or cinder block shall
not be permitted). The exterior finish and scale of the buildings shall be
harmonious with the surrounding area and natural environment.
2) Elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment, vents,
ducts, pipes and other similar apparatus shall be screened from view from
off-site by a penthouse or structure equal in height to the height of the
equipment being screened. The outside finish materials shall be the same
as or complimentary to the building facade finish materials to which it is
attached. Buildings shall further comply with Section 28.14, Building
Design Standards. The Planning Commission may modify this
requirement at site plan review.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 199
Article 19: IND Industrial District
SEC. 19.4 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
(l) Fencing. All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the
Planning Commission as part of site plan approval shall be permitted. In an IND
Industrial District fencing shall be considered a structure enclosing a piece of land
or separating contiguous land either in whole or part, serving the purpose of
preventing intrusion onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or tract of
unplatted land from without or straying from within. The following shall govern
the height, location and placement of protective or security fencing: ?
1) Permit Required: In the IND Industrial District it shall be unlawful for any
person to build, repair or relocate a protective or security fence without
first having secured a Zoning Compliance and/or Building permit from
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
2) Maximum Height: The maximum height of a protective or security fence
shall be six (6) feet.
3) Material: Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material unless
such material shall be reasonable sound in the judgment of the Department
of Building and Code Enforcement. Fences shall not be made of, or
contain barbed wire, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or
pointed projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of
pickets, the pickets shall be made of not less than one (1) inch by three (3)
inch material and shall be an angle at the top of not less than ninety (90)
degrees. The fence shall comply with the requirements of applicable
requirements of the State Construction Code enforced by the Township.
Plastic or other type of strips intertwined in cyclones fencing shall be
prohibited.
4) Placement: No fence shall be built closer to the street than the front
setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to the Article 20 Schedule
of Regulations, provided no fence shall be built closer to the street than the
established front building line along said street or in front of the building
closest to the street on the fenced premises. ?
5) The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, permit alternative fence
placements, heights or materials in keeping with the spirit and intent of
this Ordinance and deemed necessary to provide adequate protection for
the abutting properties.
(m) Sites developed with frontage on a road right-of-way shared in common with an
industrial park within 800 feet or on the same block developed under Section
19.1.11 may provide front setbacks as allowed by Section 19.1.11(b).?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 200
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
??ARTICLE XX
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
SEC. 20.1 HEIGHT, AREA, LOT COVERAGE, YARD REQUIREMENTS AND FLOOR AREA (as amended 10/25/07)
SEC. 20.1 HEIGHT, AREA, LOT COVERAGE, YARD REQUIREMENTS AND FLOOR AREA
MAX HEIGHT OF
BUILDINGS MINIMUM LOT AREA (ee)
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS IN FEET (ee)
All yard setbacks shall be dimensioned from the street setback line,
as designated in Section 28. 22
NONRESIDENTIAL
USES
MINIMUM
LIVABLE
FLOOR AREA
SIDES
ZONING
DISTRICT
IN
STORIES
IN
FEET
AREA IN
SQ. FT.
WIDTH IN
FEET
MAXIMUM
LOT
COVERAGE
IN
PERCENT
(ee)
FRONT
(ff) ONE SIDE TOTAL
OF TWO
REAR
SIDE YARD
ABUTTING
A STREET
REAR YARD
ABUTTING
A SIDE LOT
LINE
SIDE YARDS SQ. FT. PER
UNIT
AG 2 ½ 35
(a)(gg) 5 Acres 150 15 45 50 (g) 100 50 45 (g) 25 (h) 1,650
PL 2½ (c) 35 (c) (c) (c) 25 45 30 60 50 50 - - -
R-1-E 2½ 35(gg) 43,560
(b) (d) (e) 150 (b) 15 45 15 30 50 (bb) 45 (g) 25 (h) 1,650
R-1-H 2½ 35(gg) 21,780
(b) (d) (e) 120 (b) 15 (cc) 35 10 20 50 (bb) 35 (g) 25 (h) 1,450
R-1-S 2½ 35(gg) 12,000
(b) (d) (e) 90 (b) 25 30 10 20 50 (bb) 30 (g) 25 (h) 1,250
R-1 2½ 35(gg) 7,200
(b) (d) (e) 60 25 25 5 16 (y) 50 (bb) 25 (g) 25 (h) 1,050
RM 1 12 (z) (z) (z) Shall comply with Rule 941 of Mobile Home Commission Rules 580
R-2 2½ 35
1 DU 7,200
2 DU 9,200
(e)
1 DU 60 ft.
2 DU 85 ft. 25 25 1 DU 5
2 DU 10
1 DU 16
2 DU 26 50 25 25 (g) 25 (h) 580 (i)
R-2-A 2 ½
(aa) 35 12,000 (j) 100 30 25
(m) (k)
10
(k) (m)
20
(k) (m)
50
(m) (k) 25 (k) 25 (g) (k) - (i) (l)
OS 2 30 - - - 25 (o) 10
(n) (p) (r) 20 (p) 20 25 (r) 20 (g) - 400
OS-ARC shall comply with standards specified in Article XIV, ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
ARC shall comply with standards specified in Article XIV, ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
C-1 1 20 - - - 10 (o)
10
(n) (p)
(r)
20 20 10 (r) 20 - 400
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 201
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
SEC. 20.1 HEIGHT, AREA, LOT COVERAGE, YARD REQUIREMENTS AND FLOOR AREA (continued):
MAX HEIGHT OF
BUILDINGS MINIMUM LOT AREA
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS IN FEET
All yard setbacks shall be dimensioned from the street setback line,
as designated in Section 28. 22
SIDES
NONRESIDENTIAL
USES
MINIMUM
LIVABLE
ZONING FLOOR AREA
DISTRICT
IN
STORIES
IN
FEET
AREA IN
SQ. FT.
WIDTH IN
FEET
MAXIMUM
LOT
COVERAGE
IN
PERCENT FRONT
ONE SIDE TOTAL
OF TWO
REAR
SIDE YARD
ABUTTING
A STREET
REAR YARD
ABUTTING
A SIDE LOT
LINE
SIDE YARDS SQ. FT. PER
UNIT
C-2 2 (f) 35 (f) - - - 10 (o) 10
(n) (p) (r) 20 (p) 20 10 (r) 20 - 400
MR 9 90 - - 25 (w) (w) (w) (w) (w) (w) - (x)
OR -- 35 (s) 20,000 100 50 40 25 (t) 50 40 (t) 40 40 -- --
TAR -- 35 (s) 20,000 100 50 40 25 (t) 50 40 (t) 40 40 -- --
IND (ee) - 35 (u) - - - 50 20 (f) 40 20 (v) 20 (v) 20 (v) - -
?
? SEC. 20.1 HEIGHT, AREA, LOT COVERAGE, YARD
REQUIREMENTS AND FLOOR AREA
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 202
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
?SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS ARTICLE 20
?SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
(a) No principal building or barn used for agricultural farming purposes shall exceed forty
(40) feet in height.
(b) All parcels used for agricultural farming purposes shall contain an area of five (5) acres
or more and shall have an average width of not less than one-fourth (1/4) the average
depth of the parcel, provided, however, that a parcel shall not be required to have a width
greater than three hundred fifty (350) feet. Provided, however, this shall not apply to any
parcel which at the time this Ordinance becomes effective is narrower in width or lesser
in area than the specifications herein provided, if such parcel was of record at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance.
(c) The height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations of the abutting district may be applied
to the subject property provided the Planning Commission finds that the regulations of
the abutting district are consistent with the purpose of Article 4, Public Lands District,
and will not adversely affect the existing or planned future use of adjacent neighborhood
properties.
(d) See Article 21, Residential Unit Developments regarding exceptions as to parcel area and
density controls.
(e) See Article 22, Single Family Cluster Housing regarding exceptions as to parcel area,
yard requirements and density controls.
(f) See Article 23, Planned Unit Development Option regarding exceptions as to height, yard
requirements and density controls.
(g) Where the rear yard of a corner lot abuts a side yard of an interior lot or an alley
separating such parcels, any accessory building on the corner lot shall be set back from
the side street a minimum distance equal to the front yard setback for the interior lot.
(h) Non-residential principal buildings shall have side yards of not less than twenty-five (25)
feet each, plus one (1) foot in additional side yard setback for each five (5) feet or part
thereof which the principal building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in length along the side
yard and plus an additional one(1) foot for each two (2) feet in height in excess of thirtyfive
(35) feet. This shall not be deemed to require additional yard setback for permitted
height exceptions permitted by Section 28.23.
(i) Any two-family dwelling shall provide not less than five hundred eighty (580) square feet
of livable floor space for a single bedroom dwelling unit and an additional two hundred
(200) square feet of livable space for each additional bedroom. Each two-family
dwelling unit shall provide a utility room and/or a storage space, in addition to the above
requirements, which shall be not less than one hundred (100) square feet in area. Equal
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 203
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
basement area, not including area for stairs, may be substituted for utility room or storage
space.
(j) Multiple-family residential principal buildings shall be located on a parcel of not less
than four thousand (4,000) square feet per efficiency or one (1) bedroom dwelling unit,
plus an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet per additional bedroom, exclusive of
the area within the street setback.
Where extra rooms (such as a den, study or library) are shown on the plans in addition to
a living room and bedrooms, such extra rooms shall be counted as a bedroom for the
purpose of computing land area per dwelling unit.
When a project is considered by the Planning Commission to be a redevelopment project,
that is a project where removal of existing structures will be required in order to
accomplish the development and said removal would be considered an upgrading of the
area, the overall density of the project shall be determined by total number of dwelling
units without consideration to number of bedrooms proposed. The overall density for
such a project, shall not exceed eleven (11) dwelling units per acre overall density. In
reviewing the project to determine consideration as a redevelopment project, the
Commission shall find the project would result in an upgrading of the area and said
project would be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district.
(k) The following setbacks shall apply to all permitted uses and buildings, except for a single
family detached dwelling on a separate lot which shall be subject to the minimum yard
requirements (front, side and rear setbacks) listed in the Schedule of Regulations table,
Section 20.1.
1. The minimum building setback shall be 50 feet from any perimeter property line
or street setback line of the development parcel. However, based on factors such
as lack of impacts on adjacent sites or the particular relationship of the building(s)
to the side and/or rear property line, the Planning Commission may reduce the
required building setbacks from any side or rear property line. In no case shall the
building setback be less than 35 feet.
2. Where a building sides to the right-of-way of a road, the minimum building
setback from the street setback line shall be equal to the front yard setback for the
abutting zoning district, if one of the abutting districts fronting on the same road
is zoned single family residential. In no case shall the building setback be less
than 25 feet.
?(l) The following minimum floor area, requirements shall apply to R-2-A Districts, and
where multiple dwellings are provided for under a Residential Unit Development Plan:
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 204
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
(m) Minimum distances between buildings in the R-2-A District shall be as follows:?
1)
2) Where dwelling units change direction in a building grouping and such units are
touching or tied together by a gate opening, not more than three (3) feet in width,
such units shall be considered together as one building.
(n) When a side yard is adjacent to a residential use, a side yard of not less than twenty (20)
feet shall be provided.
(o) When parking is furnished between the building and the street setback line of a street, a
front yard of not less than seventy-five (75) feet shall be provided.
(p) Side yards are not required along an interior side lot line, where all walls of buildings
abutting such interior side lot line are wholly without windows or other openings and are
of fireproof construction, but if the side wall is not of fireproof construction, a side yard
of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided. When an interior side lot line abuts a
residential lot, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be required in addition to
the required screening and land use buffer.
(r) When parking is furnished in the side yard on the street side of a corner parcel, a side
yard of not less than seventy-five (75) feet shall be provided.
(s) The maximum permitted height of a building in an OR or TAR District may be increased
one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of additional setback from the street setback line
provided in excess of the required yard setbacks, with the maximum height permitted not
to exceed forty-five (45) feet.
SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
UNIT SIZE MINIMUM FLOOR AREA
Per 1 Bedroom Unit 600 sq. ft.
Per 2 Bedroom Unit 800 sq. ft.
Per 3 Bedroom Unit 1,000 sq. ft.
Per 4 Bedroom Unit 1,200 sq. ft.
BUILDING
RELATIONSHIP
MINIMUM BUILDING
SEPARATION
Front to Front 70 feet
Front to Side 50 feet
Side to Side 20 feet
Side to Rear 50 feet
Front to Rear 70 feet
Rear to Rear 70 feet
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 205
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
(t) A setback of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be required for any side or rear yard in an
OR or TAR District that is adjacent to a residential district, and not separated therefrom
by a street.
(u) The maximum permitted height of a building in the IND District may be increased one
(1) foot for each additional five (5) feet of setback provided in excess of seventy-five (75)
feet from the street setback line.
(v) A setback of not less than seventy-five (75) feet shall be required for any side or rear yard
in an IND District that is adjacent to a residential district and not separated therefrom by
a street.
(w) The following shall apply to buildings and uses in the MR District:
1) The perimeter yard setback for principal and accessory buildings three (3) or more
stories in height shall be not less than fifty (50) feet for a three (3) story building,
plus an additional setback of five (5) feet for each story in excess of three (3).
2) The perimeter yard setback for one-story accessory buildings shall be not less
than forty (40) feet.
(x) The following minimum floor area requirements shall apply to residential uses in the MR
District.
UNIT SIZE MINIMUM FLOOR AREA
Per 0 Bedroom Dwelling Unit 400 sq. ft.
Per 1 Bedroom Dwelling Unit 600 sq. ft.
Per 2 Bedroom Dwelling Unit 800 sq. ft.
Per 3 Bedroom Dwelling Unit 1,000 sq. ft.
Per 4 Bedroom Dwelling Unit 1,200 sq. ft.
?(y) Side yards for homes, on interior lots having a lot width of sixty-one (61) feet or less with
an attached garage fronting on the street may have a minimum total of two (2) side yards
of fourteen (14) feet.
(z) See Section 7.1.5 par. 3(c) for lot area, lot width and density requirements.
(aa) The number of permitted stories may be increased to three (3), provided the three-story
portion does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the length of the building, and provided that
the roof line and building elevations are not flat or one dimensional in character. The
objective shall be to use building details such as gables, arches, dormers, cupolas, ledges,
columns, piers, etc. to create interest, detail and relief of the building facade and roof line.
(bb) The rear yard in a R-l-E, R-l-H, R-l-S and R-1 Single Family Residential District may be
reduced after approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals upon the Zoning Board of
? ?SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 206
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
Appeals finding that the following specific requirements have been met. (Amended
3/14/10)
1) The single family structure may not extend more than ten (10) feet into the
required fifty (50) foot rear yard.
2) The rear yard of the residence must back to the rear yard of the adjoining
residence and not to a side yard.
3) The width of the single family structure extending into the required fifty (50) foot
rear yard shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the width of the portion of
the single family structure which must comply with the fifty (50) foot setback.
4) The proposed penetration into the rear yard setback is the only practical location
for the proposed addition.
5) The completed structure will be consistent and compatible with the other houses
in the immediate area in overall size, construction, quality, finish and aesthetic
appearance.
6) The proposed extension into the rear yard shall not have a substantial negative
impact on the open and expected vistas for adjoining properties.
7) The rear yard setback otherwise required is not less than fifty (50) feet, on
account of a consent judgment or other special exceptions.
8) The proposed structure shall comply with all other requirements of this
Ordinance.
9) The proposed addition shall be restricted to one story only and shall not exceed
the height of the single family structure.?
(cc) In the R-1-H District, maximum lot coverage shall be twenty (20) percent for two (2)
story dwellings and twenty-five (25) percent for ranch dwellings, provided that all other
setbacks are met.
(dd) For lots abutting a private road with a private ingress/egress easement, required yard
setbacks shall be measured from the edge of such easement. Areas of the lot within the
ingress/egress easement shall be excluded from the total lot area for purposes of
compliance with minimum lot area and maximum lot coverage requirements.
(ee) The area, lot, and yard requirements for industrial and research parks in the IND District
shall be modified as follows:
? SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 207
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
(ff) Where a front yard of greater or less depth than required exists in the front of a dwelling
or dwellings on the same side of the street in any block, the depth of the front yard of any
building or building addition subsequently erected on that side of the street shall be in
accordance with Section 28.21 of this Ordinance. ?
(gg) On any single family residentially zoned lot which does not meet the requirements of this
Ordinance for lot width or area, or both, and which shares a common side yard with one
or more lots occupied by an existing single family dwelling(s), the height of the proposed
single family building shall not be more than 190% of the average of the height(s) of the
dwelling(s) on the lot(s) sharing a common side yard.
END OF ARTICLE 20.
SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 sq.ft.
Minimum Lot Frontage 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard Depth 40 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Width, Each Side 25 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Adjacent to Residential 50 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Adjacent to a Street 40 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 40 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Adjacent Residential 50 ft.
Maximum Height 35 ft.
Maximum Percent Lot Coverage 50%
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
Amendments:
Page 1 of 5
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XX (20)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
Amendments:
Page 2 of 5
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XX (20)
The following language was amended on 3/14/10
SECTION 20.2, Footnote 20(bb) SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
(bb) The rear yard in a R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S and R-1 Single Family Residential District may
be reduced after approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals upon the Zoning Board of
Appeals finding that the following specific requirements have been met.
1) The single family structure may not extend more than ten (10) feet into the
required fifty (50) foot rear yard.
2) The rear yard of the residence must back to the rear yard of the adjoining
residence and not to a side yard.
3) The width of the single family structure extending into the required fifty (50) foot
rear yard shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the width of the portion of the
single family structure which must comply with the fifty (50) foot setback.
4) The proposed penetration into the rear yard setback is the only practical location
for the proposed addition.
5) The completed structure will be consistent and compatible with the other houses
in the immediate area in overall size, construction, quality, finish and aesthetic
appearance.
6) ?The proposed extension into the rear yard shall not have a substantial negative
impact on the open and expected vistas for adjoining properties.
7) The rear yard setback otherwise required is not less than fifty (50) feet, on
account of a consent judgment or other special exceptions.
8) The proposed structure shall comply with all other requirements of this
Ordinance.?
?
? SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
Amendments:
Page 3 of 5
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
MAX HEIGHT OF
BUILDINGS MINIMUM LOT AREA (ee)
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS IN FEET (ee)
All yard setbacks shall be dimensioned from the street setback line,
as designated in Section 28. 22
NONRESIDENTIAL
USES
MINIMUM
LIVABLE
FLOOR AREA
SIDES
ZONING
DISTRICT
IN
STORIES
IN
FEET
AREA IN
SQ. FT.
WIDTH IN
FEET
MAXIMUM
LOT
COVERAGE
IN
PERCENT
(ee)
FRONT
(ff) ONE SIDE TOTAL
OF TWO
REAR
SIDE YARD
ABUTTING
A STREET
REAR YARD
ABUTTING
A SIDE LOT
LINE
SIDE YARDS SQ. FT. PER
UNIT
AG 2 ½ 35
(a)(gg) 5 Acres 150 15 45 50 (g) 100 50 45 (g) 25 (h) 1,650
PL 2½ (c) 35 (c) (c) (c) 25 45 30 60 50 50 - - -
R-1-E 2½ 35(gg) 43,560
(b) (d) (e) 150 (b) 15 45 15 30 50 (bb) 45 (g) 25 (h) 1,650
R-1-H 2½ 35(gg) 21,780
(b) (d) (e) 120 (b) 15 (cc) 35 10 20 50 (bb) 35 (g) 25 (h) 1,450
R-1-S 2½ 35(gg) 12,000
(b) (d) (e) 90 (b) 25 30 10 20 50 (bb) 30 (g) 25 (h) 1,250
R-1 2½ 35(gg) 7,200
(b) (d) (e) 60 25 25 5 16 (y) 50 (bb) 25 (g) 25 (h) 1,050
RM 1 12 (z) (z) (z) Shall comply with Rule 941 of Mobile Home Commission Rules 580
R-2 2½ 35
1 DU 7,200
2 DU 9,200
(e)
1 DU 60 ft.
2 DU 85 ft. 25 25 1 DU 5
2 DU 10
1 DU 16
2 DU 26 50 25 25 (g) 25 (h) 580 (i)
R-2-A 2 ½
(aa) 35 12,000 (j) 100 30 25 (m) 10
(k) (m)
20
(k) (m) 35 (m) 25 25 (g) - (i) (l)
OS 2 30 - - - 25 (o) 10
(n) (p) (r) 20 (p) 20 25 (r) 20 (g) - 400
OS-ARC shall comply with standards specified in Article XIV, ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
ARC shall comply with standards specified in Article XIV, ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
C-1 1 20 - - - 10 (o)
10
(n) (p)
(r)
20 20 10 (r) 20 - 400
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
Amendments:
Page 4 of 5
?SEC. 20.2 NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS ARTICLE 20
(a) No principal building or barn used for agricultural farming purposes shall exceed forty
(40) feet in height.
(b) All parcels used for agricultural farming purposes shall contain an area of five (5) acres
or more and shall have an average width of not less than one-fourth (1/4) the average
depth of the parcel, provided, however, that a parcel shall not be required to have a width
greater than three hundred fifty (350) feet. Provided, however, this shall not apply to any
parcel which at the time this Ordinance becomes effective is narrower in width or lesser
in area than the specifications herein provided, if such parcel was of record at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance.
(c) The height, area, lot coverage and yard regulations of the abutting district may be applied
to the subject property provided the Planning Commission finds that the regulations of
the abutting district are consistent with the purpose of Article 4, Public Lands District,
and will not adversely affect the existing or planned future use of adjacent neighborhood
properties.
(d) See Article 21, Residential Unit Developments regarding exceptions as to parcel area and
density controls.
(e) See Article 22, Single Family Cluster Housing regarding exceptions as to parcel area,
yard requirements and density controls.
(f) See Article 23, Planned Unit Development Option regarding exceptions as to height, yard
requirements and density controls.
(g) Where the rear yard of a corner lot abuts a side yard of an interior lot or an alley
separating such parcels, any accessory building on the corner lot shall be set back from
the side street a minimum distance equal to the front yard setback for the interior lot.
(h) Non-residential principal buildings shall have side yards of not less than twenty-five (25)
feet each, plus one (1) foot in additional side yard setback for each five (5) feet or part
thereof which the principal building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in length along the side
yard and plus an additional one (1) foot for each two (2) feet in height in excess of thirtyfive
?(35) feet. This shall not be deemed to require additional yard setback for permitted
height exceptions permitted by Section 28.23.
(i) Any two-family dwelling shall provide not less than five hundred eighty (580) square feet
of livable floor space for a single bedroom dwelling unit and an additional two hundred
(200) square feet of livable space for each additional bedroom. Each two-family
dwelling unit shall provide a utility room and/or a storage space, in addition to the above
requirements, which shall be not less than one hundred (100) square feet in area. Equal
basement area, not including area for stairs, may be substituted for utility room or storage
space.
??
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 20: Schedule of Regulations
Amendments:
Page 5 of 5
(j) Multiple-family residential principal buildings shall be located on a parcel of not less
than four thousand (4,000) square feet per efficiency or one (1) bedroom dwelling unit,
plus an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet per additional bedroom, exclusive of
the area within the street setback.
Where extra rooms (such as a den, study or library) are shown on the plans in addition to
a living room and bedrooms, such extra rooms shall be counted as a bedroom for the
purpose of computing land area per dwelling unit.
When a project is considered by the Planning Commission to be a redevelopment project,
that is a project where removal of existing structures will be required in order to
accomplish the development and said removal would be considered an upgrading of the
area, the overall density of the project shall be determined by total number of dwelling
units without consideration to number of bedrooms proposed. The overall density for
such a project, shall not exceed eleven (11) dwelling units per acre overall density. In
reviewing the project to determine consideration as a redevelopment project, the
Commission shall find the project would result in an upgrading of the area and said
project would be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district.
(k) Where any multiple family use abuts a single family residential district, or where
dwelling units face or back up to a side parcel line, the side yard shall not be less than
thirty-five (35) feet
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 208
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXI
RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
PURPOSE?
The purpose of the Residential Unit Development (RUD) is to permit two (2) optional methods
of development in R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, and R-1 single family residential districts (on sites forty
(40) acres and greater, and on sites eighty (80) acres and greater) that allow a mixture of types of
residential units. It is the intent of this Article to permit development of residential patterns
which encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout and type of structures,
achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy and the provision of
public services and utilities, encourage provision of useful open space and provide better housing
suited to the needs of the residents of the Township, and ensure integration of the proposed
development with the characteristics of the general planning area. Development under this
Article shall be in accordance with a comprehensive physical plan establishing functional use
areas, density patterns, open space and recreation and system of residential streets. The
following regulations shall apply in all R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, and R-1 Single Family Residential
Districts, and shall be subject further to the provisions of this Ordinance and the Township
Subdivision Ordinance with respect to final development approval.
SEC. 21.1 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES?
The Residential Unit Development (RUD) is an optional method of development which may be
permitted only after a public hearing, review and recommendation by the Planning Commission,
and approval by the Township Board of Trustees. The proposed RUD shall reflect all of the
following basic principles:
1. The proposal is in conformity with the purpose and intent of this Article.
2. The site contains natural assets, such as large stands of trees, rolling topography,
significant views, swale areas, flood plains or wetlands which would be in the best
interest of the community to preserve, and which would otherwise be substantially
destroyed under normal subdivision development. This determination shall be made by
the Planning Commission and Township Board after review of a documented site
analysis submitted by the applicant. If a determination is made that the site does not
contain any natural assets which would be in the best interest of the community to
preserve, the Planning Commission and Board may give further consideration to the
proposal if provisions are made within the development to provide open space which
would provide a buffer between a major thoroughfare or expressway, or provide useable
recreation open space with reasonable access to all dwellings in the development.
The intent is to provide neighborhood recreation open space and to supplement the
existing natural features of the Township. The recreation open space and/or buffer area
shall be improved with plantings and other features in a manner that would create a
natural asset for the development and the community as a whole.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 21.1 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 209
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
3. The proposed development shall be in harmony with the existing and proposed land
patterns of adjacent properties, and the general planning area, and shall not negatively
impact the stability and orderly development of adjacent lands and the general planning
area as indicated by the Future Land Use Plan.
4. The proposed height, bulk, location and character of the structures proposed shall be in
harmony with the existing and proposed structures on adjacent lands and in the general
planning area and shall not negatively impact the stability of the orderly development of
adjacent lands and the general planning area as indicated by the Future Land Use Plan.
5. The proposed location of uses which are of a significantly different scale or character
than the abutting residential districts, such as access drives, parking areas, solid waste
pick-up points, swimming pools, tennis courts and facilities of a similar nature on the
subject property, shall be in harmony with the existing and proposed land patterns of
adjacent properties and the general planning area and shall not negatively impact the
stability of the orderly development of adjacent lands and the general planning area as
indicated by the Future Land Use Plan.
6. The proposed development will not adversely impact the capability of public services and
facilities in the area or the Township as a whole.
7. The gross acreage of the subject property shall be a minimum of forty (40) acres.
SEC. 21.2 CHANGE OF DISTRICT?
No application shall be accepted for a use which will require a change in the overall density of
the zoning district, unless said application is preceded by an application for a zoning district
amendment.
SEC. 21.3 APPLICATION?
Application for approval shall be made by the titleholder or titleholders of any parcel where use
of the Residential Unit Development process is contemplated. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee determined by Township Board resolution to cover the cost of evaluating
the plan.
SEC. 21.4 RUD OPTION APPLICATION INFORMATION?
Application for approval of an RUD option shall contain sufficient information to evaluate the
proposed RUD’s consistency with Section 21.1, Statement of Principles, including the following:
1. A metes and bounds survey and legal description of the acreage comprising the proposed
Residential Unit Development, including a disclosure of mineral rights ownership.
SEC. 21.2 CHANGE OF DISTRICT
SEC. 21.3 APPLICATION
SEC. 21.4 RUD OPTION APPLICATION
INFORMATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 210
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
2. Topographic survey, including natural and manmade features at a scale of one inch
equals fifty feet (1”=50’), with a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet.
3. Site analysis, which identifies the character, structure and potential of the site as it relates
to this Article, including areas adjacent to the subject property and sufficient information
about the nearby properties, so that a determination can be made by the Planning
Commission and Board as to the impact of the proposed Residential Unit Development
on the general planning area in which the RUD is located. The analysis shall include as a
minimum the following:
(a) Contiguous Land Uses. Indicate type and impact on adjoining lands, direction
and distance to community facilities, show public transportation routes related to
site.
(b) Topography. Indicate basic topography, any unique ground forms and percent of
slope.
(c) Drainage. Natural watershed (direction), drainage swales and swamp areas.
(d) Soils. Depth of topsoil and type of soils.
(e) Vegetation. Locate and identify existing tree masses, locate and identify
specimen plant material and indicate type of ground cover.
(f) Existing conditions. Structures, utilities and circulation.
(g) Special Features. Lakes, streams, ponds, floodplains and wetlands, dramatic views
and significant natural, archeological, historical or cultural features.
4. A conceptual development plan, which illustrates the general character of the proposed
RUD. The conceptual development plan shall identify the general location and extent of
?housing types and densities, open space, general system of interior roadways,
drainageways, open water and general intentions relating to grading within the site.
5. Other pertinent information necessary to enable the Planning Commission to make a
determination concerning the desirability of applying the provisions of this Article.
SEC. 21.5 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPLICATION INFORMATION
Following RUD option approval by the Township Board, a General Development Plan that
contains sufficient information to determine the proposed development’s conformance to Section
21.10, General Conditions, must be submitted for approval and shall contain the following
information:
SEC. 21.5 GENRAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
APPLICATION INFORMATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 211
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
1. A general development plan shall contain the same information required for tentative site
plan approval as found in Section 29.8.2 of this Ordinance or tentative preliminary plat
approval found as found in Chapter 93 of the Township Code of Ordinances.
2. Project Narrative
A written narrative statement describing the proposed RUD, including housing types, lot
sizes, building designs and architectural themes or styles, types of exterior façade finish
materials, the relationship of the RUD to the surrounding area, all anticipated impacts
associated with the proposed project and measures to be taken to mitigate or minimize
such impacts (including any environmental impacts or impacts to off-site traffic
conditions). The Township may require a more detailed impacts analysis based on the
initial narrative statement.
2. An RUD Contract in conformance with Section 21.09.
3. If the proposed RUD will be a condominium, the Master Deed and By-laws in
conformance with Section 21.14 shall be submitted.
4. The Planning Commission may require the submittal of typical building elevations that
identify the general character of proposed buildings.
SEC. 21.6 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS ?
Information required for final development plan approval shall be the same as required for final
site plan approval as found in Section 29.8.2 of this Ordinance or final preliminary plat approval
as found in Chapter 93 of the Township Code of Ordinances. The final development plan shall
meet all conditions of Township Board approval, and any final requirements determined
necessary by provisions of this Ordinance or other applicable Codes and Ordinances, or the
criteria for final site plan approval set forth in Section 29.8.2. Final development plan approval
shall be further subject to the following:
1. The final site plan or final preliminary plat for a single phase RUD development shall
constitute the final development plan. For a multi-phased RUD, where sufficient final
detail has not been determined or which is expected to change slightly, the final
development plan shall be reviewed and approved as a separate document, and be
contingent on approval of the final site plans or final preliminary plats.
2. Phasing
Separate final plan approvals may be granted on each phase of an approved multi-phased
RUD, subject to the following:
(a) The approved final development plan for the entire proposed RUD shall be
incorporated by reference and as an exhibit of the RUD contract for each phase.
SEC. 21.5 GENRAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
APPLICATION INFORMATION
SEC. 21.6 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 212
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
(b) Each phase shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural
resources and the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the surrounding
area and users of the Residential Unit Development.
(c) Each phase shall include all improvements necessary to allow the developed
portion of the RUD to function and be occupied independent of improvements
associated with future phases.
SEC. 21.7 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS (as amended on 9/30/07)
At least one (1) public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a proposed
Residential Unit Development in order to acquaint the public and adjoining property owners with
the proposal prior to finishing of detailed plans and specifications by the petitioner. Notice of
the hearing shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent by mail
or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the
property in question and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the
property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. The
notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be
considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in
making notification. The notice shall:
1. Describe the nature of the Residential Unit Development request.
2. Indicate the property which is the subject of the Residential Unit Development request.
The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property.
Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist
within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be
used.
3. State when and where the Residential Unit Development request will be considered.
4. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
SEC. 21.8 RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCESS ?
1. Residential Unit Development Option
(a) Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall review the
proposed RUD for conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the intent
and purpose of this Article, the statement of principles listed in Section 21.1 and
SEC. 21.7 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 21.8 RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT
APPROVAL PROCESS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 213
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
its compatibility with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the
capability of public services and facilities affected by the proposed RUD
Within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the Commission shall
recommend to the Board of Trustees approval, denial or approval with conditions,
of the RUD Option and concept plan. The Commission’s recommendations shall
be forwarded to the Township Board of Trustees stating the Commission’s
findings, recommendations and any recommended conditions of approval.
(b) Township Board Action. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the
Commission, the Township Board shall review the application, recommendations,
and may approve, approve with condition, or deny the application.
If the Township Board denies the request to apply the provisions of the RUD
Option to the parcel of land as described in the survey submitted with the
application, it shall record the decision and the basis for the decision in the
meeting minutes. In the case of a denial, development of the subject property can
be made only in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance for the
district where the property is.
If the Township Board of Trustees approves the request to apply the provisions of
the RUD Option to the parcel of land as described in the survey submitted with
the application, it shall record the decision and the basis for the decision in the
meeting minutes.
Approval by the Board shall confer approval to develop the subject property
under the terms and requirements of the RUD Option, conditions established by
the concept plan and in the site analysis. Such approval shall be further subject to
the following:
1) RUD Option approval shall not constitute approval of a preliminary plat,
final plat, final site plan, or site condominium plan.?
2) Approval Period: The approval of the Township Board grants the
applicant a period of one (1) year from the date of RUD Option approval
by the Board to submit a general development plan and RUD contract to
the Planning Commission for recommendation to the Township Board and
final approval by the Board.
3) Extensions: Extensions of RUD Option approval may be granted by the
Township Board upon written request of the applicant, and upon showing
of good faith and effort by the applicant. Failure to request such extension
shall be deemed an abandonment of the proposed Residential Unit
Development.
? SEC. 21.8 RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT
APPROVAL PROCESS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 214
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
2. General Development Plan
Within eighteen months of RUD option approval by the Township Board the applicant
shall submit and obtain Township Board approval of the general development plan and
RUD contract.
(a) Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall review the
general development plan for conformance to Section 21.10, General Conditions,
and any conditions of RUD option approval and make a recommendation to the
Township Board to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed
general development plan. ?
(b) Township Board Action. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s
recommendations of the Commission, the Township Board shall review the
general development plan and RUD contract, recommendations, and shall take
action thereupon.
If the Township Board denies the general development plan and contract, it shall
record the decision and the basis for the decision in the meeting minutes.
If the Township Board approves the general development plan and contract, it
shall record the decision and the basis for the decision in the meeting minutes.
Approval by the Board shall confer approval to develop the subject property
under the requirements of the RUD Option and the conditions established in the
site analysis and general development plan
1) Approval Period. Approval by the Board shall grant the applicant a period
of one (1) year to submit a final development plan to the Planning
Commission for approval.
2) Extensions. Extensions of general development plan approval may be
granted by the Township Board upon written request of the applicant and
upon showing of good faith and effort by the applicant. Failure to request
such extension shall be deemed an abandonment of the proposed
Residential Unit Development.
3. Final Development Plan
Within eighteen (18) months of general development plan approval by the Township
Board the applicant shall submit and obtain Planning Commission approval of a final
development plan.
(a) Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall review the final
development plan for conformance to Section 21.10, General Conditions, and the
RUD contract and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed
general development plan.
SEC. 21.8 RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT
APPROVAL PROCESS ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 215
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
1) Approval Period: Approval by the Planning Commission shall grant the
applicant a period of one (1) year to obtain a Building Permit from the
Building Department.
2) Extensions: Extensions of final development plan approval may be
granted by the Planning Commission upon written request of the applicant
and upon showing of good faith and effort by the applicant. Failure to
request such extension shall be deemed an abandonment of the proposed
Residential Unit Development.
SEC. 21.9 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS?
Prior to or in conjunction with the submission of a general development plan, the applicant shall
submit a proposed RUD contract for review and recommendation by the Planning Commission,
and review and approval by the Township Board. Such contract shall set forth the conditions
upon which the RUD Option approval is based. The contract shall be entered into between the
Township and the applicant prior to the approval of any final plat, final site plan or final
condominium site plan. Said contract shall provide:
1. Survey (metes and bounds) of the acreage comprising the proposed Residential Unit
Development, including a legal description of the proposed RUD site.
2. The manner of ownership of the land, including mineral rights.
3. The manner of the ownership and of the dedication of the open land.
4. The restrictive covenants required for membership rights and privileges, maintenance and
obligation to pay assessments for the open land.
5. The stipulations pertaining to commencement and completion of the phases of the
development, to construction, installation, repairs and maintenance of improvements, to
obligations for payment of any costs, expenses or fees is planned or reasonably foreseen,
and to the manner of assuring payment of obligations.
6. Provisions for the Township to effect construction, installation, repair, and maintenance
and keep of public utilities, storm and sanitary sewers, and drainageways, water, streets,
sidewalks, lighting and similar facilities, required open space areas, land and
improvements associated with the approved RUD Option thereon, and any other
conditions of the RUD approval or the general development plan, upon failure of the
applicant to do so in accordance with contract requirements. This provision shall address
the manner for assessment (and enforcement of assessments) of costs, expenses or fees
incidental thereto against the applicant or owner(s) or occupants of the Residential Unit
Development.
7. The site analysis and general development plan shall be incorporated by reference and as
exhibits.
? SEC. 21.9 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 216
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
8. If final plat, final site plan or final condominium site plan approval is granted for only a
portion (phase) of the overall Residential Unit Development, an approved tentative
preliminary plat, tentative site plan or tentative condominium site plan for the entire
proposed RUD shall be incorporated by reference and as an exhibit to the RUD contract.
9. Provisions reasonably and necessarily intended to protect, the intent of this Article, the
conditions of approval, public health, safety, or general welfare of the Township.
SEC. 21.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS?
This Article provides for two (2) optional methods of developing residential property. When the
gross area proposed for development is forty (40) acres or greater but less than eighty (80) acres
and the applicant provides at least ten (10) percent open space, development shall be permitted
under the specific conditions set forth in Sections 21.11. When the gross area is eighty (80)
acres or greater and the applicant provides at least ten (10) percent open space, development
shall be permitted under the specific conditions set forth in Sections 21.12.
1. Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in all Residential Unit Developments:
(a) All principal permitted, accessory and special land uses allowed within the
applicable residential zoning district shall be respectively permitted, subject to the
requirements of the applicable district.
(b) Multiple family dwellings, as defined in Section 36.2 and limited to no more than
sixteen (16) dwelling units in any one (1) building.?
(c) Townhouse dwellings as defined in Section 36.2 and limited to no more than six
(6) dwelling units in any one (1) building.
(d) Stacked flat dwellings as defined in Section 36.2 and limited to no more than
eighteen (18) dwelling units in a building.
(e) Two family dwellings, as defined in Section 36.2.
(f) One family cluster dwellings, which shall be defined as the attaching of no more
than four (4) one family dwellings. The method by which the units may be
attached shall be limited to the following:?
1) A common party wall in the garage portion of the unit only.
2) Obscuring walls, architectural screens fencing or similar elements
designed to create a private outdoor area.
?
? SEC. 21.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 217
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
3) A common party wall between individual dwelling units, provided that
each dwelling unit shall have a private exterior entrance with visual and
physical separation from adjacent dwelling units; the exterior design of the
building shall be compatible with the architectural style, size, overall floor
area and height of nearby single family dwellings; and shall include
acoustic controls and soundproofing materials in accordance with the
standards established by the Chief Building Official for cluster housing.
(g) Detached one family cluster dwellings, which shall be defined as a group of two
(2) or more detached one family dwellings located on a common parcel of land
under single or condominium ownership, and having any yard or court in
common. Such dwellings shall not be subject to Section 21.10.4.
2. Calculation of Permitted Dwelling Unit Density
The area used in computing overall density shall be the gross site area including any
dedicatable interior right-of-way less than eighty-six (86) feet in width and twenty-five
(25) percent of the area of water located wholly within the boundaries of the parcel. The
Planning Commission may vary the percentage of water area to be used in the density
calculation, upon determination that such a decrease or increase would be within the
purpose and intent of the RUD Option, and that the overall project would be in harmony
with the existing and proposed land patterns of adjacent properties and the general
planning area.
The following shall be excluded from the area used in computing overall density:
(a) Dedicated or dedicatable interior and exterior right-of-way equal to eighty-six
(86) feet in width or greater. This shall be determined by the established street
setback lines, in the case of existing streets.
(b) Water area which is not wholly within the boundaries of the parcel to be
developed.?
3. All dwellings defined and allowed pursuant to Section 21.10.1(b) through 21.10.1(f) shall
require a land area not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet for each dwelling unit
with not more than one (1) bedroom, and shall provide an additional one thousand
(1,000) square feet for each additional bedroom. As a guide only, the densities based
upon such minimum land area will not exceed the following:
UNIT TYPE DWELLING UNITS
PER ACRE
1 Bedroom Unit 10.9
2 Bedroom Unit 8.7
3 Bedroom Unit 7.3
? SEC. 21.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 218
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
4. All one family dwellings shall be subject to the following:
(a) All one family dwellings shall comply with the height and minimum floor area
requirements of Article 20, Schedule of Regulations.
(b) Standard lots shall conform to the requirements of Article 20, Schedule of
Regulations, of this Ordinance or
(c) Modified lots shall conform to the following lot size and yard requirements:
MODIFIED LOT STANDARDS R-1-E R-1-H R-1-S R-1
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 30,000 16,000 10,000 6,600
Minimum Lot Depth (feet) 150 140 120 110
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet) 125 100 80 60
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 45 35 30 25
Minimum Side Yard – One Side (feet) 15 10 10 5
Minimum Side Yards - Total of Two (feet) 30 20 20 16
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 50 50 50 40
Minimum Rear Yard Abutting Open Space (feet) 50 40 40 30
5. Open Space for Modified Lots
For each square foot of land gained within a single-family residential development
through the reduction of lot size, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the
common use of the owners and/or residents of the land as open space, and developed in a
manner approved by the Commission. A complete table indicating proposed area for
each lot and the amount of square footage gained for each proposed lot shall be submitted
with the proposal (see example in table below). Square footage gained for each shall be
determined by subtracting the proposed reduced lot area from standard lot area as found
in the Schedule of Regulations for the zoning of the subject property.? No open space
credit is given for lots greater than the minimum district requirement.
Example of Required Open Space Calculations:
LOT
NUMBER
PROPOSED
LOT AREA
REQUIRED
LOT AREA DIFFERENCE REQUIRED
OPEN SPACE
1 16,000 sq.ft. 21,780 sq.ft. (5,780) 5,780 sq.ft.
2 25,000 sq.ft. 21,780 sq.ft. 3,220 (3,220 sq.ft.)
3 18,500 sq.ft. 21,780 sq.ft. (3,280) 3,280 sq.ft.
MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE 9,060 sq.ft.
? SEC. 21.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 219
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
6. Required Yards (as amended 10/25/07)
The actual arrangements of buildings, distances between buildings and use of yard areas
shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. The Commission
may require additional separation distance between units or clusters to ensure that the
intent of the Ordinance is carried out and the public health, safety and welfare of the
community is adequately served.
(a) Yard requirements for attached one family dwelling clusters, and detached one
family dwelling clusters shall be provided based on the following:
1) A minimum of ten (10) feet shall be provided between each detached unit
except that the distance between or between a garage and a living area
may be reduced to six (6) feet. In the above mentioned situations the
applicant shall clearly indicate the intended use of the area and the
proposed elevations facing each other. Where the space between is
intended for use as an outdoor living space, the area shall be a minimum
of twenty (20) feet.
2) Minimum spacing between clusters shall be determined by the number of
living units that are arranged in any cluster group, as shown in the
following table: ?
NUMBER OF LIVING UNITS
PER CLUSTER
MINIMUM DISTANCE
BETWEEN CLUSTERS (feet)
1 Unit Cluster and a 1 Unit Cluster 10.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 2 Unit Cluster 15.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 20.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 25.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 2 Unit Cluster 20.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 25.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 30.0
3 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 30.0
3 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 40.0
4 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 40.0
3) The minimum building setback in a RUD shall be 50 feet from any
perimeter property line or street setback line of the development parcel.
However, based on factors such as lack of impacts on adjacent sites or the
particular relationship of the building(s) to the side and/or rear property
line, the Planning Commission may reduce the required building setbacks
from any side or rear property line. In no case shall the building setback
be less than 35 feet.
? ? SEC. 21.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 220
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
4) Where a building in an RUD sides to the right-of-way of a road, the
minimum building setback from the street setback line shall be equal to
the front yard setback for the abutting zoning district, if one of the abutting
districts fronting the same road is zoned single family residential. In no
case shall the building setback be less than 25 feet.
SEC. 21.11 CONDITIONS SPECIFIC TO FORTY ACRES OR GREATER?
Residential Unit Developments of forty (40) acres or greater, and developed pursuant to this
section, shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Overall density shall not exceed the following dwelling units per acre:
ZONING
DISTRICT
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF
DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE
R-1-E 0.86
R-1-H 1.70
R-1-S 3.05
R-1 5.00
2. Open space shall be provided in at least the amount gained by lot size reduction as
provided in Section 21.10.4(c), but in no case shall it be less than ten (10) percent of the
Residential Unit Development.
3. The total number of dwelling units of the types as defined in Section 21.10.1(b) through
21.10.1(g) combined, shall be limited to thirty-five (35) percent of the total number of
dwelling units in the development.
4. Development of a RUD in the R-1-E District:
Development of a RUD in a R-1-E Zoning District may be permitted consistent with the
following requirements where only detached one family residential dwellings on
individual lots are proposed, provided the following requirements are met:
(a) Overall density of the proposed Residential Unit Development shall not exceed
one (1) dwelling unit per acre.
(b) A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross area of the Residential Unit
Development shall be provided as open space. The provisions as found in Section
21.11.2 shall not apply.
(c) All other specific requirements as found in Section 21.10.4(b) shall apply in
regard to lot size reduction.
? SEC. 21.11 CONDITIONS SPECIFIC TO FORTY ACRES
OR GREATER
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 221
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
(d) All other specific requirements as found in Article 21 shall apply, except where
they are in conflict with the above requirements.
SEC. 21.12 CONDITIONS SPECIFIC TO EIGHTY ACRES OR GREATER ?
Residential Unit Developments of eighty (80) acres or greater, and developed pursuant to this
section, shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Overall density shall not exceed the following dwelling units per acre:
ZONING
DISTRICT
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF
DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE
R-1-E 1.30
R-1-H 2.20
R-1-S 3.05
R-1 5.00
2. Open space shall be provided in at least the amount gained by lot size reduction as
provided in Section 21.10.4(b), but in no case shall it be less than ten (10) percent of the
Residential Unit Development.?
3. The total number of multiple family, stacked flat and townhouse dwelling units, as
defined in Section 21.10.1(b) through 21.10.1(g) combined, shall not exceed thirty-five
(35) percent of the total number of dwelling units in the development. Any such units
must comply with the restrictions for multiple family, townhouse or other unit types as
listed in Section 21.10.1 (b) through (g).
4. The total number of detached one family dwellings units that have been modified
pursuant to Section 21.10.4 of this Article, shall be not less than fifty-five (55) percent of
the total number of dwelling units in the development.
5. A perimeter strip not less than three hundred sixty (360) feet in depth shall be placed
around the outer boundaries of the total area where the proposed Residential Unit
Development abuts, in whole or in part, land in a One Family Residential District. Use
and development of land within this perimeter strip shall be limited to the following:
(a) The perimeter strip shall only be developed in complete conformity with the
requirements of Article 20 applicable to the abutting One Family Residential
District, and shall contain only one family dwellings. All other permitted or
conditional uses otherwise applicable to the zoning district shall be prohibited in
the perimeter strip.
? SEC. 21.12 CONDITIONS SPECIFIC TO EIGHTY
(80) ACRES OR GREATER
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 222
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
(b) A reduction in lot size may be permitted within the perimeter strip, in accordance
with Section 21.10.4(b), based upon the applicable abutting zoning district
requirements.
(c) The perimeter strip may also be used for an elementary school playground, park,
golf course or similar open space which is recorded in perpetuity for said purpose.
(d) The Planning Commission may modify the three hundred sixty (360) foot
perimeter strip depth requirement upon determination that a greater or lesser
perimeter strip would be in better proportion to the total area of the development
due to topography or existing development on the abutting land.
7. Where the proposed Residential Unit Development abuts a major thoroughfare having an
existing or ultimate right-of-way of one hundred twenty (120) feet or more, the perimeter
strip required above may contain attached one family dwelling clusters, detached one
family dwelling clusters. The density of such clusters shall not be greater than three and
one-half (3 ½) dwelling units per acre. The depth of the perimeter strip shall be measured
from the nearest edge of the street setback line, and shall not be less than three hundred
sixty (360) feet in depth.
8. Development of an RUD in the R-1-H District: ?
Development of an RUD in the R-1-H zoning district where only detached one family
residential dwellings on individual lots are proposed, and no other uses as defined under
Section 21.10.1 (b) through (g) are proposed, the modification of lot size and yard
requirements as defined in Section 21.10.4(b) may be further modified provided the
following requirements are met:
(a) No lot proposed shall be less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area.
(b) A minimum of fifty-five (55) percent of the lots proposed shall be thirteen
thousand (13,000) square feet or greater.
(c) No lot shall be less than ninety (90) feet in width.
(d) A minimum of forty-five (45) percent of the lots proposed shall be one hundred
(100) feet in width or greater.
(e) Overall density of the proposed Residential Unit Development shall not exceed
2.2 dwelling units per acre.
(f) All other applicable requirements of the RUD Option are met.
9. Development of a RUD in the R-1-E District:
Development of a RUD in a R-1-E Zoning District may be permitted consistent with the
following requirements where only detached one family residential dwellings on
individual lots are proposed, and no other uses as defined under Section 21.10.1(b)
through (g) are proposed provided the following requirements are met:
? SEC. 21.12 CONDITIONS SPECIFIC TO EIGHTY
(80) ACRES OR GREATER
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 223
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
(a) Overall density of the proposed Residential Unit Development shall not exceed
one (1) dwelling unit per acre.
(b) A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross area of the Residential Unit
Development shall be provided as open space. The provisions as found in Section
21.12.2 shall not apply.
(c) All other specific requirements as found in Section 21.10.4(b) shall apply in
regard to lot size reduction.
(d) All other specific requirements as found in Article 21 shall apply, except where
they are in conflict with the above requirements.
SEC. 21.13 AMENDMENT, TERMINATION AND REVOCATION?
Final approval by the Township Board of the general development plan and contract signifies the
completion of the Residential Unit Development application process. The applicant shall comply
with all conditions and requirements of the general development plan and contract, which shall
be recorded in the record of the Township Board’s approval action and shall remain unchanged
except upon the mutual consent of the Township and the landowner
1. Compliance Required
Once an area has been included within a general development plan for Residential Unit
Development, and such plan has been approved by the Board, no development may take
place in such area nor may any use thereof be made except in accordance with said plan,
or in accordance with a Board approved amendment thereto, unless the plan is terminated
as provided herein.
2. Amendment
An approved general development plan and contract may be amended in the same
manner provided in this Article for approval of the original general development plan and
contract.
3. Termination
An approved general development plan and contract may be terminated by the applicant
prior to any development within the Residential Unit Development area involved by
filing with the Township Clerk and recording in the Wayne County Records an affidavit
so stating. The approval of the general development plan and contract shall terminate
upon said recording. No approved general development plan and contract shall be
terminated after any development commences within the Residential Unit Development
area, except with the approval of the Township Board and of all parties of interest in the
land.
? SEC. 21.13 AMENDMENT, TERMINATION AND
REVOCATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 224
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
4. Revocation
A Residential Unit Development approval may be revoked by the Township Board in any
case where the conditions of such approval have not been or are not being complied with.
The Township Board shall give the applicant notice of its intention to revoke such permit
at least ten (10) days prior to review of said approval by the Board. After conclusion of
such review the Township Board may revoke such approval if it finds that a violation in
fact exists and has not been remedied prior to such hearing. ?
SEC. 21.14 CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
For any condominium proposed as a RUD, the applicant shall provide a copy of the Master Deed
and Condominium Association Bylaws for approval by the Township Board of Trustees. The
condominium documents shall provide limits on use of common areas or open space for
accessory structures such as swimming pools, decks, playground equipment and buildings. A
plan shall be provided indicating the limits of such accessory structures within a defined
envelope.
As part of the General Development Plan application, the applicant shall submit the necessary
documents to the Community Development Department for Township Attorney review prior to
final development plan approval by the Board of Trustees. The Association documentation shall
include provisions for the following at a minimum:
1. The conditions upon which the approval is based, with reference to the approval final
development plan.
2. When open space or common areas are indicated in the development plan for use by the
residents, the open space or common areas shall be conveyed in fee simple or otherwise
committed by dedication to an association of the residents, and the use shall be
irrevocably dedicated for the useful life of the residences, and retained as open space for
park, recreation or other common uses.
3. A program and financing for maintaining common areas and features, such as walkways,
signs, lighting and landscaping.
4. Assurance that trees, waterways and woodlands will be preserved as shown on the
General Development Plan.?
5. Assurance that the construction and maintenance of all streets and necessary utilities
(including public water, wastewater collection and treatment) through bonds or other
satisfactory means, for any and all phases of the RUD. In the case of a phased RUD, this
equipment shall be reviewed at the time of any final development plan approval.
6. Address any other concerns of the Township regarding construction and maintenance.
END OF ARTICLE 21. THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY
OF REVISIONS TO THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
?
? SEC. 21.14 CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
Page 1 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXI (21)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
Page 2 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXI (21)
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
6. Required Yards
The actual arrangements of buildings, distances between buildings and use of yard areas
shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. The Commission,
may require additional separation distance between units or clusters to ensure that the
intent of the Ordinance is carried out and the public health, safety and welfare of the
community is adequately served.
(a) Yard requirements for attached one family dwelling clusters, and detached one
family dwelling clusters shall be provided based on the following:
1) A minimum of ten (10) feet shall be provided between each detached unit
xcept that the distance between or between a garage and a living area may
be reduced to six (6) feet. In the above mentioned situations the applicant
shall clearly indicate the intended use of the area and the proposed
elevations facing each other. Where the space between is intended for use
as an outdoor living space, the area shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
feet.
2) Minimum spacing between clusters shall be determined by the number of
living units that are arranged in any cluster group, as shown in the
following table: ?
NUMBER OF LIVING UNITS
PER CLUSTER
MINIMUM DISTANCE
BETWEEN CLUSTERS (feet)
1 Unit Cluster and a 1 Unit Cluster 10.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 2 Unit Cluster 15.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 20.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 25.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 2 Unit Cluster 20.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 25.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 30.0
3 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 30.0
3 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 40.0
4 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 40.0
(b) Yard requirements for townhouse dwellings, stacked flats and multiple family
structures shall comply with Article 20, Schedule of Regulations for R-2-A
Zoning District.
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 21: Residential Unit Developments
Amendments:
Page 3 of 3
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 21.7 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS?
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a proposed Residential Unit
Development in order to acquaint the public and adjoining property owners with the proposal
prior to finishing of detailed plans and specifications by the petitioner. Notice of the hearing shall
be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent by mail or personal
delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to
whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in
question and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet. The notice shall
be given not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will
be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in
making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure,
except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased
by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit
or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4)
dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the
structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The
notice shall:
1. Describe the nature of the Residential Unit Development request.
2. Indicate the property which is the subject of the Residential Unit Development request.
3. State when and where the Residential Unit Development request will be considered.
4. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 225
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXII
SINGLE FAMILY CLUSTER HOUSING
PURPOSE?
The purpose of the Single Family Cluster Housing Option is to permit optional methods of
development and arrangement of single family structures on parcels less than forty (40) acres
gross area in the R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1 and R-2 single family residential districts, which
provide for design alternatives compatible with existing and future adjacent single family
subdivisions, and which meet one or more of the following characteristics:
1. The parcel contains natural assets such as large stands of trees, rolling topography, swale
areas, flood, plains or wetlands which would be in the best interest of the community to
preserve and would otherwise be substantially destroyed if developed under traditional
subdivision requirements.
2. Because of the parcel's peculiar configuration, it would be difficult to develop under
traditional subdivision requirements.
3. Because of the parcel's particular relationship to thoroughfare and/or collector roads and
existing circulation patterns for abutting subdivisions, it would be difficult to develop
under traditional subdivision requirements.
4. Because of the parcel's particular relationship to a limited access highway, development
under the cluster option would result in a more suitable living environment than could be
achieved under strict adherence to traditional subdivision requirements.
SEC. 22.1 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES ?
Single Family Cluster Housing is an optional method of development which may be permitted
only after a public hearing, review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, and
approval by the Township Board of Trustees, and upon finding that the proposed cluster housing
development reflects the following basic principles:
1. The proposal is in conformity with the spirit and intent of the Cluster Housing Option as
established in the purpose Section of this Article.
2. The vehicular circulation system planned for the proposed development will be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare in regards to the overall circulation of
the community, egress/ingress to the site, vehicular turning movements related to street
intersections and street gradient, site distance and potential hazards to the normal flow of
traffic.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 22.1 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 226
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
In reviewing the proposed interior circulation system for the proposed project, the
Planning Commission shall determine the necessity for public roads and the potential
future extension of such roads to adjacent properties.
All interior roads, both public and private, shall be constructed in compliance with
existing construction standards as adopted by the Wayne County Department of Public
Services for residential streets. The Planning Commission and/or Township Board may
waive this requirement after review and recommendation by the Township Planner and
Township Engineer, provided the proposed waiver will not materially impair the intent
and purpose of this Ordinance or the public interest.
3. The proposed units, circulation, layout, parking facilities and any open space or
recreation activity areas are designed and located in a manner that ensures the stability of
existing or future conventional single family residential properties in the area.
4. Proposed landscape plantings, fences, walls and/or open space areas are appropriate and
of sufficient size, height and quantity to insure that the proposed development will not be
objectionable to nearby existing or future conventional single family residential
properties by reason of noise, fumes or flash of lights from automobiles, or exterior
lighting; nor will it interfere with an adequate supply of light and air, increase the danger
of fire or otherwise endanger the public safety.
5. The proposed development will not adversely impact the capability of public services and
facilities in the area or the Township as a whole.
SEC. 22.2 APPLICATION?
Application for approval shall be made by the titleholder or titleholders of any parcel where use
of the Cluster Housing Option is contemplated. The application shall be accompanied by a fee
determined by Township Board resolution to cover the cost of evaluating the application.
SEC. 22.3 APPLICATION INFORMATION ?
Application for approval shall contain the following information:
1. Survey and Site Analysis
(a) A metes and bounds survey and legal description of the acreage comprising the
proposed Cluster Housing Development, including a disclosure of mineral rights
ownership.
(b) Topographic survey, including natural and manmade features at a scale of one
inch equals fifty feet (1”=50’), with a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet.
(c) Site analysis, which identifies the character, structure and potential of the site as it
relates to this Article, including areas adjacent to the subject property and
? SEC. 22.2 APPLICATION
? SEC. 22.3 APPLICATION INFORMATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 227
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
sufficient information about the nearby properties, so that a determination can be
made by the Planning Commission and Board as to the impact of the proposed
Cluster Housing development on the general planning area in which it is located.
The analysis shall include as a minimum the following:
1) Adjacent Land Uses: Indicate type and impact on adjoining lands,
direction and distance to community facilities; show transportation routes
related to site.
2) Drainage: Natural watershed (direction), drainage swales and swamp
areas.
3) Soils: Depth of topsoil and type of soils.?
4) Vegetation: Locate and identify existing tree masses, locate and identify
specimen plant material and indicate type of ground cover.
5) Existing Conditions: Structures, utilities and circulation.
6) Special Features: Lakes, streams, ponds, floodplains and wetlands,
dramatic views and significant natural, archeological, historical or cultural
features.
2. Documentation related to the Purpose and Statement of Principles Sections of this Article
indicating why this parcel should be considered for development under the Cluster
Housing Option.
3. General Development Plan: A plan of sufficient detail to define the proposed location of
buildings, parking, interior circulation, landscape areas and method of handling storm
water run-off, sanitary sewer and water facilities. (Scale 1"=50’ minimum).
4. Proposed method of ownership.
5. General concept of the building types to be used, including typical architectural
elevations of proposed residential dwellings.
6. A parallel plan conforming to all applicable requirements of a conventional residential
development demonstrating the number of residential units or lots that could be
developed following the requirements of the zoning district without the cluster option.
7. Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or
Township Board to make a determination concerning the desirability of applying the
provisions of this Article.
? SEC. 22.3 APPLICATION INFORMATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 228
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
22.4 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS (as amended on 9/30/07)
At least one (1) public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a proposed Cluster
Housing Development in order to acquaint the public and adjoining property owners with the
proposal prior to finishing of detailed plans and specifications by the petitioner. Notice of the
hearing shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons
to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property
in question and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the property
regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. The notice
shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be considered.
If the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making
notification. The notice shall:
1. Describe the nature of the Cluster Housing request.
2. Indicate the property which is subject of the Cluster Housing request. The notice shall
include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do
not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property.
If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used.
3. State when and where the Cluster Housing request will be considered.
4. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
SEC. 22.5 PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION?
The Planning Commission shall review the proposed cluster housing development for
conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the intent and purpose of this Article, the
statement of principles listed in Section 22.1 and its compatibility with adjacent uses of land, the
natural environment, and the capability of public services and facilities affected by the proposed
Cluster.
Within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the Commission shall recommend to the
Township Board of Trustees approval, denial or approval with conditions of the Cluster Option.
The Commission’s recommendations shall be forwarded to the Township Board of Trustees
stating the Commission’s findings, recommendations and any recommended conditions of
approval.
SEC. 22.4 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS?
SEC. 22.5 PLANNING COMMISSION
RECOMMENDATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 229
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
SEC. 22.6 TOWNSHIP BOARD ACTION?
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Commission, the Township Board shall review the
application, recommendations, and may approve, approve with condition, or deny the
application.
SEC. 22.7 DISAPPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP BOARD?
If the Township Board denies the request to apply the provisions of the Cluster Housing Option
to the parcel of land as described in the survey submitted with the application, it shall record the
decision and the basis for the decision in the meeting minutes. In the case of a denial,
development of the subject property can be made only in accordance with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance for the district where the property is located.
SEC. 22.8 APPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP BOARD ?
If the Township Board of Trustees approves the request to apply the provisions of the Cluster
Housing Option to the parcel of land as described in the survey submitted with the application, it
shall record the decision and the basis for the decision in the meeting minutes.
Approval by the Board shall confer approval to develop the parcel of land described in the
application under the conditions and requirements of the Cluster Housing Option. Such approval
shall be further subject to the following:
1. Cluster Option approval shall not constitute approval of a preliminary plat, final plat,
final site plan or final site condominium plan.
2. Approval Period: Said approval by the Township Board of Trustees shall grant the
applicant a period of one (1) year and six (6) months from the date of Cluster Housing
Option approval to submit and receive final site plan or final site condominium plan
approval (dependent upon the method of ownership proposed), and to submit a contract
for approval to the Township Board.
3. Extensions of Cluster Housing Option approval may be granted by the Township Board
upon written request of the applicant and upon showing of good faith and effort by the
applicant. Failure to request such extension shall be deemed an abandonment of the
proposed Cluster Housing Development.
4. Approval of the final site plan or final condominium site plan and approval of a Cluster
Housing Option contract by the Township Board is a prerequisite for issuance of a
building permit by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
SEC. 22.9 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS?
? SEC. 22.6 TOWNSHIP BOARD ACTION
? SEC. 22.7 DISAPPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP BOARD
? SEC. 22.8 APPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP BOARD
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 230
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
Prior to final site plan, final plat, or final condominium site plan approval, or in conjunction with
the respective submissions, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission for
recommendation and to the Township Board for approval, a proposed contract setting forth the
conditions upon which approval of the Cluster Housing Development is based. The contract,
after review by the Planning Commission and approval by the Township Board, shall be entered
into between the Township and the developer. Said contract shall provide:
1. The manner of ownership of the land, including mineral rights.
2. The manner of the ownership and of the dedication of the open land.
3. The restrictive covenants required for membership rights and privileges, maintenance and
obligation to pay assessments for the open land.
4. The stipulations pertaining to commencement and completion of the phases of the
development, to construction, installation, repairs and maintenance of improvements, to
obligations for payment of any costs, expenses or fees planned or reasonably foreseen,
and to the manner of assuring payment of obligations.
5. Provisions for the Township to effect construction, installation, repairs and maintenance
and use of public utilities, storm and sanitary sewers and drainageways, water, streets,
sidewalks and lighting, and of the open land and improvements thereon, and any other
conditions of the plan, and the manner for the assessment, and enforcement of
assessments for the costs, expenses, or fees incidental thereto against the applicant, or the
future owners or occupants of the Cluster Housing Development.
6. The final site plan, final condominium site plan or final plat shall be incorporated by
reference and as exhibits.
7. Provisions reasonably and necessarily intended to protect public health, safety, or general
welfare of neighboring residents or the Township as a whole, to address any conditions of
approval, or to further the purpose and intent of this Article.
SEC. 22.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS?
The option allows for development of detached and attached one family dwelling clusters in the
R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, R-M and R-2 Residential Districts.
1. Clustering of the dwelling units shall be in a manner which preserves the basic amenities
normally found in single family residential neighborhoods, while allowing for innovative
site layout, and a potential increase of common open space.
2. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a private exterior entrance, with visual and
physical separation from adjacent dwelling units.
3. The method by which dwelling units may be attached shall be limited to the following:
(a) A common party wall in the garage portion of the unit only.
? SEC. 22.9 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS
? SEC. 22.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 231
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
(b) Obscuring walls, architectural screens fencing or similar elements designed to
create a private outdoor area.
(c) A common party wall between individual dwelling units, which defines interior
living or storage space, provided that the exterior design of the building is
compatible with existing single family structures located in the general area in
architectural style, size, overall floor area and height, and that the structure
complies with acoustic control standards as established by the Chief Building
Official for Cluster Housing.
4. Where the proposed cluster development abuts an existing conventional single family
subdivision or land zoned for single family use, the Planning Commission shall ensure
that an orderly transition occurs in one of the following manners:
(a) Detached single-family dwellings, subject to the standards of the Schedule of
Regulations for the particular zoning district.
(b) Open or recreation space.
(c) Sufficient change of topography.
(d) Buffer plantings of sufficient size, character, density and quantity to adequately
provide for an orderly transition.
(e) Any other means the Planning Commission finds to be consistent with the spirit
and intent of this Ordinance and the objectives of this Article.
5. Attached dwelling units shall be subject to the following:?
(a) The maximum number of units which may be attached shall be four (4) units.
(b) The exterior design of the structures shall be compatible with existing single
family structures located in the general area of the project in regards to
architectural style, size, overall floor area and height.
(c) Variety in the design of individual units shall be provided by the use of design
details which do not appear to be continuous or repetitious. A building pattern
which is repetitious throughout the project shall not be permitted.
6. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of forty (40) feet from the street setback line
for a major thoroughfare [projected right-of-way one hundred twenty (120) feet] or
collector road [projected right-of-way eighty-six (86) feet]. The Planning Commission
may reduce this requirement to allow development consistent with existing or future
single family developments along the major thoroughfare or collector road.
? SEC. 22.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 232
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
7. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of forty-two (42) feet from the edge of any
internal private street providing general circulation through the site. A minimum setback
of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided on drives whose primary purpose is to serve as
access for only a few units. The Planning Commission on the basis of the Site Plan shall
determine which streets provide general circulation and those which serve only a few
units. All buildings shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the rightof-
way of any internal public street.
8. Yard and Building Separation Standards?
The requirements of Article 20, Schedule of Regulations applicable for minimum lot size
and yard requirements shall not apply under the Cluster Housing Option. The
arrangement of buildings, distances between buildings and intended use of yard areas
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. Yard requirements and minimum
separation distances between buildings shall be provided as follows:
(a) Separation between Detached Dwelling Units. A minimum of ten (10) feet shall
be provided between each detached unit except that the distance between garages
or between a garage and living area may be reduced to six (6) feet with Planning
Commission approval. The applicant shall clearly indicate the intended use of
outdoor and indoor areas and proposed elevations facing each other. Where the
space between units is intended for use as outdoor living space, the separation
shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
(b) Separation between Dwelling Clusters. Minimum spacing between clusters shall
be determined by the number of living units that are arranged in any cluster
group, as shown in the following table:
NUMBER OF LIVING UNITS
PER CLUSTER
MINIMUM DISTANCE
BETWEEN CLUSTERS (feet)
1 Unit Cluster and a 1 Unit Cluster 10.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 2 Unit Cluster 15.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 20.0
1 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 25.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 2 Unit Cluster 20.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 25.0
2 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 30.0
3 Unit Cluster and a 3 Unit Cluster 30.0
3 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 40.0
4 Unit Cluster and a 4 Unit Cluster 40.0
? ? SEC. 22.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 233
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
(c) Planning Commission Modifications. After review of the proposed plan and the
proposed use of yard areas and arrangement of buildings, the Planning
Commission may require additional setbacks or separation distances between
buildings or clusters of buildings to ensure that the intent of this Ordinance is
carried out and the public health, safety and welfare of the community is
adequately served.
(as amended 10/25/07)
(d) The minimum building setback in a Single Family Cluster shall be 50 feet from
any perimeter property line or street setback line of the development parcel.
However, based on factors such as lack of impacts on adjacent sites or the
particular relationship of the building(s) to the side and/or rear property line, the
Planning Commission may reduce the required building setbacks from any side or
rear property line. In no case shall be building setback be less than 35 feet.
(e) Where a building in a Single Family Cluster sides to the right-of-way of a road,
the minimum building setback from the street setback line shall be equal to the
front yard setback for the abutting zoning district, if one of the abutting districts
fronting the same road is zoned single family residential. In no case shall the
building setback be less than 25 feet.
9. Where the proposed cluster development abuts a designated thoroughfare and/or collector
road, the Planning Commission shall ensure that the treatment along said roads is
compatible with existing or future single family developments in the area, and that an
orderly transition occurs in one of the following manners: ?
(a) Detached single family dwellings, subject to the standards of the Schedule of
Regulations for the particular zoning district.
(b) Open or recreation space.
(c) Sufficient change of topography.
(d) Buffer plantings of sufficient size, character, density and quantity to adequately
provide for an orderly transition.
(e) Mounding or berming of sufficient size, height and slope to insure proper
maintenance of the area and to adequately provide for an orderly transition.
(f) Any other proposed means the Planning Commission finds to be consistent with
the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the objectives of this Article.
10. Architectural Standards
The following minimum architectural design and exterior wall finish materials standards
are intended to encourage greater design variety, encourage greater variety and interest in
the design of individual buildings, minimize repetition of design elements between
? SEC. 22.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 234
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
neighboring structures, avoid design monotony within neighborhoods and prohibit the
use of materials that are less permanent or are not consistent with a residential
appearance.
Residential structures in a Cluster Housing development shall be subject to the following,
unless otherwise determined by the Planning Commission:
(a) Facade Materials. A minimum of forty (40) percent of the exterior vertical
surface of the principal building façades shall be finished with brick, stone or
similar decorative masonry materials approved by the Planning Commission.
(b) Other Elements. Other architectural elements intended to increase architectural
variety, interest and reduce monotony in building design may be required by the
Planning Commission. Such elements may include variation of the location and
design of building entries, garage door orientation, porches, window openings,
roof design and pitch, building materials, etc.
(c) Planning Commission Modifications. The Commission shall have the authority to
vary the specific requirements of this subsection upon determination that
alternative designs, materials or other architectural elements would be in
accordance with the Purpose and Statement of Principles Sections of this Article.
11. Covenants and Restrictions or Master Deed: Architectural standards required as
conditions of Cluster Housing development approval shall be included in the covenants
and restrictions and/or master deed of the development.
12. Open spaces shall include all-weather pedestrian paths to permit convenient access for
residents. Access easements connecting local streets within the cluster development to
open spaces shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
SEC. 22.11 PERMITTED DENSITIES?
The area used in computing overall density shall be the gross site area including any dedicatable
interior right-of-way less than eighty-six (86) feet in width and twenty-five percent (25%) of the
water area of water located wholly within the boundaries of the parcel. Permitted dwelling unit
density shall be further subject to the following:
1. Planning Commission Modifications
The Planning Commission may vary the percentage of water area to be used in the
density calculation upon determination that such a decrease or increase would be within
the spirit and intent of the Cluster Option as established in the Purpose Section and the
overall projection would be in harmony with the existing and proposed land patterns of
adjacent properties and the general planning area.
? SEC. 22.11 PERMITTED DENSITIES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 235
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
2. Exclusions
The following shall be excluded from the area used in computing overall density:
(a) Dedicated or dedicatable interior and exterior right-of-way equal to eighty-six
(86) feet in width or greater. This shall be determined by the established street
setback lines, in the case of existing streets.
(b) Water area which is not wholly within the boundaries of the parcel to be
developed.
1. The following gross densities may be permitted:
ZONING
DISTRICT
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF
DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE
R-1-E 0.86
R-1-H 1.70
R-1-S 3.05
R-1 5.00
R-2 9.40
SEC. 22.12 AMENDMENT, TERMINATION AND REVOCATION
Final approval by the Township Board of the Cluster Housing Option contract, and approval of
the final site plan, final plat, or final condominium site plan by the Planning Commission,
signifies the completion of the Cluster Housing development application process. The applicant
shall comply with all conditions and requirements of the approved Cluster Housing Option
contract and final site plan or final condominium site plan, which shall remain unchanged except
upon the mutual consent of the Township and the landowner.
1. Compliance Required
Once an area has been included within the final site plan, final plat, or final condominium
site plan approved for a Cluster Housing Development, no development may take place
in such area nor may any use thereof be made except in accordance with said plan, or in
accordance with a Board approved amendment thereto, unless the plan is terminated as
provided herein.?
2. Amendment
An approved Cluster Housing contract and final site plan, final plat, or final
condominium site plan may be amended in the same manner provided in this Article for
approval of the original Plan and Contract
SEC. 22.12 AMENDMENT, TERMINATION OR
REVOCATION ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 236
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
3. Termination
An approved contract and final site plan, final plat, or final condominium site plan for a
Cluster Development may be terminated by the applicant prior to any development within
the Cluster Housing Development involved by filing with the Township Clerk and
recording in the Wayne County Records an affidavit so stating. The approval of the
contract and final site plan, final plat, or final condominium site plan for the Cluster
Housing Development shall terminate upon said recording. No approved contract and
final site plan, final plat, or final condominium site plan shall be terminated after any
development commences, except with the approval of the Township Board and of all
parties of interest in the land, except as outlined below.
4. Revocation
A Cluster Housing Option approval may be revoked by the Township Board in any case
where the conditions of such approval have not been or are not being complied with. If it
is determined that the conditions of the approval are not being met, the Chief Building
Official shall issue an immediate stop work order and communicate in writing his actions
to the applicant and to the Township Board with reason therefore. The Township Board
shall give the applicant notice of its intention to revoke such approval at least ten (10)
days prior to review of said approval by the Board. After conclusion of such review the
Township Board may revoke such approval if it finds that a violation in fact exists and
has not been remedied prior to such hearing. ?
END OF ARTICLE 22.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
? SEC. 22.12 AMENDMENT, TERMINATION OR
REVOCATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
Page 1 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXII (22)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
Page 2 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXII (22)
The following language was amended (added) on 10/25/07 (section 22.10.8)
(d) The minimum building setback in a Single Family Cluster shall be 50 feet from any
perimeter property line or street setback line of the development parcel. However, based
on factors such as lack of impacts on adjacent sites or the particular relationship of the
building(s) to the side and/or rear property line, the Planning Commission may reduce the
required building setbacks from any side or rear property line. In no case shall be
building setback be less than 35 feet.
(e) Where a building in a Single Family Cluster sides to the right-of-way of a road, the
minimum building setback from the street setback line shall be equal to the front yard
setback for the abutting zoning district, if one of the abutting districts fronting the same
road is zoned single family residential. In no case shall the building setback be less than
25 feet.
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 22.4 PUBLIC HEARING REOUIREMENTS?
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a proposed Cluster Housing
development in order to acquaint the public and adjoining property owners with the proposal
prior to finishing of detailed plans and specifications by the petitioner. Notice of the hearing
shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent by mail or personal
delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to
whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in
question and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet. The notice shall
be given not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will
be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in
making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure,
except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased
by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations one (1) occupant of each unit
or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4)
dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individual partnerships,
businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who
shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The notice shall:
1. Describe the nature of the Cluster Housing request.
2. Indicate the property which is subject of the Cluster Housing request.
3. State when and where the Cluster Housing request will be considered.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 22: Single Family Cluster Housing
Amendments:
Page 3 of 3
4. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
Text Amendment 014 1
April 3, 2018
Charter Township of Plymouth
Ordinance No. 99.029
Text Amendment 014
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE TEXT OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH
ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 99 BY AMENDING ARTICLE 23, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
The Charter Township of Plymouth Ordains:
Part I. The Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 is hereby amended as follows:
ARTICLE XXIII, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Replace the existing language of Article 23 with the following:
ARTICLE XXIII, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
PURPOSE
It is intended that the PUD Option permit flexibility in the regulation of land development, encourage
innovation in land use and variety in design, layout and type of structures constructed, achieve economy
and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources and the provisions of public services and utilities,
encourage useful open space and pedestrian and non-vehicular interconnectivity, and provide a more
desirable living environment with housing, employment, recreation and/or commercial opportunities
particularly suited to the needs of the residents of the Township of Plymouth in the following zoning
districts: C-2, Commercial; IND, Industrial; MR, Mid-Rise; OS, Office Service; OR, Office Research;
and TAR, Technology and Research on parcels of one (1) acre or greater where the basic principles set
forth in this Article are met.
It is understood that the PUD Option may be consistent with the planning goals of the Township only in
specific locations, under specific conditions, related to height, bulk and location of buildings in
accordance with sound planning and site plan principles. It is further the intent that that any uses
permitted by a PUD Option be compatible and consistent with the availability of utilities, both existing
and planned, for the area in which the PUD is proposed and best planning practices.
Further, the PUD Option shall also be available in the ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor District, and OSARC,
Office Service-Ann Arbor Road Corridor District, subject to certain conditions applicable only to
properties located within those districts. The purpose of allowing this flexibility within the Ann Arbor
Road Corridor is to:
1. Achieve a higher quality of development than would otherwise be achieved.
Text Amendment 014 2
April 3, 2018
2. Encourage assembly of lots and redevelopment of outdated commercial properties.
3. Encourage in-fill developments on sites that would be difficult to develop according to
conventional standards because of lot shape or size, abutting development, accessibility, or other
site features.
4. Ensure compatibility of design and function between neighboring properties.
5. Encourage developments that are consistent with the Ann Arbor Road Corridor Plan, and the
conditions of Section 23.10B, General Conditions for Sites in the ARC and OS-ARC Districts.
It is not intended that the use of the PUD Option in the ARC and OS-ARC Districts should detract from
the primary function and use of the Ann Arbor Road Corridor as a commercial area, but rather it is
intended only to provide some flexibility within the Corridor.
For purposes of this Article, references to the “Township” shall include both the Planning Commission
and Board of Trustees. References to the “Development Plan” shall include the tentative and final site
plan, together with the PUD Contract, applicable Condominium Project Documents, and all requirements
of Section 23.5.
SEC. 23.1 PUD OPTION ELIGIBILITY
The PUD Option is an alternative method of development that may be permitted only after a public
hearing, review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, and approval by the Township Board
of Trustees after having found that the proposed PUD Option reflects the following eligibility principles:
1. The proposal is in conformity with the spirit and intent of the PUD Option as established in the
Purpose Section of Article 23.
2. A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the community,
where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application
of the PUD Option regulations.
3. The site contains natural assets such as large stands of trees, rolling topography, significant
views, swale areas, floodplains or wetlands which would be in the best interest of the community
to preserve and which would otherwise be substantially destroyed without application of the PUD
Option regulations. In the case of a proposed PUD Option to an existing, developed site which is
absent of said natural features, this requirement can be satisfied by the creation of natural features
and areas, gateways, and community amenities.
4. The site contains certain existing natural or manmade features which could, with sound site
planning, be incorporated into the project to minimize any negative impact the proposed project
might have on adjacent properties and the community as a whole. This includes the long-term
protection of historic and cultural resources and significant architecture worthy of historical /
cultural preservation and/or enhancement, if applicable.
5. The (a) proposed uses; (b) location of said uses; and (c) height, bulk, location and character of
structures shall be in harmony with the existing and proposed land patterns of adjacent properties,
and the general planning area, and shall insure the stability of the orderly development of adjacent
Text Amendment 014 3
April 3, 2018
lands and the general planning area as indicated by the Future Land Use Plan and adopted Master
Plan.
6. The proposed uses and the location of said uses on the subject property shall be such that traffic
to and from the site will not be hazardous or adversely impact abutting properties or conflict with
the normal traffic flow of the general area. In reviewing this particular aspect, the Township shall
consider the following:
(a) Conflicts with convenient routes for pedestrian traffic, particularly of children.
(b) The relationship of the site to major thoroughfares and street intersections.
7. The intensity of uses associated with the proposal and such noises, vibrations, odors, glare,
reflection of light, heat, hours of operation and other external effects which would normally be a
product of the proposed uses, shall be compatible with the existing land uses of the abutting
properties and shall insure the stability of the orderly development of same as indicated in the
Future Land Use Plan and adopted Master Plan.
8. In consideration of an existing, developed site only, the PUD would facilitate redevelopment of a
site which may be aging, functionally obsolete or be such that the Commission finds that
redevelopment would create substantial benefit to the Township, consistent with the adopted
Master Plan.
SEC. 23.2 CHANGE OF ZONING DISTRICT
No application for a PUD Option shall be accepted which will require a zoning district change, unless the
application is preceded by an application for a zoning district amendment.
SEC. 23.3 APPLICATION AND REVIEW
Application for approval shall be made by the titleholder(s) of any tract where use of the PUD Option
process is contemplated. The application shall be accompanied by a fee determined by Township Board
resolution to cover the cost of evaluating the plan in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
Adjacent Property Review. The applicant shall discuss said development proposal with adjacent property
owners prior to Planning Commission review of the PUD Option. As part of the PUD Option application
process, the applicant shall provide written documentation on the outcome of said discussions or
documentation on why said discussion is not applicable or feasible.
SEC. 23.4 PUD OPTION ELIGIBILITY APPLICATION
Application for a PUD Option shall contain sufficient information to evaluate the proposed PUD’s
consistency with the Section 23.1, including the following information:
1. A metes and bounds survey and legal description of the acreage comprising the proposed PUD
Option, including a disclosure of mineral rights ownership.
Text Amendment 014 4
April 3, 2018
2. Topographic survey, including natural and manmade features at a scale of one inch equals fifty
feet (1”=50’), with a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet.
3. Site analysis, which identifies the character, structure and potential of the site as it relates to this
Article, including areas adjacent to the subject property and sufficient information about the
nearby properties, so that a determination can be made by the Planning Commission and Board as
to the impact of the proposed PUD on the general planning area in which the PUD is located.
The analysis shall include as a minimum the following:
(a) Contiguous Land Uses and Offsite Impacts. Indicate type and impact on adjoining lands,
offsite impacts with significant externalities, direction and distance to community
facilities, show public transportation routes related to site.
(b) Topography. Indicate basic topography, any unique ground forms and percent of slope.
(c) Drainage. Natural watershed (direction), drainage swales and swamp areas.
(d) Soils. Depth of topsoil and type of soils.
(e) Vegetation . Locate and identify existing tree masses, locate and identify specimen plant
material and indicate type of ground cover.
(f) Existing conditions. Structures, utilities and circulation.
(g) Special Features. Lakes, streams, ponds, floodplains and wetlands, dramatic views and
significant natural, archeological, historical or cultural features.
4. A conceptual Development Plan, which illustrates the general character of the proposed PUD
Option. The conceptual Development Plan shall identify the uses proposed and the general
location of proposed site improvements such as landscaping, buildings, parking areas, vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, open space and any other special features.
5. A description and/or visual of the proposed recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users
of the project and to the community.
6. Other pertinent information necessary to enable the Township to review and make a
determination concerning the desirability of applying the provisions of this Article.
SEC. 23.5 DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPLICATION
Following PUD Option approval by the Township Board, a Development Plan application must be
submitted.
Information required for Development Plan approval shall be the same as required for site plan approval
as found in Section 29.8.2 of this Ordinance or final preliminary plat approval as found in Chapter 93 of
the Township Code of Ordinances. The Development Plan shall meet all conditions of Township Board
approval, and any final requirements determined necessary by provisions of this Ordinance.
Development Plan approval shall be further subject to the following:
Text Amendment 014 5
April 3, 2018
1. The final site plan or final preliminary plat for a single phase PUD development shall constitute
the Development Plan. For a multi-phased PUD, where sufficient final detail has not been
determined or which is expected to change slightly, the Development Plan shall be reviewed and
approved as a separate document, and be contingent on approval of the final site plans or final
preliminary plats.
2. A written narrative statement describing the proposed PUD, including a description of proposed
uses, the architectural theme or style, the relationship of the proposed PUD to the surrounding
area, all anticipated impacts associated with the proposed project and measures to be taken to
mitigate or minimize such negative impacts (including any environmental impacts or impacts to
off-site traffic conditions). The Township may require a more detailed impacts analysis.
3. A PUD contract in conformance with Section 23.8.
4. If the proposed PUD will be a condominium, the Master Deed and By-laws in conformance with
Section 23.13.
5. Phasing
Separate final site plan approvals may be granted on each phase of an approved multi-phased
proposed PUD, subject to the following:
(a) The approved Development Plan for the entire proposed PUD shall be incorporated by
reference and as an exhibit of the proposed PUD contract for each phase.
(b) Each phase shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural
resources and the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the surrounding area and
users of the proposed PUD.
(c) Each phase shall include all improvements necessary to allow the developed portion of
the proposed PUD to function and be occupied independent of improvements associated
with future phases.
23.6 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS
At least one (1) public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a proposed PUD Option in
order to acquaint the public and adjoining property owners with the proposal prior to furnishing of
detailed plans and specifications by the Applicant. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper which circulates in the Township, and sent by mail to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the request and to the occupants of all
structures within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days
before the date the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term
“occupant” may be used in making notification. The notice shall:
1. Describe the nature of the PUD Option request.
2. Indicate the property which is the subject of the PUD Option request, including any street
addresses, is available.
3. State when and where the PUD Option request will be considered.
4. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
Text Amendment 014 6
April 3, 2018
SEC. 23.7 PUD APPROVAL PROCESS
1. PUD Option Eligibility
(a) Planning Commission Action. Following the public hearing and having a complete PUD
Option application, the Planning Commission may, recommend approval, table,
disapproval or approval with conditions. The Commission’s recommendations shall be
forwarded to the Township Board of Trustees for consideration and action.
(b) Township Board Action. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Commission, the
Township Board shall review the application, recommendations, and take action
thereupon. The decision and basis for the decision shall be recorded in the meeting
minutes.
If the Township Board denies the request to apply the provisions of the PUD Option,
development of the subject property can be made only in accordance with the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance for the district where the property is located.
If the Township Board approves the request to apply the provisions of the PUD Option,
approval by the Board shall confer approval to develop the subject property under the
requirements of the PUD Option and the conditions established in the site analysis and
concept plan.
1) Approval Period. PUD Option approval by the Board shall grant the applicant a
period of one (1) year to submit a Development Plan to the Planning Commission
for consideration.
2) Extension. A single, one (1) year extension of PUD Option approval may be
granted by the Township Board upon written request of the applicant and upon
showing of good faith and effort by the applicant. Failure to request such
extension shall be deemed an abandonment of the proposed PUD Option.
3) PUD Option approval shall not constitute approval of a preliminary plat, final
plat, final site development plan, or site condominium plan.
2. Development Plan
Within one (1) year of PUD Option approval by the Township Board, the applicant shall obtain
Township Board approval of the Development Plan and PUD contract.
(a) Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall review the Development
Plan for conformance to this Article, and any conditions of PUD Option approval and
make a recommendation to the Township Board to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the proposed Development Plan.
Text Amendment 014 7
April 3, 2018
(b) Township Board Action. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation,
the Township Board shall review the Development Plan and PUD contract, and shall
deny, approve, or approve with conditions the Development Plan and PUD contract. The
decision and basis for the decision shall be recorded in the meeting minutes.
If the Township Board approves the Development Plan and PUD contract, the applicant
shall have a period of one (1) year to obtain a Building Permit from the Building
Department.
(c) Extension. A single, one (1) year extension of Development Plan and PUD contract
approval may be granted by the Planning Commission upon written request of the
applicant and upon showing of good faith and effort by the applicant. Failure to request
such extension shall be deemed an abandonment of the proposed PUD entirely.
SEC. 23. 8 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS
In conjunction with the submission of a Development Plan, the applicant shall submit to the Township
Board for approval a proposed PUD contract setting forth the conditions upon which approval of the PUD
is based. After approval by the Township Board, the PUD contract shall be entered into between the
Township and the applicant. The contract shall be entered into between the Township and the applicant
prior to the issuance of any Building Permit. Said contract shall provide:
1. The manner of ownership of the land, including mineral rights.
2. The manner of the ownership and of the dedication of the common open space or parks.
3. The restrictive covenants required for membership rights and privileges, maintenance and
obligation to pay assessments for the common open land, parks or other features.
4. The stipulations pertaining to commencement and completion of the phases of the development,
to construction, installation, repairs and maintenance of improvements, to obligations for payment
of any costs, expenses or fees planned or reasonably foreseen, and to the manner of assuring
payment of obligations.
5. Provisions for the Township to effect construction, installation, repairs and maintenance and use
of public utilities, storm and sanitary sewers and drainageways, water, streets, sidewalks and
lighting, and of the open land and improvements thereon, and any other conditions of the plan,
and the manner for the assessment and enforcement of assessments for the costs, expenses, or
fees incidental thereto against the applicant, or the future owners or occupants of the PUD.
6. The site analysis, development plan shall be incorporated by reference and attached as an exhibit.
7. Provisions reasonably and necessarily intended to affect the intent of this Article, or the
conditions of the approval of the plan for the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the Township.
SEC. 23.9 DIMENSIONAL AND DESIGN STANDARDS (All PUD’s):
1. Separation, Height and Setback Standards
Text Amendment 014 8
April 3, 2018
(a) The minimum distance between buildings shall equal ten (10) feet, plus four (4) feet for
each story of the higher structure than two (2) stories. In reviewing the spacing between
buildings, the Township shall ensure that the spacing proposed shall provide for adequate
light and air to each structure and that, in the case of residential units, privacy within and
between units is maintained.
(b) The maximum height of structures shall be reviewed on the basis of the PUD proposed
and the principles established in the purpose and statement of principles Sections of this
Article. In no case shall the height of structures be permitted to exceed nine (9) stories.
(c) A minimum perimeter yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided. The
perimeter yard setback shall increase five (5) feet for each story in excess of three (3)
stories. However, based on factors such as lack of impacts on adjacent sites or the
particular relationship of the building(s) to the side and/or rear property line, the Planning
Commission may reduce the required building setbacks from any side or rear property
line, provided that the alternative proposed by the applicant is in accordance with the
spirit and intent of this Article and the Ordinance as a whole.
The Commission may also require additional perimeter yard setbacks and additional
buffer treatment in the form of tree plantings and screening walls, where any of the
following conditions apply:
1) The PUD abuts an existing or proposed residential land.
2) The PUD site is five (5) acres or larger.
3) The PUD includes more than one hundred (100) residential units.
4) To provide for adequate separation and buffering between the PUD and existing
main buildings on adjacent parcels.
(d) Where a building in a PUD sides to the right-of-way of a road, the minimum building
setback from the street setback line shall be equal to the front yard setback for the
abutting zoning district, if one of the abutting districts fronting the same road is zoned
single family residential.
2. Design Standards
(a) Open Space Standards.
1. A minimum of 20% of total land area shall be allocated for open space, excluding setback
provisions. Open space shall not include parking areas, driveways, or vehicle circulation
routes.
2. Preservation of desirable natural site amenities shall be encouraged. Emphasis shall be
on preserving trees, waterways, swale areas, scenic points, historic points and other
community assets and landmarks.
Text Amendment 014 9
April 3, 2018
3. Non-Residential / Mixed Uses. In addition to the above open space requirements, usable
civic spaces shall be incorporated to provide a public focal point and may include:
common areas, parks, plazas, greens, public gathering spaces, amphitheaters, stages, and
similar areas. Civic spaces shall have a minimum of 1,000 square feet. To count as usable
civic space, the area must be designed for pedestrian use and shall not be solely a
landscaped area. Civic space shall not include parking areas, driveways, or vehicle
circulation routes.
4. Residential Uses. In addition to the above minimum open space requirements, the
following shall be required for PUD’s with residential uses:
i. Private Residential Outdoor Living Space. An individual outdoor living space
shall be provided for each residential unit proposed in a PUD. Said outdoor living
space shall be located adjacent to the unit which it is intended to serve and shall
as a minimum provide one-tenth (.1) square foot of area for each square foot of
floor space of the unit which it is intended to serve and shall be directly
accessible from the dwelling unit.
ii. Common Residential Outdoor Living Space. A portion of the above dedicated
open space area shall provide common recreation space for the occupants and
shall include areas for passive recreation such as outdoor sitting areas and active
recreation such as shuffleboard courts, tennis courts, etc. The Commission shall
review the proposed location of said recreation areas to determine conformity
with the spirit and intent of this Article. Landscaped roof areas which are freely
accessible to residents and are in keeping with the quality and character of the
project may be included as common residential outdoor living space.
(b) Signs.
All proposed signs shall comply with the requirements of Article 25: Sign Regulations of
the Zoning Ordinance. Signs within the ARC and OS-ARC Districts shall be further
subject to Section 23.11.
(c) Street Design Standards.
1. Complete Streets. If appropriate, the PUD Option shall include a streetscape that provides
for sidewalks, landscaping, street trees, special paving or pavers, irrigation, lighting and
pedestrian-scale site furniture. Site furniture includes bicycle parking facilities for all
residential uses and may be appropriate for other uses, including recreation, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
2. Building and Street Interface. If appropriate, consideration related to structures adjacent
to streets, driveways, and streetscape frontage which address roof overhangs, balconies,
awnings and signs shall be incorporated.
3. Block Length. Unless otherwise justified, the maximum block length shall be established
in the PUD to encourage pedestrian-friendly development and promote interconnectivity.
4. Environmental / Cultural / Historic Considerations. If applicable, the PUD shall identify
any existing historic, cultural or environmentally sensitive or unique resource(s) within
the PUD and detail how the resource(s) is to be protected, managed and/or enhanced.
Text Amendment 014 10
April 3, 2018
3. Circulation, Interconnectivity, Parking and Loading Standards
The exterior and interior vehicular and pedestrian circulation system planned for the proposed
PUD Option shall be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare in regards to the
general public and site future users. In reviewing the proposed interior circulation system, the
Planning Commission shall determine the necessity for public roads and the potential future
extension of such roads to adjacent properties.
The circulation systems proposed shall take into consideration the overall circulation of the
community as a whole, egress/ingress to the site, where vehicular joint and/or cross access is
necessary and feasible, vehicular turning movements related to interior circulation, street
intersections and street gradients, site distance and potential hazards to the normal flow of traffic.
The following must be met:
(a) Access. The PUD shall be located, with respect to major streets and highways, so as to
provide direct access to the PUD without increasing significantly the amount of traffic
along minor streets.
(b) Non-Motorized Network. A description of the proposed, non-vehicular circulation
system must be provided for all sidewalks, multi-purpose pathways, bike lanes and
running trails. The description shall include the type, width, location, material and design
criteria of each pathway. Within and outside the PUD boundary, the street and pathway
pattern shall link neighborhoods with roadways, destinations and other pathways. The
Planning Commission shall determine the appropriate type and general location of such
pathways.
(c) Road Standards. All interior roads (both those designated as public and private) shall be
constructed in compliance with current "Subdivision Rules and Regulations" as adopted
by the Wayne County Department of Public Services. The Township may waive this
requirement after review and recommendation by the Township Planner and Township
Engineer provided the proposed variance shall not materially impair the intent and
purpose of this Ordinance or the public interest.
(d) Traffic Calming. Traffic calming techniques, such as horizontal deflections, road
narrowing, ripples, pavers, central islands, entry or gateway treatments, raised medians,
on-street parking, roundabouts, textured pavements, and other similar treatments are
encouraged where appropriate.
(e) Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses as specified in Article 24, except
if an ARC or OS-ARC PUD site, as provided in Section 14. Mixed uses may have varied
and shared demands; therefore, minor variations may occur if justified by the applicant
and approved by the Township. All parking areas shall be screened from public rightsof-
way, and where necessary to reduce offsite impacts, in a manner acceptable to the
Township. In general, the screened areas shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width.
Planting islands with trees which meet the standards of Section 26.7.2 shall be
incorporated into parking areas. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be provided and
incorporated within the parking area for each fifteen (15) parking spaces provided.
Text Amendment 014 11
April 3, 2018
(f) Loading. Off-street loading and unloading as specified in Article 24 of this Ordinance.
Mixed uses may have varied and shared demands, therefore, minor variations may occur
if justified by the applicant and approved by the Township.
4. Location and Utility Standards
(a) The PUD shall be so located in relationship to sanitary sewers, water mains, storm and
surface drainage systems and other utilities that neither extensions nor enlargement of
such systems will be required that would result in a higher net public cost than would
ordinarily occur under development within the existing zoning classification provided,
however, that the developer may install said facilities at his own expense.
(b) All utility lines or similar facilities intended to serve any use in a PUD, whether designed
for primary service from main lines or for distribution of services throughout the site,
shall be placed and maintained underground at all points within the boundaries of the
site.
5. Site Area and Density Standards
The site area used to determine eligibility of the site for development shall be the gross site area
exclusive of public rights-of-way or street setbacks (as specified in Section 28.22) presently or
ultimately equal to eighty-six (86) feet in width or greater.
The area used in computing overall residential density shall be the gross site area including any
dedicated interior right-of-way and excluding the following:
(a) Public rights-of-way, presently or ultimately equal to eighty-six (86) feet
in width or greater.
(b) All submerged bottom land of lakes and ponds.
(c) Churches, public libraries and schools.
Where residential uses are incorporated into the PUD, the overall density of the particular area
used for residential purposes shall in no case exceed twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre.
6. Modification of Standards
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to vary the specific requirements of Section
23.9, provided that the alternative proposed by the applicant is in accordance with the spirit and
intent of this Article and the Ordinance as a whole.
Section 23.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS: SITES IN THE C-2, IND, MR, OS, OR AND TAR
ZONING DISTRICTS
1. Permitted Uses for Sites only in the C-2, IND, MR, OS, OR, and TAR districts.
Text Amendment 014 12
April 3, 2018
All uses of the underlying zoning district (separate or in combination; and permitted by right and
by special use) may be permitted in a PUD upon determination by the Township that the
proposed uses meet the criteria established in this Article.
2. Uses and facilities not specified.
Additionally, facilities and uses such as a restaurant, licensed restaurant or bar; residential uses;
hotels and motels; civic and recreational facilities; and event facilities may be permitted within
the PUD, provided the Commission and the Board of Trustees shall find that the proposed facility
is consistent with this Article.
SEC. 23.11 GENERAL CONDITIONS: SITES IN THE ARC AND OS-ARC ZONING
DISTRICTS
1. Permitted Uses for Sites only in the ARC district.
All uses from the underlying zoning district (separate or in combination; and permitted by right
and by special use) may be permitted in a PUD upon determination by the Township that the
proposed uses meet the criteria established in this Article.
Additionally, facilities such as a restaurant, licensed restaurant or bar; residential uses (townhouse
dwellings, tacked flats and/or multi-family dwellings); hotels and motels; civic and recreational
facilities; and event facilities may be permitted within the PUD, provided the Township shall find
that the proposed use is consistent with this Article.
2. Permitted Uses for Sites only in the OS-ARC district.
The following uses (separately or in combination) may be permitted in a PUD in the OS-ARC
District upon determination by the Township that the proposed uses meet the criteria established
in this Article.
(a) Office Service Uses.
1) Medical and dental offices and clinics and other professional offices, including
veterinary offices and clinics.
2) Administrative, executive and editorial offices.
3) Real estate and other general business offices, not including exhibiting or storing
of products for sale.
4) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and similar financial
institutions, with or without drive-through facilities.
5) Schools for arts and crafts, photography and studios for music or dancing;
training centers, business schools or private schools operated for profit.
6) Child care centers, subject to the standards of Section 28.64.
Text Amendment 014 13
April 3, 2018
7) Commercial, medical and dental laboratories, not including the manufacturing of
pharmaceutical or other products for general sale or distribution.
(b) Residential Uses.
1) Townhouse dwellings.
2) Stacked flats.
3) Multiple-family dwellings.
(c) Institutional Uses.
1) Municipal facilities including governmental offices, fire stations, post offices,
park and ride facilities, libraries, community buildings and municipal parks and
playgrounds, provided such facilities do not meet the definition of “large-scale
institutional uses.”
2) Housing for the elderly, including congregate elderly housing, provided that such
uses do not meet the definition of “large scale institutional uses.”
3) Churches, temples and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental
thereto, provided that the uses do not meet the definition of “large-scale
institutional uses.”
4) Public, charter, and private, including parochial, elementary, intermediate and/or
secondary schools offering courses in general education, provided such facilities
do not meet the definition of “large-scale institutional uses.”
3. Density and Building Setbacks.
Adjacent land in an R-1 One Family Residential District may be included in a PUD when the
Planning Commission finds that such property meets the intent of this Article. Such land area
must be included in the overall open space of the PUD and may not be used for any building
purposes. The proposed R-1, One Family Residential District area shall assist in providing a
transition and buffer area for compatibility with adjacent land uses.
4. Landscaping and Open Space.
All uses in a PUD in the ARC and OS-ARC Districts shall be further subject to the requirements
of Section 14.6, ARC Landscaping Standards, and Section 14.7, ARC Landscaping, Screening or
Buffering. The Commission shall review these requirements when considering the PUD Option.
Modifications can be made by the Commission if its findings are such that a strict interpretation
of the ARC standards would adversely impact the development of the parcel.
5. Signs.
(a) All uses in a PUD in the ARC and OS-ARC Districts shall be subject to the requirements
of Section 14.10, ARC Signs. All uses in a PUD in the OS-ARC District shall also be
subject to the requirements of Section 11.3.8, OS-ARC Signs.
Text Amendment 014 14
April 3, 2018
(b) All proposed signs shall be subject to review by the Commission as part of the
Development Plan. The Planning Commission, in its review, may modify the specific
requirements applicable to the PUD, in order to ensure that all proposed signs are in
harmony with the existing land uses of the general area and shall not adversely impact the
orderly development of adjacent properties, properties of the general area and the planned
development project.
6. Streetscape improvements shall be installed consistent with the Ann Arbor Road Corridor Design
Plan, as specified in the Charter Township of Plymouth Downtown Development Authority’s
Streetscape Prototype and Specifications.
7. Lighting shall comply with the standards as specified in Section 28.8, Exterior Lighting. The
type of lighting shall be consistent with the objectives of the Ann Arbor Road Corridor District
development standards.
8. All ARC or OS-ARC PUD sites shall be subject to the requirements of Section 14.5, ARC Access
Management and Driveway Standards. Mixed uses may have varied demands; therefore, minor
variations may occur if justified by the applicant and approved by the Township.
9. For ARC or OS-ARC PUD sites, parking area screening and parking lot landscaping shall be
provided for all uses as required by Section 14.8, ARC Parking Area Screening, and Section 14.9,
ARC Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. Mixed uses may have varied demands; therefore, minor
variations may occur if justified by the applicant and approved by the Township.
SEC. 23.12 AMENDMENT, TERMINATION AND REVOCATION
Township Board approval of the development plan and contract signifies the completion of the PUD application
process. The applicant shall comply with all conditions and requirements of the Development Plan and contract,
which shall be recorded in the record of the Township Board's approval action and shall remain unchanged except
upon the mutual consent of the Township and the landowner.
1. Compliance Required
Once an area has been included within a Development Plan for a PUD and such plan has been
approved by the Board, no development may take place in such area nor may any use thereof be
made, except in accordance with said plan, or in accordance with a Board approved amendment
thereto, unless the plan is terminated as provided herein, excluding scope of work which is
otherwise permitted by Section 29.4: Administrative Review.
2. Amendment
An approved Development Plan and contract may be amended as provided in this Article.
3. Termination
An approved development plan and contract may be terminated by the applicant prior to any
development within the PUD area involved by filing with the Township Clerk and recording in
the Wayne County Records an affidavit so stating. The approval of the Development Plan and
contract shall terminate upon said recording. No approved Development Plan and contract shall
be terminated after any development commences within the PUD area, except with the approval
of the Township Board and of all parties of interest in the land.
Text Amendment 014 15
April 3, 2018
4. Revocation
A PUD approval may be revoked by the Township Board in any case where the conditions of
such approval have not been or are not being complied with. The Township Board shall give the
applicant notice of its intention to revoke such permit at least ten (10) days prior to review of said
approval by the Board. After conclusion of such review, the Township Board may revoke such
approval if it finds that a violation, in fact, exists and has not been remedied prior to such hearing.
SEC. 23.13 CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
For any condominium proposed as a PUD, the applicant shall provide a copy of the Master Deed and
Condominium Association Bylaws for approval by the Township Board of Trustees. The condominium
documents shall provide limits on use of common areas or open space for accessory structures such as
swimming pools, decks, playground equipment and buildings. A plan shall be provided indicating the
limits of such accessory structures within a defined envelope.
At the time of application for Development Plan approval, the applicant shall submit the necessary
documents to the Township and Township Attorney review prior to development plan approval by the
Board of Trustees. The Association documentation shall include provisions for the following at a
minimum:
1. The conditions upon which the PUD Option approval is based.
2. When open space or common areas are indicated in the development plan for use by the residents,
the open space or common areas shall be conveyed in fee simple or otherwise committed by
dedication to an association of the residents, and the use shall be irrevocably dedicated for the
useful life of the residences, and retained as open space for park, recreation or other common
uses.
3. A program and financing for maintaining common areas and features, such as walkways, signs,
lighting and landscaping.
4. Assure that trees, waterways and woodlands will be preserved.
5. Assure the construction and maintenance of all streets and necessary utilities (including public
water, wastewater collection and treatment) through bonds or other satisfactory means, for any
and all phases of the PUD.
6. Address any other concerns of the Township regarding construction and maintenance.
Part II. VIOLATION AND PENALTY. Unless otherwise provided for, any person, corporation,
partnership or any other legal entity who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be fined, at the discretion of the Court.
Part III. SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions
Text Amendment 014 16
April 3, 2018
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion thereof.
Part IV. REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and
effect.
Part V. SAVINGS CLAUSE. The repeal or amendment provided for herein shall no abrogate or
affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending
litigation or prosecution of any right established, or occurring prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
as amended.
Part VI. PUBLICATION. The Clerk of the Charter Township of Plymouth shall cause a Notice of
Adoption of this Ordinance to be published in the manner required by law.
Part VII. EFFECTIVE DATE. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be effective seven days after
publication.
Part VIII. ADOPTION. This Ordinance was Adopted by the Charter Township of Plymouth Board
of Trustees by authority of Act 110, of Public Acts of Michigan, 2006, as amended, at a meeting duly
called and held on _______, 2018, and ordered to be given publication in the manner prescribed by law.
This Ordinance may be purchased or inspected at the Plymouth Township Hall, Planning and Zoning
Department, during regular business hours.
Adopted by the Board of Trustees on: __________________
Effective Date: __________________
Publish: _____________________________________________
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 260
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXIV
PARKING REQUIREMENTS, LAYOUT, STANDARDS,
AND OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING
SEC. 24.1 SCOPE?
In all zoning districts, off-street facilities designed for the parking of self-propelled motor
vehicles for occupants, employees and patrons of buildings erected, used, altered or extended
after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Such facilities shall be maintained
and not encroached upon so long as the main building or use remains, unless an equivalent
number of spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this Ordinance.
SEC. 24.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS?
All off-street parking, stacking, loading and unloading facilities shall be subject to the use and
development standards of this Article and Ordinance, and the following general requirements:
1. Parking, Loading and Stacking Space Requirements
Required loading, stacking, and parking spaces shall be considered separate and distinct
components and requirements. In no case shall facilities provided to satisfy the
requirements of this Article or Ordinance for one component be construed as meeting the
requirements for another component.
2. Fractional Requirements
Where calculations determining the number of required parking spaces result in a
fractional space requirement, any fraction up to one-half shall be disregarded and
fractions including one-half (½) and over shall require one (1) parking space.
3. Usable Floor Area
Calculations of usable floor area shall be subject to the following:
(a) Usable floor area shall equal the sum of the gross horizontal floor areas of a
building used by or intended to be used by tenants, or for services to the public, or
customers, patrons, clients or patients. This shall include areas occupied by
fixtures and equipment used for display or sales of merchandise. Measurements
shall be taken from the exterior walls.
(b) Usable floor area shall not include area used principally for non-public purposes,
such as storage, incidental repairs, processing or packaging of merchandise, shop
windows, offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or
buildings, toilets or restrooms, utilities or areas for dressing, fitting or alterations.
? SEC. 24.1 SCOPE
? SEC. 24.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 261
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
(c) Applications for approval of required parking shall include floor plans and
calculations clearly indicating the areas designated as usable area, and the uses of
areas not considered usable floor area. If such information is not submitted,
parking requirements shall be based on eighty (80) percent of the sum of the gross
horizontal floor areas of the building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls.
(d) The usable floor area of a shopping center shall be based on eighty (80) percent of
the sum of the gross horizontal floor areas of the building(s) occupied by the
shopping center measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. However,
if floor plans and calculations of usable floor area are submitted which
demonstrate otherwise, usable floor area may be adjusted accordingly.
4. Existing Facilities
Off-street parking, stacking and loading facilities established on or before the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance shall be upgraded or improved to
conform with the provisions of this Article and Ordinance, in accordance with the
following: ?
(a) Increases in Floor Area for Existing Uses. When an existing use requiring offstreet
parking is increased in floor area and such use is located within an existing
building, additional parking, stacking and loading spaces for that use shall be
provided and maintained in the amounts hereinafter specified for the additional
floor area.
(b) Extension of Building into Existing Parking Lot. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent the extension of or an addition to a building into an existing parking area,
subject to the following:
1) The same number of spaces taken by the extension or addition is provided
by an enlargement of the existing parking facilities, or by other means
satisfactory to the Planning Commission.
2) The expanded parking facilities shall not encroach upon required
landscaping, screening, open space or setbacks.
(c) Use Changes. When an existing use is replaced by a new use, parking, stacking
and loading facilities for the new use shall conform with the requirements of this
Article and Ordinance.
(d) Safety. The Chief Building Official may require improvements to existing
facilities where necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare of
pedestrians or motorists within the site or on adjacent public streets and
sidewalks.
? SEC. 24.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 262
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
5. Collective Parking Facilities
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent collective provision of off-street
parking or loading facilities for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided that such
facilities shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements for the various uses
computed separately.
6. Continuing Character of Parking Obligation
The requirements for off-street parking applicable to newly erected or substantially
altered structures shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the parcel upon which
any such structure or use is located so long as the structure or use is in existence. ?
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner of any building affected by this Ordinance to
discontinue, change or dispense with, or cause the discontinuance, sale or transfer
of such structure without establishing alternate parking which meets with the
requirements of and is in compliance with this Article and Ordinance.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use such building
without acquiring such land for vehicle parking which meets the requirements of
and is in compliance with this Article and Ordinance.
SEC. 24.3 APPROVAL REQUIRED?
No land shall be used for parking, stacking or loading purposes until approved by the Planning
Commission in connection with site plan approval, or by the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement for building projects not subject to Planning Commission review. Whenever the
parking, stacking or loading facilities do not meet the specifications and/or regulations set forth
in this Ordinance, the Department of Building and Code Enforcement shall give notice to the
property owner to correct the same within a specified time. If such corrections are not made in
accordance with such notice, the Chief Building Official shall order the lot closed forthwith.
Such lots shall not be used for parking until corrections have been made and approved by the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
Plans for the development of any such parking lot shall be approved before construction is
started. An application for a permit to construct a parking lot shall be submitted to the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement, supplied with three (3) sets of plans for its
development. The Department of Building and Code Enforcement shall issue a permit for said
lot when it has determined that the requirements of this Article have been met.
? SEC. 24.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
? SEC. 24.3 APPROVAL REQUIRED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 263
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
SEC. 24.4 PERMITTED OFF STREET PARKING LOCATIONS?
The location of all required off street parking facilities shall be subject to the following:
1. One and Two Family Dwellings
Parking facilities for one and two family dwellings shall be subject to the following:
(a) Such facilities shall consist of a driveway, parking strip, parking space and/or
private garage located on the same lot or parcel as the dwelling they are intended
to serve.
(b) No parking shall be permitted elsewhere on the lot or abutting public right-ofway,
except upon a paved street where such parking is otherwise permitted.
(c) Not more than fifty (50) percent of the required front yard area of a single family
lot may be occupied by driveway or off-street parking facilities used, designed or
intended for the parking of motor vehicles:
2. Other Residential Uses including Multiple Family
The off-street parking facilities for other residential uses (including multiple family) shall
be located on the same lot or parcel as the uses they are intended to serve. In the case of
multiple family residential and similar uses where there are several buildings on one
parcel, required parking shall generally be located within three hundred (300) feet of the
building that it is intended to serve.
3. All Other Uses
Off-street parking facilities for all other uses shall be located on the same lot, parcel or
site as the use they are intended to serve. ?
SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING?
The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings and additions or
alterations to existing uses or buildings shall be determined in accordance with the following
table. The space so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and
certificate of occupancy, and shall be a continuing obligation of the owner except as provided in
Section 24.2.6. above.
For uses not specifically listed in this Section the provisions for a similar listed use shall apply as
determined by the Planning Commission:
? SEC. 24.4 PERMITTED OFF STREET PARKING
LOCATIONS
? ? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 264
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
RESIDENTIAL
Dwellings, including One family,
Two family, and Multiple family,
dwellings, Terrace apartments,
Efficiency apartments, Townhouses
and Stacked flats
TWO (2) Per Dwelling Unit
Elderly Housing – Assisted Living
ONE (1) per four (4) units
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
Elderly Housing –Congregate Care
ONE (1) per two (2) units
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
?Elderly Housing –Independent
Living
ONE (1) per unit
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
Mobile Home Park
TWO (2) per mobile home site
plus
ONE (1) per each three (3) mobile home sites for
visitor parking
INSTITUTIONAL
Churches, temples, or auditoriums
incidental to schools
ONE (1) per three (3) seats
or
ONE (1) per six (6) feet of bench in main assembly
unit based on maximum seating capacity
Hospitals
ONE (1) per two (2) beds
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift, including staff doctors
and nurses
SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING ? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 265
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Sanitariums, extended care facilities,
nursing and convalescent homes or
similar uses
ONE (1) per four (4) beds
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift, including staff doctors
and nurses
Elementary and junior high schools
ONE AND ONE HALF (1 ½) per teacher,
employee and administrator
plus
Requirements for an assembly hall, stadium or sports
arena. If no auditorium or assembly hall is provided
two (2 spaces per classroom shall provided in addition
to the above.
High schools, trade schools,
commercial or vocational schools or
colleges?
ONE AND ONE HALF (1 ½) per teacher,
employee and administrator
plus
ONE (1) per ten (10) students
plus
Requirements for an assembly hall, stadium or sports
arena
Private clubs and lodge halls ONE (1) per three (3) persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load established by local,
county, or state fire, building or health codes
Private golf clubs, gun clubs,
swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs, or
other similar uses
ONE (1) per two (2) member families or individual
members
Golf courses open to the public, other
than Par 3 golf courses
EIGHT (8) per hole
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
plus
Requirements for accessory uses such as restaurant or
bar if deemed necessary
SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 266
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Par 3 Golf Courses?
FOUR (4) per hole
plus
ONE (1) per two (2) employees
plus
Requirements for accessory uses such as restaurant or
bar if deemed necessary
Golf driving ranges
ONE (1) per two (2) practice tees,
plus
any required parking for other uses
Miniature Golf Courses
TWO (2) per hole,
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
Stadiums, sports arenas or similar
place of outdoor assembly
ONE (1) per three (3) seats
or
ONE (1) per six (6) feet of bench
Theaters and auditoriums (other than
incidental to schools)
ONE (1) per three (3) seats based on maximum
seating capacity,
plus
ONE (1) per two (2) employees based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift
Conference Centers, Exhibit Halls
and Similar Facilities
ONE (1) per two (2) persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load established by local,
county, or state fire, building or health codes,
or
TEN (10) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
usable floor area, whichever is greater
Convent, nurses’ home or other
dormitory
ONE (1) per two (2) bedrooms
plus
TWO (2) for manager
Orphanage and institutions of
philanthropic and charitable nature or
similar use?
ONE (1) per six (6) beds
plus
ONE (1) per one (1) employee, including staff
members and visiting doctors, based on the greatest
number of employees in any one shift
? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 267
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Libraries or museums
ONE (1) per five hundred (500) square feet of floor
space
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
Post Office
ONE (1) per two hundred (200) square feet of usable
floor area,
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
Public utility ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
Municipal recreation centers
FIVE (5) per one-thousand (1,000) square feet of
usable floor area,
plus
any required spaces for outdoor courts, fields and
facilities,
or
ONE per three (3) persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load as established by local,
county, state fire, building or health codes, whichever
is greater
Child care centers, day care centers,
nursery schools
ONE (1) per four hundred (400) square feet of
useable floor area
plus
ONE (1) per employee?
COMMERCIAL?
Animal hospitals and commercial
kennels
ONE (1) per four hundred (400) square feet of usable
floor area,
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 268
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Beauty parlor and barber shops
TWO (2) per chair or station
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
Batting cage THREE (3) per cage
Bowling alleys
SEVEN (7) per alley
plus
Requirements for accessory uses
Racquetball or tennis facilities
ONE (1) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
usable floor area,
or
SIX (6) per court, whichever is greater
Pool or billiard parlors, roller and
skating rinks, exhibition halls, dance
halls and assembly halls without
fixed seats
ONE (1) per three (3) persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load as established by local,
county, state fire, building or health codes
Drive through restaurant or ‘fast
food’ facilities; i.e. establishments
with service windows or similar
arrangements for the purpose of
serving food to customers in their
vehicles
SEVEN (7) stacking spaces per window
plus
Required off-street parking per designated use
Drive through facilities, other than for
restaurants or ‘fast food’
FIVE (5) stacking spaces per window
plus
Required off-street parking per designated use?
Establishments for sale and
consumption on the premises of
alcoholic beverages, food or
refreshments
ONE (1) per two (2) persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load as established by local,
county, state fire, building or health codes,
or
ONE (1) per two (2) seats
plus
ONE (1) per employee whichever is greater
? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 269
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
?Furniture and appliance, household
equipment repair shops, showroom of
plumber, decorator, electrician or
similar trade, clothing and shoe
repair, wholesale stores and
machinery sales
ONE (1) per eight hundred (800) square feet usable
floor area
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
Automobile service stations with or
without convenience retail or fast
food
TWO (2) per lubrication stall, rack or pit,
plus
ONE (1) per vehicle fueling position,
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
plus
ONE (1) per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of
usable floor area in any convenience store area.
Requirements for fast food shall be calculated
separately.
Quick oil change facility
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
plus
FOUR (4) stacking spaces per service stall or lane.
Laundromats and coin operated dry
cleaners
ONE (1) per each washing and/or dry cleaning
machines
Mortuaries or funeral homes ONE (1) per fifty (50) square feet of floor space in the
parlors or individual funeral service rooms
Motel, hotel or other commercial
lodging establishments
ONE (1) per unit
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
plus
Parking required for accessory uses such as restaurant
or bar
Service garages, auto repair, collision
or bumping shops
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one sift
plus
TWO (2) spaces for each grease rack or stall for
servicing automobiles
? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 270
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
?Motor vehicle sales and service
establishment
ONE (1) per two hundred (200) square feet of sales
room floor space,
plus
ONE (1) per one (1) automobile service stall,
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
Open air businesses
ONE (1) per eight hundred (800) square feet of land
area used for display or permitted business purposes,
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
?Shopping centers – for the purpose
of this section shopping centers shall
be defined as a structure or a group of
structures located on the same zoning
lot or parcels which provide a variety
of commercial uses and also provide
common off-street parking facilities,
pedestrian areas and vehicular
movement areas
ONE (1) per 200 square feet of usable floor area.
Drive in restaurants and roadside
stands
ONE (1) per each fifteen (15) square feet of usable
floor area
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
Retail stores except as otherwise
specified herein ONE (1) per 200 square feet of usable floor area
? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 271
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Automobile wash - automatic
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
plus
TWELVE (12) stacking spaces per washing stall,
plus
A drying line thirty (30) feet long at the exit of each
washing stall to prevent undue amounts of water from
collecting on the public street and creating a traffic
hazard
Automobile wash – self service
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
plus
THREE (3) stacking spaces per washing stall
Video Rental Establishments FIFTEEN (15) per one thousand (1,000) square feet
of usable floor area.
OFFICE
Banks, Business or professional
offices of lawyers, landscape
architects, architects, planners,
engineers or similar professions?
ONE (1) per two hundred (200) square feet of usable
floor area
Professional offices of doctors and
dentists
ONE (1) per twenty (20) square feet of floor space in
the waiting room
plus
ONE (1) per examining room or patient treatment
station
plus
ONE (1) per employee based on the greatest number
of employees in any one shift
Medical clinics, outpatient care
centers, 24 hour medical stations,
urgent care centers and similar
facilities
TWO (2) per exam, procedure or operating room or
patient treatment station
plus
ONE (1) per laboratory or recovery room
? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 272
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Drive through facilities, such as
banks; i.e. establishments with
service windows or similar
arrangements for the purpose of
serving customers in their vehicles
FIVE (5) stacking spaces per window
plus
Required off-street parking per designated use
INDUSTRIAL
Industrial facilities as permitted in an
IND district and established for a
known user
ONE (1) per four hundred (400) square-feet of usable
floor area
Industrial facilities, as permitted in an
IND District and established on
speculation (not for a known user)
ONE (1) per three hundred fifty (350) square-feet of
usable floor area
Mini-warehouses and self-storage
establishments
ONE (1) per ten (10) storage units to be equally
distributed throughout the storage area,
plus
ONE (1) per manager or caretaker’s quarters,
plus
ONE (1) per fifty (50) storage units to be located at
the office
Technology and research uses as
permitted in a TAR District
ONE (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of
useable floor area
Warehouse and storage buildings? ONE (1) per four hundred (400) square feet of
useable floor area
SEC. 24.6 EXEMPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS ?
Exemptions, waivers and modifications of the parking requirements of Section 24.5, Table of
Required Off-Street Parking, or loading requirements of Section 24.10, Off Street Loading and
Unloading Standards, shall be subject to the following:
1. Exemptions
Whenever the Township Board shall establish off-street parking facilities by means of a
special assessment district or similar means, the Board may determine that all buildings
erected or uses established thereafter within the special assessment district shall be
exempt from the requirements of Section 24.5, Table of Required Off-Street Parking, for
supplying off-street parking facilities on their individual lot.
? SEC. 24.5 TABLE OF REQUIRED
OFF-STREET PARKING
? SEC. 24.6 EXEMPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 273
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
2. Banked Parking
Where an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the
minimum number of required parking spaces exceeds the amount necessary for the
proposed use, the Commission may approve construction of a lesser number of parking
spaces, subject to the following:
(a) The banked parking shall be shown on the site plan and set aside as landscaped
open space.
(b) The banked parking shall be constructed upon request by the Chief Building
Official, after the Department of Building and Code Enforcement documents
three (3) incidents of problem parking on the site within any one (1) year period.
(c) Banked parking shall be located in areas which are suitable for future parking and
comply with Ordinance requirements.
SEC. 24.7 BARRIER FREE PARKING REQUIREMENTS?
Barrier free parking spaces shall be required and included as part of the total parking space
requirement of Section 24.5, Table of Required Off-Street Parking, subject to the following:
1. A barrier free parking space shall meet the minimum dimensions and design criteria
illustrated below. At least one of the required accessible spaces shall meet the design
standards for vans as illustrated below, and as required by the Michigan Department of
Labor, Construction Code Division, Barrier Free Design Division or Americans with
Disabilities Act standards.
?SEC. 24.7 BARRIER FREE PARKING
REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 274
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
?2. Barrier free spaces shall be provided in conformance with the following table:
TOTAL
PARKING
SPACES
PROVIDED
REQUIRED NUMBER OF BARRIER
FREE SPACES
(include barrier free spaces within total
required parking)
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 per each 100 total spaces over
1,000
If more than eight (8) barrier free spaces are required, one (1) out of every eight (8)
barrier free spaces shall be van accessible.
3. The Planning Commission may require additional barrier free spaces to conform with
Michigan Department of Labor, Construction Code Commission, Barrier Free Design
Division or Americans with Disabilities Act standards or specific use conditions.
4. Barrier free spaces shall be located near elevators, ramps, walkways and entryways.
Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, an inclined
curb approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one (1) foot in twelve (12)
feet and a width of not less than four (4) feet shall be provided for wheelchair access. ?
SEC. 24.8 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT, MAINTENANCE AND
LAYOUT OF OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES?
In all instances, except private residences, where off-street parking facilities are required or
where vehicular parking is provided as an accessory to the lawful use of property, such off-street
parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained subject to the following
regulations:
? SEC. 24.7 BARRIER FREE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
? SEC. 24.8 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT,
MAINTENANCE AND LAYOUT OF OFF
STREET PARKING FACILITIES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 275
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
1. Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided to meet the approval of the Administrative
Review Committee or Planning Commission, as applicable, and the agency having
jurisdiction of the road right-of-way. Additionally, driveway location, spacing and
design shall meet the standards of Section 24.11, Driveway Spacing, Service Roads and
Traffic Impacts.
2. The lots shall be graded and proper drainage facilities provided to dispose of all surface
water to meet the approval of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement and
Township Engineer.
3. Such parking lot, including areas for ingress and egress, shall be constructed in
compliance with the standards as adopted by the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement. The minimum specifications shall not be construed as a substitute for
sufficient pavement thickness where traffic conditions and/or soil conditions require more
substantial pavement designs.
4. Screening and land use buffers shall be provided as specified in Article 26 of this
Ordinance.
5. Lighting shall comply with the standards specified in Section 28.8, Exterior Lighting.
6. Concrete curbs or other protection against damage to adjoining properties or planting
areas shall be provided and maintained.?
7. All parking spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes.
Maneuvering directly on to a street shall be prohibited, except as may be approved by the
Planning Commission.
8. Ingress and egress to a parking lot located in an area zoned for non-residential uses shall
not be across land zoned for single family residential uses.
9. All parking lots shall be striped and maintained showing the individual parking bays.
Said stripes shall conform with the minimum layout requirements of this Section and the
approved site plan.
10. Stacking spaces shall be ten (10) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long.
11. Plans for the layout and striping of off-street parking lots shall comply with the following
minimum requirements:
? SEC. 24.8 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT,
MAINTENANCE AND LAYOUT OF OFF
STREET PARKING FACILITIES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 276
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
PARKING
PATTERN
MANEUVERING
LANE WIDTH
(feet)
PARKING
SPACE
WIDTH
(feet)
PARKING
SPACE
LENGTH
(feet)
TOTAL WIDTH
OF ONE TIER OF
SPACES PLUS
MANEUVERING
LANE (feet)
TOTAL WIDTH
OF TWO TIERS OF
SPACES PLUS
MANEUVERING
LANE (feet)
0o 12 9 23 21 30*
38**
30o to 53o 12 9 20 33 54
54o to 74o 15 9 20 36.5 58
75o to 90o 20 9 20 40 60
* One way aisle
** Two way aisle
12. Prohibited Activities: Parking lots shall be used solely for parking private passenger
vehicles for periods of less than one (1) day. Washing, greasing or servicing of any kind,
repair work, or sale of merchandise shall be prohibited within parking lots, unless
otherwise permitted by provisions of this Ordinance.
13. All parking areas shall be maintained so that the surface of the lot shall be safe and clean.
Cracks, pot holes or litter found on the lot shall be repaired and/or removed after
notification by Chief Building Official. All parking facilities and business establishments
shall keep the exterior lot and grounds free of debris and flying paper.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 277
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
?
? SEC. 24.8 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT,
MAINTENANCE AND LAYOUT OF OFF
STREET PARKING FACILITIES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 278
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
?SEC. 24.9 PARKING DECKS AND STRUCTURES?
Parking decks and similar structures used, designed or intended for the parking of motor vehicles
shall conform with the requirements of this Ordinance for principal buildings in the district
where they are located, and with the requirements of this Article and Ordinance for off street
parking facilities. All applications for site plan review of such structures shall include a detailed
maintenance and security plan for review by the Township.
SEC. 24.10 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING STANDARDS?
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for
manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods, display, department store, wholesale store, market,
hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on
the same lot adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services to avoid undue
interference with public use of the streets or alleys and parking areas.
1. Such space shall be provided according to the following table, unless determined by the
Planning Commission that a lesser or greater standard is appropriate based on the
documented characteristics of the use:
GROUND FLOOR AREA
(square feet) LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES
1 – 2,000 None required
2,000 – 20,000 One (1) space
20,000 – 100,000 One (1) space plus one (1) space for each 20,000 square feet in
excess of 20,000 square feet
100,000 – 500,000 Five spaces plus one (1) space for each 40,000 square feet in
excess of 100,000 square feet
Over 500,000 Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) for each 80,000 square feet in
excess of 500,000
2. Unless otherwise adequately provided for, loading spaces shall be ten (10) feet by fifty
(50) feet with fourteen (14) feet of height clearance.
3. The location of loading and unloading areas shall be reviewed at the time of site plan
submission to ensure that adequate protection from noise and other disruptive elements
normally associated with such facilities is afforded to adjacent districts, in particular to
residential districts.
?
? SEC. 24.9 PARKING DECKS AND STRUCTURES
? SEC. 24.10 OFF-STREET LOADING AND
UNLOADING STANDARDS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 279
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
SEC. 24.11 DRIVEWAY SPACING, SERVICE ROADS AND TRAFFIC IMPACTS?
The purpose of this section is to provide access standards which will facilitate through traffic
operations, ensure public safety along roadways, and protect the public investment in the street
system; while providing property owners with reasonable, through not always direct, access.
The standards are specifically designed for streets whose primary function is the movement of
through traffic, as opposed to local streets whose primary function is access to adjacent
properties. The following requirements shall apply to all sites, uses and developments which are
subject to Planning Commission review, to the extent determined reasonable and appropriate by
the Planning Commission:
1. Driveway Location
Driveways shall be located so as to minimize interference with the free movement of
traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway
grade.
2. Number of Non-Residential Driveways
The number of non-residential driveways shall be the minimum necessary to provide
reasonable access for regular traffic and emergency vehicles, while preserving traffic
operations and safety along the public roadway.
(a) Where feasible, access shall be provided by a shared driveway or a service drive.
(b) Where shared access is not feasible, access may be provided by separate
driveways.
(c) Additional driveways may be permitted for larger sites where additional
driveways are needed to adequately accommodate traffic and to provide a second
means of access for public safety.
3. Driveway Offsets along Public Rights-of-Way
Where feasible, new non-residential driveways shall be aligned with driveways or streets
on the opposite side of the street, or offset a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet
along major thoroughfares and one hundred fifty (150) feet along other streets. Greater
offsets may be required depending on the expected inbound left-turn volumes of the
driveways, or sight distance limitations.
? SEC. 24.11 DRIVEWAY SPACING, SERVICE
ROADS AND TRAFFIC IMPACTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 280
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
?
? ? SEC. 24.11 DRIVEWAY SPACING, SERVICE
ROADS AND TRAFFIC IMPACTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 281
Article 24: Parking Requirements, Layout, Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Amendments:
4. Shared Driveways and Cross Access Drives
The use of cross access drives, in conjunction with driveway spacing, preserves traffic
flow and minimizes traffic conflicts, while retaining reasonable access to the property.
Where the Planning Commission determines that reducing the number of access points
may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety while preserving the right to
reasonable access, access from a side street, a shared driveway or cross access drive
connecting two or more properties or uses may be required.
(a) Location. Shared driveways or cross access drives shall generally be parallel or
perpendicular to the front property line and may be located either in front of,
adjacent to, or behind, principal buildings. In considering the most appropriate
alignment, the Planning Commission shall consider the setbacks of existing
buildings and anticipated traffic flow for the site.
(b) Access Easement. Shared driveways and cross access drives shall be within an
access easement which permits traffic circulation between properties. The
easement area shall remain clear of obstructions, and shall not be used for parking
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
(c) Maintenance. Each property owner using a shared driveway or cross access drive
shall be responsible for its maintenance, subject to a maintenance agreement
between all property owners responsible for the shared facility.
5. Traffic Impact Studies ?
When determined necessary by the Planning Commission, a traffic impact study (TIS)
shall be prepared by an applicant to determine the potential future traffic conditions on
the adjacent roadways once a proposed development is finished. If required, the TIS
shall predict the peak-hour operational conditions at site driveways and road intersections
affected by the development. The results of the TIS shall be used in the final design of
access points and internal circulation and may identify necessary off-site road
improvements. As a minimum, the TIS shall meet standards as published by SEMCOG
and MDOT in the handbook titled “Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies,” however the
Planning Commission may modify the analysis required based upon site and use location
and conditions. ?
? SEC. 24.11 DRIVEWAY SPACING, SERVICE
ROADS AND TRAFFIC IMPACTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 282
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXV
SIGN REGULATIONS
PURPOSE ?
The purpose of this article is to provide a framework within which the identification and
informational needs of business and industry can be harmonized with the desires and aesthetic
standards of the general public. It is intended by this Ordinance to give recognition to the
legitimate needs of business, industry and other activities, through appropriate guidelines, in
attaining their identification and informational objectives. It is a basic tenet of this article that
unrestricted signage does not benefit either business or the community.
(as amended 10/25/07)
It is further the intent of this Article to regulate the construction, alteration, repair and
maintenance of all signs with respect to structural and fire safety, location, type of sign,
dimensions, height and method of illumination; to avoid visual clutter that obstructs vision or
misleads motorists; to protect the general public from damage and injury caused by distractions,
hazards or obstructions caused by poorly designed or improperly constructed signage; to
authorize the use of signs that are compatible with their surroundings, appropriate to the use that
displays them and legible under the circumstances in which they are seen; to seek the removal of
illegal signs; and to encourage the replacement or removal of nonconforming signs that are
incompatible with the purpose of this Article.
Further, the control of signs is necessary to prevent hazards to life and property and ensure the
continued attractiveness and protect property value within the Township. The Township has
determined that, in general, the use of animated, electronic changeable copy, flashing, or moving
signs would lead to visual clutter, negatively impact traffic safety, and would be inconsistent
with the purposes of this Ordinance.
SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS ? (as amended 10/25/07)
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings as set forth in this section.
1. ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which, for ninety (90) consecutive days, fails to direct a
person to or advertise a bona fide business, tenant, owner, product or activity conducted,
or product available on the premises where such a sign is displayed.
2. ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign, display, device, or portion of a sign which is designed to
provide apparent movement of any part of the sign. Animated signs also include any
portion of a sign that displays any artificial light which is not maintained stationery or
constant in intensity and/or color at all times when the sign is in use through some other
automated method resulting in the appearance of movement, excluding Time-
Temperature and Changeable Copy Signs (Electronic).
? PURPOSE
SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 283
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
3. AWNING: A protective, rooflike covering, attached to the face of a
building, as might be located over a window or door.
4. AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN: A sign which is painted on, printed
on or attached flat against the surface of an awning or canopy.
5. ?BANNER: A sign made of fabric, cloth, paper, or other non-rigid
material that is typically not enclosed in a frame.
6. CANOPY: A rooflike architectural structure, typically attached
to the face of a building, and used to provide protection from the
elements (e.g., a canopy over a walkway or a gas station canopy).
7. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL): A sign or part of a
sign that is designed so that the message can be changed or
rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign, by
physically replacing the characters, letters, or illustrations, but not
by electric or electronic means.
8. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (ELECTRONIC). A sign or part
of a sign where the individual numbers or letters can be changed electronically in display.
Such signs do not include animated signs or flashing or moving signs, as defined herein.
A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic indication of the time and
temperature shall be considered a Time-Temperature Sign and not an electronic
changeable copy sign
9. CONSTRUCTION SIGN: See “real estate development or construction sign.”
10. DIRECTIONAL SIGN, OFF-PREMISES: A monument sign, the sole purpose of
which is to direct traffic to one or more commercial businesses which are located on
premises without frontage on or visual exposure to a major thoroughfare or collector
road. Such businesses shall front on a road or easement which is used for their primary
public ingress and egress from the major thoroughfare or collector road. The purpose of
the off-premises directional sign is to facilitate the flow of traffic, encourage the
concentration of commercial uses, discourage strip commercial development, and not to
advertise the business or products or services offered.
11. DIRECTIONAL SIGN, ON-PREMISES: A ground sign located at the entry or exit of
a business or commercial establishment which indicates traffic flow. On-premise
direction signs may be located on buildings.?
12. FLAG: A piece of cloth having a distinctive size, color and design, used as a symbol,
standard or emblem.
13. FLASHING OR MOVING SIGN: A sign or any part of a sign that has intermittently
reflecting lights, or a sign which uses intermittent, flashing, scintillating, or varying
intensity of illustration or color to create the appearance of movement, or a sign that has
any visible portions in motion, either constantly or at intervals, whether caused by
artificial or natural sources (See also ANIMATED SIGN).
SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 284
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
14. GROUND SIGN: A sign supported by one or more
uprights, poles, braces, a masonry base, or a monument
placed in or upon the ground, fastened to a secure and
permanent foundation, and not attached to any building.
Ground signs shall include monument signs and pole signs.
15. INFLATABLE SIGN: A sign that is either expanded or its
full dimensions are supported by gases contained within the
sign, or a sign part, at a pressure greater than atmospheric
pressure.
16. ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign that is illuminated by a
direct or indirect source of light so shielded that no direct
rays from it are visible from any public right-of-way or from the abutting property.
17. INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD: A structure
containing a surface area upon which is displayed the name
of a religious institution, school, library, community center or
similar institutions, and the announcement of its services or
activities. Such signs shall exclude animated, flashing,
moving or electronic changeable copy signs, as defined
herein. ?
18. MARQUEE: A rooflike structure, often bearing a sign,
projecting over an entrance to a theater.
19. MARQUEE SIGN: A sign attached to a marquee projecting
from and supported by the building.
20. MENU BOARD OR ORDER BOARD: A sign which is intended to service patrons
using a drive thru facility.
21. MONUMENT SIGN: A ground sign mounted on a base
that is in contact with or close to the ground. The base of
a monument sign shall be no less than 75% of the greatest
horizontal dimensions of the sign face, and the vertical
separation between the lowest point of the sign face and
the highest point of the sign base shall be not greater than
twelve (12) inches.
22. MONUMENT SIGN BASE: The lower part of a monument sign, which may appear as
a separate architectural feature, and serves as its ground support.
23. NAMEPLATE: A wall sign identifying the occupant, business name and/or address of a
building or parcel of land.?
24. NEON SIGN: A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon or another gas, which
glows when electric current is sent through it.
?
? SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 285
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
25. NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any advertising structure or sign that was lawfully
erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and any amendments
thereto, and that fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this
Article.
26. OFF-PREMISES SIGN: A sign which contains a message unrelated to a business or
profession conducted on the premises, or to a commodity, service or activity, not sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
27. OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN: A sign calling attention to a product or service
not available on the same premises upon which the sign is located. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, signs commonly known as billboards.
28. PANEL SIGN: A sign whose letters and/or symbols are on a panel contained within a
frame, which is an integral part of the sign. This definition is intended to distinguish
between panel signs and signs consisting of individual freestanding letters and/or
symbols.
29. PENNANT: A long, triangular, tapering flag, often bearing an emblem.
30. POLE SIGN: A ground sign mounted on a freestanding pole(s) or other support(s) with
a clear space between the bottom of the sign face and the grade.
31. POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign, relating to the election of a person or persons to
public office, or relating to a political party, or relating to matters to be voted upon in a
local, state or national election or referendum.
32. PORTABLE SIGN: A free standing sign not permanently anchored or secured to either
a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to "A" frame, "T" shaped, or inverted
"T" shaped structures, including those mounted on wheeled trailers.
33. PROJECTING SIGN: A sign that is attached to and projects from a building wall at an
angle of up to 90o (not including a marquee, canopy or awning sign).
34. REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary
ground or wall sign listing the name of the project developers, contractors, engineer and
architects, on the site being developed, or located at the entrance of a residential
development under construction, listing the name of the development and general
information, such as the number and types of units to be built, price range and similar
data. Such signs include “subdivision business sign” and “construction sign.”
35. REAL ESTATE SIGN: A non-illuminated sign for the purpose of advertising or
promoting the sale, lease or rent of real estate. A PERMANENT LEASING SIGN is a
real estate sign that is erected for an indefinite period of time for the purpose of offering
space in a building for lease.?
36. ROOF SIGN: A sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof
of any building, with its principal support on the roof structure. For purposes of this
section, any architectural element which is used on the wall of a structure to give the
appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or other roof type, shall be
? SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 286
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
considered as a roof. A vertical plane or fascia which is attached to and located below
the angled plane of a sloped roof and which is less than 6 inches in height, shall be
considered part of the roof.
37. SERVICE CLUB ENTRANCE SIGN: A sign, usually located along a main entrance
way to a community, displaying the names of service clubs and organizations, their
meeting schedules, and usually including the service clubs’ symbols or logos. The name
of the community and a short salutatory message may also be included. ?
38. SETBACK OF SIGN: Setback is the distance measured from the street setback line
from which the sign is to be primarily viewed to the nearest edge of the sign.
39. SIGN: The name, identification, description, object, device, structure, display or
illustration that is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, service, event, organization or business by any means,
including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or
projected images.
40. SIGNABLE AREA: The area in which a sign is to be located and which is used to
determine the permitted size of that sign, pursuant to Section 25.2.1.(d). The signable
area shall be a continuous surface or wall unobstructed by windows, doors, other major
architectural details or a change in material color.
41. SITE ENTRY FEATURE WITH SIGNAGE: An architectural feature that defines,
delineates and differentiates the entrance to a residential subdivision, apartment
community, condominium development, mobile home park or office, business or
industrial park, or similar development from a major thoroughfare without being a visual
intrusion or distraction to the general public and the traveling motorist. Signage
identifying the name of the development may be incorporated into the architectural
feature.
42. SPINNER: A spinning disc-like sign that is typically thread on a line with other spinners
to attract attention.
43. STREAMER: A long narrow banner or flag.
44. SUBDIVISION BUSINESS SIGN: See “real estate development or construction sign.”
? SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 287
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
45. TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign that is not permanently fastened to any structure and is
intended for a limited period of display, including, but not limited to inflatable signs,
banners, pennants, spinners and streamers, window signs and decorative displays for
holidays or public demonstrations.?
46. TIME-TEMPERATURE SIGN: A sign, electronic or otherwise, which displays the
current time or outdoor temperature or both and which displays no material except for the
name of a business, product or service. For purposes of this ordinance, a Time-
Temperature sign shall be considered a public service.
47. VEHICLE BUSINESS SIGN: A sign painted or attached to a vehicle which is located
on a premise primarily for purposes of advertising the business or product for sale on the
premises. Commercially licensed vehicles which are generally used daily off-site are not
included in this definition.
48. VOICE MESSAGE SIGN: A sign that either 1) conveys a recorded message to
someone located nearby, or 2) provides for two-way voice communication (such as with
a menu board at a drive-through restaurant). A voice message sign may also be known as
a talking sign.
49. WALL SIGN: A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall and
does not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached, nor more than twelve
(12) inches therefrom, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building
wall. Included in the definition of wall signs are signs mounted flat against the building
fascia, provided the sign does not protrude beyond any boundary of the fascia.
50. WINDOW SIGN: A temporary or permanent sign painted on or affixed to a window
surface, suspended so as to hang more or less parallel with the window surface, or
otherwise displayed in a manner intended to be viewed from outside the window.
SEC. 25.2 GENERAL STANDARDS ?? (as amended 10/25/07)?
The following general standards shall apply:
1. Standards of Measurement for Signs
Dimensional standards and measurements for signs shall be subject to the following:
(a) Sign Area. The entire area within a rectangle or square enclosing the extreme
limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character,
together with any frame, tower, or other material, color or internally illuminated
area forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign, shall
be included in the measurement. Parts of a sign shall be deemed to be a single
sign whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggests a
single unit, not withstanding any physical separation between parts.
?
?
?? SEC. 25.2 GENERAL STANDARDS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 288
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
1) Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included
in determining the sign area, except that where two such faces are placed
back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the
area of the sign shall be taken as either: ?
a) the area of one face, if the two faces are of equal area, or
b) the area of the larger face, if the two faces are of unequal area.
2) For ground signs, the area shall include the entire area of the sign upon
which copy, lettering, drawings or photographs could be placed, excluding
necessary uprights or supports. For monument signs, the base of a
monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a
distance of thirty (30) inches above grade. Streetscape and landscape
features which in the determination of the Planning Commission, are an
integral part of the sign design shall also be excluded from the calculation
of sign area.
3) For internally-illuminated awnings or canopies, the entire flat surface of
the awning or canopy upon which the message is written shall be included
in the sign area calculation. Signs mounted on awnings and canopies that
are not internally-illuminated shall be subject to the sign area standards of
measurement specified in paragraph (a), above.
4) For paper window signs, the area shall include, the entire area of the
paper. Where adjacent paper window signs are within eight (8) inches of
each other they shall be measured as a single sign.
(b) Sign Height. The distance from the average level of the ground or pavement
directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign structure, including any
supportive or decorative appendages, without including any berm, landscaping,
grading, or artificially or unnaturally constructed raised portion of land at the
point of measurement.
? SEC. 25.2 GENERAL STANDARDS
Computation of Sign Area
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 289
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(c) Sign Setback. Setback is the distance measured from the street setback line from
which the sign is to be primarily viewed to the nearest edge of the sign.??
(d) Signable Area. Where it is specified that the size of a sign shall be based on the
signable area, signable area shall be delineated as the area of a continuous surface,
or wall unobstructed by windows, doors, other major architectural details, or a
change in materials or color. The signable area shall equal the area of (a x b) or
(c x d) or (e x f) in the following illustration, at the choice of the applicant:
The signable area for a gable shall be determined by calculating the actual area of
the surface or wall of the gable, unobstructed by any architectural features.
2. Illumination
Sign illumination shall be subject to the following:
(a) Sign illumination shall be designed, installed and maintained in a manner that
minimizes off-site glare, light trespass and light pollution. Illumination shall be
concentrated within the area of the sign to prevent glare upon the street or
adjacent property. Sign illumination shall be provided solely by electrical means
or devices, shall not be of a flashing, intermittent, moving or animated type, and
shall further comply with the specific standards defined in Section 25.9, Area,
Height and Placement Regulations.
(b) Signs shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11 P.M. and 7 A.M., except
those pertaining to a business open during these hours, and except
time/temperature signs located in C-2 districts.
? SEC. 25.2 GENERAL STANDARDS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 289a
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
3. Maintenance Contract
A contract for maintenance of all new permanent signs may be required by the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
4. Underground Wiring
Where illumination is desired, underground wiring shall be required for all signs not
attached to a building.
SEC. 25.3 ARC and OS-ARC DISTRICT SIGNS?
Requirements for signs in the ARC and OS-ARC District are set forth in Section 14.10.
? SEC. 25.3 ARC AND OS-ARC DISTRICT SIGNS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 290
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS ?
The following signs are permitted in a C-1 and C-2 Districts:
1. Flags or Pennants
Flags or pennants bearing the official design of a corporation or award flags or pennants
subject to the following:
(a) Such corporation, or award flags or pennants shall be displayed on flag poles
only. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a flagpole is a pole used exclusively to
display a flag. Attachment to any other site fixture or feature shall be prohibited.
(b) A maximum of two (2) such flags or pennants shall be permitted for each flag
pole provided.
(c) The maximum number of flag poles permitted per individual business shall be
determined in accordance with the following table:?
STREET FRONTAGE IN FEET MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FLAG
POLES PERMITTED
0 - 210 1
211 - 300 3
301 or greater 5
(d) Placement of flag poles shall be in a manner and location subject to the following
requirements:
1) The placement shall not impact adjacent properties, in particular, those of
a residential nature.
2) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
3) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination of said flags shall not
constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
4) The height of flagpoles shall conform to the height restrictions of set forth
in Article 20 for buildings and structures. A flagpole shall be deemed to
be a structure under all provisions of this Ordinance. Flagpoles shall
comply with the setback requirements for structures.
5) No flag or flagpole shall be permitted to project into the road right-of-way
at full extension of the flag.
6) Flag poles shall not be located on the roof of a building. ?
? SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 291
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(e) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination of said flags or pennants
shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
2. Banners
Banners used to draw attention to vehicle dealerships are permitted, provided that there is
a maximum of one (1) banner on each pole, and provided that they have no written
message or corporate identity. Each banner shall not exceed a maximum area of twenty
(20) square feet.
3. On-Premises Directional Signs ?
On-Premises Directional Signs may be permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Shopping
District, C-2 General Commercial District, MR Mid-Rise District, OS Office Service
District, OR Office Research District, TAR Technology and Research District, and IND
Industrial District subject to the following:
(a) Directional signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per side, nor exceed two (2)
sides.
(b) Said signs may incorporate a corporation or business logo provided the main
theme of the sign shall be to facilitate vehicular traffic flow.
(c) Placement shall be within the subject property; no such signs shall be permitted
within the street setback area or right-of-way.
(d) The size, content, coloring, placement or manner of illumination shall not
constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic
flow.
(e) Directional ground signs shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet and shall be
limited to one (1) per ingress or egress drive, located at the ingress or egress
drive.?
(f) On-premises directional signs may be located on buildings.
4. Off-Premises Directional Signs
Off-Premises Directional Signs may be permitted on a limited basis in the C-2 District, in
order to encourage the clustering of businesses, and minimize strip commercial
development in accordance with the Township Master Plan, while still allowing
necessary and reasonable identification of businesses, facilitating the orderly flow of
traffic, and avoiding unnecessary proliferation and excessive size of signs on
thoroughfares and collector roads. ?
(a) Off-premises directional signs are permitted only upon review and approval of the
Planning Commission, and subject to compliance with the following conditions:
? SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 292
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
1) Approval of the sign would serve to further the purposes of this Section.?
2) The Planning Commission shall determine that the business is located in
the C-2 District; has no frontage on the major thoroughfare from which it
takes primary access; is within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of
said thoroughfare; is not visible from the major thoroughfare or is visible
from the major thoroughfare but with no clear indication of how to access
the business; and would not reasonably be able to direct traffic to or
adequately identify its location without an off-premises directional sign.
3) No off-premises directional sign shall be permitted without a recorded
easement or executed agreement that accomplishes all of the following:
a) states that the owner of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed
grants permission for the off-premises directional sign to be
located on the parcel,
b) stipulates which parcel(s) are entitled to use of the off-premises
directional sign, and
c) specifies how the sign is to be maintained and establishes a means
to assure that maintenance runs with the life of the sign.
4) Off-premises directional signs shall be located only on land zoned C-2,
and shall direct traffic only to land also zoned C-2.
5) Off-premises directional signs shall be permitted only at the intersection
of the access road for the business and a major thoroughfare, and only one
such sign is permitted at each intersection. The business access road may
be a public street, private road, or recorded access easement over which
the general public has ingress/egress rights. If multiple businesses served
by the same access road require the use of the same intersection for an offpremises
business directional sign, the same sign shall be used.?
6) Off-premises directional signs shall be located entirely on private property
and no closer than thirty (30) feet from the centerline of the street, private
road, or recorded access easement which provides access to the business.
The sign shall be located a minimum of sixty (60) feet from the centerline
of the major thoroughfare or collector road. The sign location shall
comply with all other setback and visibility requirements of the Township.
7) Off-premises directional signs shall be monument signs with the minimum
dimensions necessary to accomplish the purpose of directing traffic;
however, in no case shall the sign height exceed the following dimensions:
?
? SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 293
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
NO. OF USERS ON
SIGN
MAXIMUM SIGN
AREA
MAXIMUM SIGN
HEIGHT
1 12 sq. ft. 4.5 ft.
2 24 sq. ft. 6 ft.
3 or more 36 sq. ft. 8 ft.
The base of an off-premises directional sign shall be excluded from the
calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty (30) inches above grade.
8) If multiple businesses served by the same access road require the use of
the same intersection for an off-premises business directional sign, the
same sign shall be used.
9) Space shall be allocated on the sign to allow identification of all
businesses which use the same access road to use the off-premises
directional sign. A common lettering size and style and no more than one
uniform background color shall be used. The sign shall state only the
name of the business(es) being identified. A directional arrow may also
be included on the sign. The sign base shall be of brick or decorative
masonry block.
10) The ground within five (5) feet of the base of the off-premises directional
sign shall be landscaped in low shrubbery, ground cover or flowers, and
said landscaping shall be maintained in presentable condition.
11) Off-premises directional signs may be illuminated in accordance with
Section 25.2.2, provided the illumination creates no perceptible glare on
private property at a distance greater than ten (10) feet from the sign and
on public streets and the access drive.
12) Off premises directional signs shall be prohibited where a Site Entry
Feature with Signage, as defined in Section 25.1, is determined by the
Planning Commission to be more appropriate.?
(a) The off-premises directional sign shall be maintained in a sound and presentable
condition. If a business that is identified on the off-premise directional sign
ceases to exist at its location or changes its name, the appropriate changes to the
copy of the sign shall be made within thirty (30) days of the change in the
business.
(b) The existence of an off-premises directional sign shall not affect the number and
size of other signs permitted by the Township, including any other signs on the
same parcel as the off-premises directional sign, and any other signs on the same
parcel as the business identified by the off-premises directional sign.
5. Menu or Order Board
Menu and/or order board for a drive-thru facility subject to the following:
? SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 293a
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(a) Said signs shall be located on the interior of the lot or parcel and shall not be
readable from the exterior of the lot.
(b) Said signs shall be intended to service the public utilizing the drive-thru facilities
only.
(c) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair
vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow in any manner.
(d) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination shall not constitute a traffic
or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow.
(e) The volume on order boards shall be maintained at the minimum level necessary
so that it is audible to users, so as to minimize extraneous noise traveling off the
site.
6. Gasoline Service Station Signs (as amended 10/25/07)
Because of the nature of the use, gasoline service stations have sign needs that are unique
from other uses. Gasoline service stations are relatively high traffic facilities and
typically located at very high traffic locations and intersections. Such locations offer
limited opportunity for driver indecision, increasing the importance of good signage to
communicate and avoid traffic accidents. Further, the public expects to see automotive
fuel prices posted in a consistent and clear format. To reflect the above-referenced
character and needs of the use, signs for gasoline service stations shall be permitted as
follows:
(a) One (1) monument sign, subject to the requirements of Section 25.9.1.(b). The
Township understands that the traveling public expects to see updated, clear, and
precise automotive fuel pricing from off-site, and further, that fuel prices change
from day to day. If automotive fuel pricing is not visible, or is unavailable or
removed, it would cause great inconvenience to residents of the Township.
Further, it is documented, by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(NHTSA) and others, that it is dangerous to distract a driver’s attention from the
road. Clear and accurate price numerals may help to reduce the number of traffic
accidents associated with the distraction of drivers from inaccurate and unclear
gasoline pricing. While in general electronic changeable copy signs are not
consistent with the established, planned and desired appearance of the Township,
for the limited application of automotive fuel pricing only, the Township finds it
acceptable. In consideration of these factors, changeable copy may be permitted
as part of a monument sign for a gasoline service station subject to the following:
1) Only the individual fuel price numbers shall be permitted to be changeable
copy. The changeable copy portion of the sign shall be manual or
electronic.
2) The fuel price number height shall not exceed nine (9) inches.
3) The changeable copy portion of the sign shall consist of no more than 1
background color and 1 numeral color.
SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 293b
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
4) The base of any monument sign containing fuel price changeable copy
shall be brick, with limestone capped brick piers on the two ends of the
sign. The sign shall not project above the brick piers by more than onehalf
of the message area’s height.
5) The area of the changeable copy shall be counted toward the maximum
sign area.
6) All electronic numerals used in the price of fuel shall be designed to
automatically adjust their brightness under varying light conditions to
maintain legibility, avoid glare, and eliminate visual impact on nearby
areas of the Township.
(b) One (1) wall sign, subject to the requirements of Section 25.9.2.
(c) One (1) canopy sign per street frontage, up to a maximum of two (2), and limited
to no more than one (1) sign on any canopy face, subject to the following
conditions:
1) The length of the canopy sign shall not exceed 10% of the length of the
canopy façade (See diagram).
2) The sign shall be a minimum of six (6) inches from the top and bottom of
the canopy façade (See diagram). Further, the sign shall have a minimum
separation of six (6) inches from any accent color on the fascia.
(Refer to Section 13.2.11(i) for detailed standards on gas station canopies).
SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS
Canopy Sign Example
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 294
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
SEC. 25.5 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITHOUT A SIGN PERMIT ??
The following signs shall not count toward the maximum permitted sign, and shall be permitted
in all districts without obtaining a sign permit prior to installation:
1. For purposes of identification by emergency personnel (fire, police, EMS) all businesses,
offices, industrial buildings, apartment complexes, and multiple and single-family
residences, shall prominently display their street address on the front side (facing the
street) of their building or upon freestanding signs or building entranceways. All street
addresses shall be in Arabic numerals, each numeral shall be large enough to be easily
read from the street, but in no event smaller than four (4) inches high by two and one-half
(2 ½) inches wide, except for numeral one (1) which shall have a width in proportion to
its height. Street Address Signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area, unless that
signs exceeding three (3) square feet are counted in the maximum sign area
computations. All numerals shall contrast with the surface they are applied to (light
numerals on dark surfaces, dark numerals on light surfaces) shall be mounted high
enough to be seen from the street, and shall not be obstructed from view by trees, shrubs
or any other material. If the residence or business cannot be seen from the street, an
additional street address sign shall be displayed in an area where it can be seen from the
street. In all residences with more than one unit, such as apartments, each individual unit
shall be clearly marked.
2. House numbers, legible from the street, home occupation signs, nameplates (fraternity,
sorority, apartments, and professional) identifying the occupant or address of a parcel of
land and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
3. Window signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area indicating the hours of operation
for a business, and whether a business is open or closed.
4. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any
masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
5. For Sale signs attached to vehicles.
6. Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution or
non-profit organization.
7. Traffic safety and control signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body, or other
municipal signs such as the following: legal notices, railroad crossing, danger and other
emergency notices as may be approved by the Township Board or the Township
Supervisor. ?
8. Community special event signs approved by the Township Board or the Township
Supervisor.
9. Institutional bulletin boards no more than fifty (50) square feet in area, four (4) feet in
height and placed wholly within the property to which the sign pertains.
SEC. 25.5 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS
WITHOUT A SIGN PERMIT
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 295
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
10. Private traffic control signs which conform to the requirements of the Michigan Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published in accord with Section 508 of Public Acts
300 of 1949, as amended.
11. Park and playground signs. ?
12. Political signs subject to the following:
(a) They shall be removed within ten (10) days following the election.
(b) They shall not be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet from any polling
place entrance.
(c) The candidate shall be responsible for compliance with this section.
(d) No election sign is to exceed eight (8) square feet in area, and in the case of a
ground-mounted election sign, the height may not exceed four and one-half (4 ½)
feet.
13. Real estate signs shall be subject to the following:
(a) Temporary Real Estate Signs.?
1) Such signs shall be limited to ground or wall signs only. One (1) sign
shall be permitted per street frontage, regardless whether the property is
represented by more than one real estate agent.
2) Area shall not exceed seven (7) square feet in all Residential Districts and
shall not exceed forty-two (42) square feet in any other Zoning District.
3) Height shall not exceed four (4) feet in all Residential Districts and seven
(7) feet in all other Zoning Districts.
4) Such signs shall be erected only on private property with permission from
the property owner. Placement shall be wholly within the property
boundaries to which the sign pertains, and such signs shall be located
outside of any street setback area or corner clearance area.
5) The sign may be erected at the time the property is offered for sale or lease
and shall be removed within ten (10) days following the sale or lease of
the property. The property owner, and real estate agent, or other persons
responsible for creating the sign and/or placing the sign on the property,
shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Section.
6) Temporary off-site real estate signs shall be permitted for the purpose of
directing buyers to an open house provided that such signs not exceed four
(4) square feet per face and provided further that such signs are removed
immediately following the open house.
? SEC. 25.5 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS
WITHOUT A SIGN PERMIT
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 296
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(b) Permanent Leasing Signs. Permanent leasing signs erected for a period of one (1)
year a longer shall be subject to the following:
1) If the permanent leasing sign is a ground sign, it shall be a monument sign
and it shall be subject to the location, setback, and other applicable
standards in Section 25.9.1.?
2) If the permanent leasing sign is a wall sign, it shall be subject to the
applicable standards in Section 25.9.2.
3) Permanent leasing standards shall comply with the maximum sign area
and sign height requirements that apply to temporary real estate signs.
4) Such signs shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be replaced or
renovated when weathered or worn.
14. Community entrance signs erected by the municipality.
SEC. 25.6 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITH A SIGN PERMIT ? ?
The following signs shall be permitted in all districts subject to approval of a sign permit, and
provided that they are accessory to a permitted use in the district:
1. Real Estate Development or Construction Signs
Real Estate Development or Construction signs subject to the following:
(a) Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of one (1) ground or wall sign per
development project.
(b) Sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, except that large scale
development projects, such as subdivisions, site condominiums, multiple-family
developments and office, business, technology or industrial parks shall be
permitted an area not to exceed forty-two (42) square feet.
(c) Height shall not exceed eight (8) feet.
(d) Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign
pertains.
(e) For non-residential construction projects, the sign shall not be erected prior to
issuance of a building permit for the proposed construction project and shall be
removed upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(f) For residential construction projects, the sign shall not be erected prior to
approval of the final site plan or final preliminary plat. The permit shall be issued
for a period of one year only, subject to renewal after review by the Department
of Building and Code Enforcement.
? SEC. 25.5 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITHOUT
A SIGN PERMIT
SEC. 25.6 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITH A
SIGN PERMIT
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 297
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(g) Only one such sign shall be permitted at the intersection of the major entry to the
site from a major thoroughfare or collector road. If the site has an egress/ingress
from two separate major thoroughfare or collector roads, one sign may be
permitted for each separate thoroughfare or collector road.
2. Service Club Entrance Signs ?
Service club and community entrance signs are permitted, subject to the following: ?
(a) The aggregate of all such signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height nor fifty
(50) square feet in area.
3. Banners, Pennants, Spinners, and Streamers
Except as provided under Section 25.4.2. herein, banners, pennants, spinners, and
streamers may be allowed only upon approval of the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement and Township Supervisor, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such signs shall be temporary, and shall be for a specific period of time defined
on the written approval.
(b) Such signs shall not create a traffic hazard or congestion.
(c) Such signs will not be disturbing to the public peace and tranquility.
(d) Permit for such signs may be granted for a
period not to exceed 72 hours and may be
renewed for not more than 48 hours.
(e) Such permit shall be granted not more than
four (4) times per year for any individual lot
or parcel.
4. Site Entry Feature
Architectural features with signage may be erected
at each entrance to a residential subdivision,
apartment community, condominium development,
mobile home park or office, business or industrial
park, or similar development, subject to the
following requirements: ? ?
(a) Maximum Number of Signs on an Architectural Feature. One (1) sign shall be
permitted on each side of the entrance from a major thoroughfare.
?(b) Setbacks for an Entry Feature. Site entry features with signage shall be located
outside of any street setback area or corner clearance area, and shall further
comply with the following minimum setback requirements:?
1) Ten (10) feet from any street setback or right-of-way.
?
? SEC 25.6 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS
WITH A SIGN PERMIT
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 298
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
2) Ten (10) feet from the curbline of any internal access driveway.
3) Five (5) feet from any sidewalk or paved path.
(c) Site Entry Feature within a Boulevard. Site entry features with signage may be
located in the median of a boulevard entrance, subject to the above requirements
where applicable, provided that: 1) the entry feature is setback a minimum of ten
(10) feet from the intersecting street right-of-way, 2) the entry feature does not
block the vision of drivers, and 3) the site entry feature is subject to approval of
the road agency that has jurisdiction over the road.
(d) Maximum Sign Height and Area. The maximum height and area permitted for
signs on an architectural feature shall be equal to the maximum permitted for
ground signs in the district, as defined in Section 25.9, Area, Height and
Placement Regulations.
(e) Off premises directional signs shall be prohibited where a site entry feature with
signage is approved by the Planning Commission.
(f) The location and design of each site entry feature with signage shall be approved
by the Planning Commission as part of site plan or subdivision plat review.
SEC 25.6 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITH A
SIGN PERMIT
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 299
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
SEC. 25.7 SIGNS PERMITTED IN SPECIFIC ZONING DISTRICTS ?
The following illuminated or non-illuminated signs shall be permitted only within the zoning
districts specified below. ?
ZONING DISTRICT TYPE SIGN PERMITTED
GROUND WALL PROJECTING OUTDOOR
ADVERTISING
WINDOW
AG, R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-
1, RM, R-2, R-2-A and PL
yes (a) yes (a) no no no
OS and VP yes (b) yes (b) yes no yes (c)
MR yes (b) yes (b) yes no yes (c)
C-1 and C-2 yes (b) yes (b) yes no yes (c)
OR and TAR yes (b) yes (b) no no yes (c)
IND yes (b) yes (b) no yes (d) yes (c)
(a) Refers to identification signs located at the entrance to a subdivision or group of
residences. No other permanent type of sign structure is permitted in residential districts,
except as provided in Section 25.5, Signs Permitted in All Districts Without a Sign
Permit, Section 25.6, Signs Permitted in All Districts with a Sign Permit, or as may be
permitted by the Planning Commission for non-single-family dwelling uses. In instances
where the applicant desires to erect a sign containing the names and/or professional
specialties of the occupants of an office and/or commercial building or complex of office
and/or commercial buildings, the sign shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance and
provided that only one such wall or ground sign shall be allowed for each main entrance.
(b) Limited to first floor windows only.
(c) Limited to areas adjacent to Interstate 275 or Michigan Route 14, a Federal Aid Primary
Highway.
(e) Off-premises directional signs may be permitted in the C-2 district only, subject to the
provisions of Section 25.4.4.
(f) On premises directional signs may be permitted in the C-1, C-2, MR, OS, OR, TAR, and
IND districts, subject to the requirements of Section 25.4.3.
SEC. 25.8 SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS (as amended 10/25/07) ?
The following signs shall not be permitted in any district:
1. Signs not expressly permitted are prohibited.
2. Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or intermittent lights.
3. Signs in the public right-of-way or on public property, except as permitted by this Article.
? SEC 25.7 SIGNS PERMITTED IN SPECIFIC ZONING DISTRICTS
SEC 25.8 SIGNS PROPROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 300
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
4. Any sign which revolves or has any scrolling message, visible moving part, visible
revolving parts or visible mechanical movement of any description ?or other apparent
visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic pulsations, or by mechanical means,
including intermittent electrical pulsations, or by action of normal wind currents, except
for those actions associated with time/temperature signs.
5. A sign or sign structure which is determined by the Building Official to be:
(a) Structurally unsafe.
(b) A hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or
abandonment.
(c) Not kept in good repair.
(d) Capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it.
6. Any sign which by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the
vision of drivers, or by obstructing, or detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or
control device on public streets and roads. All signs shall comply with the clear vision
regulations in Section 28.25 of the Zoning Ordinance.
7. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire
escape or other required exit way.
8. Signs which make use of such words as "stop", "look", "danger", or any other words,
phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
vehicular traffic. ?
9. Any sign, unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
10. Any sign now or hereafter existing which advertises a product, service or business no
longer available at that location.
11. Roof signs: For the purpose of this section any architectural element which is used on the
wall of a structure to give the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or
other roof type shall be considered the same as a roof and no sign shall be permitted upon
it. A vertical plane or fascia which is attached to and located below the angled plane of a
sloped roof or roof element and which is less than 6 inches in height, shall be considered
part of the roof and not used for signage.
12. Portable or inflatable signs unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance.
13. Banners, pennants, spinners and streamers except as otherwise provided for in this
Ordinance.
14. Wall panel signs.
15. Animated signs.
16. Neon, LED, string or rope lights used to highlight architectural features, or to frame a
window or door, except as may be permitted under Section 28.8 Exterior Lighting.
? SEC 25.8 SIGNS PROPROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 300a
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
17. Awning and marquee signs.
18. Canopy signs, except as permitted herein.
19. Electronic changeable copy signs, except as specifically permitted under Section 25.9.
20. Any sign, which requires a permit, that consists of glass tubing, filled with neon or
another gas, may only be permitted subject to Planning Commission approval.
SEC 25.8 SIGNS PROPROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 301
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS ? ?
1. Ground Signs
Except as specifically noted, ground signs shall be monument-type signs. All monument
signs shall comply with the following standards:
(a) For AG, R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, RM, R-2, R-2-A and PL Districts:
Minimum setback
required1 (feet)
Maximum sign area2
(square feet)
Maximum height
(feet)
5.0 50.0 4.0
Footnotes:
1 Setback measured from the street setback line or street right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
2 The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of
30 inches above grade.
(b) For OS, MR, C-1, C-2, OR, TAR and IND Districts:?
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA PREMISES WITH STREET FRONTAGE
LESS THAN 200 FEET
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum Height Maximum Sign
Area1
5 ft. 8 ft. 25 sq. ft.
6 ft. 8 ft. 26 sq. ft.
7 ft. 8 ft. 27 sq. ft.
8 ft. 8 ft. 28 sq. ft.
9 ft. 8 ft. 29 sq. ft.
10 ft. 8 ft. 30 sq. ft.
11 ft. 8 ft. 31 sq. ft.
12 ft. 8 ft. 32 sq. ft.
13 ft. 8 ft. 33 sq. ft.
14 ft. 8 ft. 34 sq. ft.
15 ft. 8 ft. 35 sq. ft.
16 ft. 8 ft. 36 sq. ft.
17 ft. 8 ft. 37 sq. ft.
18 ft. 8 ft. 38 sq. ft.
19 ft. 8 ft. 39 sq. ft.
20 ft. 8 ft. 40 sq. ft.
21 ft. 8 ft. 41 sq. ft.
22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
Footnotes: ?The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance
of 30 inches above grade.
? SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 302
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA PREMISES WITH STREET FRONTAGE 200
FEET OR GREATER
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum
Height2
Maximum Sign
Area1
10 ft. 10 ft. 42 sq. ft.
11 ft. 10 ft. 43 sq. ft.
12 ft. 10 ft. 45 sq. ft.
13 ft. 10 ft. 46 sq. ft.
14 ft. 10 ft. 48 sq. ft.
15 ft. 10 ft. 49 sq. ft.
16 ft. 10 ft. 51 sq. ft.
17 ft. 10 ft. 52 sq. ft.
18 ft. 10 ft. 54 sq. ft.
19 ft. 10 ft. 55 sq. ft.
20 ft. 10 ft. 57 sq. ft.
21 ft. 10 ft. 58 sq. ft.
22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
Footnotes:
1 The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of
30 inches above grade.
2 The maximum height of permitted ground signs in the C-1 and C-2 Districts may be increased to
fourteen (14) feet where a single premises has a minimum of five hundred (500) feet of frontage
on one (1) collector road or thoroughfare, or a minimum of seven hundred (700) feet of total
frontage on two (2) collector roads or thoroughfares, provided that all signs on the premises are
in compliance with this Article.
(c ) Pole signs may be permitted by the Planning Commission upon finding that one
of the following conditions exist:?
1. A monument sign would block the vision of drivers (see Section 28.25 of
Zoning Ordinance).
2. A wall or projecting sign could not be legally established on a side facing
a street.
In permitting a pole sign, the Planning Commission shall permit the minimum
height necessary to achieve visibility, provided it does not exceed the height of
the building to which it is accessory.
(d) Number of Ground Signs. Except where provided for in Section 25.10, a
maximum of one (1) ground sign shall be permitted per development parcel or
premises.
? ? SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 303
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(e) Placement shall be wholly within the boundaries of the property to which the sign
relates, exclusive of the street setback or road right-of-way area.
(f) Institutional Bulletin Boards, Stock Ticker, and Time-Temperature Signs may be
incorporated into any permitted ground sign structure.
(g) Monument signs shall have brick or decorative masonry block base that
complements the materials and architecture of the building. The base shall be not
less than seventy-five (75) percent of the greatest horizontal dimension of the sign
face, and the vertical separation between the lowest point of the sign face and the
highest point of the sign base shall be no greater than twelve (12) inches. Sign
copy shall be located at least thirty (30) inches above the ground to allow for
snow accumulation and plant growth.
(h) Lettering style shall be clean and simple to assure readability and shall be in
harmony with the style of architecture of the building. Generally, no more than
two (2) different fonts shall be used on each sign.
(i) It is the intent of this Ordinance to require signs to be in harmony with the
building color and architecture, therefore generally, no more than three (3) colors
may be used per sign and one (1) uniform, background color. Established
company logos are exempt from color limitations. An established company logo
is one that has historically been used as a symbol representing the company. For
the purposes of this regulation, black and white shall be considered colors.
2. Wall Signs ? (as amended 10/25/07)
The maximum permitted sign area and sign height for wall signs in each district shall be
as follows:
(a) For the AG, R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, R-M, R-2, R-2-A and PL Districts.
1) Maximum signable area of thirty (30) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height of twenty (20) feet, or height of wall to which the sign is
attached, whichever is less.
(b) For the OS District.
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height of twenty (20) feet, or height of wall to which the sign is
attached, whichever is less.
?
? SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 304
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(c) For the C-1 and C-2 Districts.
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet of sign area for signs in the C-1 district,
and ninety (90) square feet of sign area for signs in the C-2 district.
2) The maximum sign area for wall signs in the C-2 district may be increased
in accordance with the following table where such signs are located on
buildings that are set back two hundred (200) feet or more from the street
setback line, as measured from the closest building point to the nearest
street setback line:
?Distance of Sign
from Street
Setback Line
(feet)
Percentage Increase
in Maximum Sign
Area
(%)
Maximum Wall
Sign Area
(square feet)
200.0 - 299.0 25% 112.5
300.0 - 399.0 30% 117.0
400.0 - 499.0 35% 121.5
500.0 + 40% 126.0
3) Maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, or height of wall to which the sign
is attached, whichever is less.
(d) For the MR District.
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of ninety (90) square feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height shall be equal to the height of the bottom edge of the
second story windowsills.
(e) For the OR, TAR and IND Districts. ?
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters and
thirty (30) percent for a panel sign, up to a maximum of ninety (90) square
feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height shall be equal to the height of the wall to which the sign
is attached.
3) Buildings that face I-275 or M-14 are permitted to have one (1) wall sign
on the front, facing the road that provides access, and one (1) sign facing
the freeway, up to an additional ninety (90) square feet.?
? ? SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 304a
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
(f) Number of Wall Signs. One (1) wall sign shall be permitted on each façade
which has a separate public means of ingress and egress. In the case of a building
located on a corner lot, one (1) additional wall sign shall be permitted on a
separate façade that faces a public or private street, regardless of a separate public
means of ingress and egress. In the case of a building with more than one tenant
(multi-tenant), shopping center or business center, one (1) wall sign shall be
permitted for each tenant having a separate, direct means of public access from
the outside.?
(g) Institutional bulletin boards and time-temperature signs may be incorporated into
any permitted wall sign structure.
(h) The wall sign must be located within the signable area selected as the basis for the
size of that wall sign.
3. Projecting signs
For OS, MR, C-1, C-2 and IND Zoning Districts.
Instead of a wall sign, a business may be permitted to have a projecting sign, subject to
the following specifications:
(a) The maximum area of a projecting sign shall be twenty-five (25) square feet on
buildings located ten (10) feet or less from the street setback line. The maximum
area of a projecting sign shall be permitted to increase one (1) square foot for each
additional foot of setback greater than ten feet (10) to a maximum area of fortytwo
(42) square feet.
(b) Number of Projecting Signs. One (1) projecting sign shall be permitted on each
facade which has a separate public means of ingress and egress.
(c) Placement. Projecting signs shall be permitted only on zoning lots with frontage
of fifty (50) feet or more on the side on which the sign is to be mounted.
(d) Maximum Height. Maximum height shall be the height of the wall to which the
sign is attached.
(e) Signs must project at a ninety (90) degree angle to the building surface to which it
is attached. Angular projection at the corner of a building is prohibited.
(f) Signs shall not project more than five (5) feet from the face of the building, and
shall not project into any street setback or right-of-way.?
(g) Minimum clearance beneath a projecting sign shall be eight (8) feet six (6) inches.
(h) Projecting signs shall be attached directly to a building through building mounts
or hung from a mast arm. These support members may also include decorative
appurtenances, but external bracing such as guy wires and metal framework shall
be prohibited.?
? SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 305
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
4. Window Signs (as amended 10/25/07)
(a) Window signs shall be limited in area to twenty (20) percent of the total surface
area of the window to which the sign is attached or visible from.
(b) Permanent window signs, internally-illuminated window signs, and window signs
with words or symbols three (3) inches or more in height shall be deemed a wall
sign for purposes of calculating sign area.
(c) Open/Closed signs shall not be larger than two (2) square feet in area, and shall
not be counted towards the maximum permitted wall sign area.
5. Underhanging Signs (as amended 10/25/07
?
Where the roof structure of the building is extended over a walkway along the outer edge
of a building, one nameplate for each business or use may be attached to the underside of
the overhang, provided that all such signs shall be of identical size, shape, configuration,
lettering style and color scheme, shall contain only the name of the business, and shall
provide a vertical clearance of at least eight (8) feet six (6) inches between the sign and
the surface of the walkway.
6. Changeable Copy Signs (as amended 10/25/07)
Manual changeable copy ground monument and wall signs may be permitted, subject to
all of the requirements for ground and wall signs specified herein, and the following
additional requirements:
(a) Letter height shall not exceed four (4) inches except that numbers up to nine (9)
inches, in height may be permitted for fuel prices on gas station signs.
(b) Electronic changeable copy monument and wall signs are prohibited.
(c) The area of the changeable copy sign shall be counted toward the maximum
ground sign area, as applicable.
(d) The base of a ground sign containing changeable copy shall be brick, with
limestone capped brick piers on the two ends of the sign. The changeable copy
sign shall not project above the brick piers by more than one-half of the message
area’s height.
SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 306
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
7. Time-Temperature Signs. (as amended 10/25/07)
Time and Temperature signs subject to the following:
(a) Time-Temperature signs incorporate information that is considered a public
service for the benefit of the traveling public, and therefore may be permitted as
part of the sign face of a ground sign.
(b) The electronic numerals used in the Time and Temperature portion of the sign
shall not scroll, blink, move, flash, exit or enter from the outside area of the copy
or across the face of the sign or otherwise create a sense of movement. The sign
may display either the time or the temperature or both together, but shall not
switch between time and temperature. The electronic numerals shall only change
when there is an actual change in time or temperature. In no case shall any such
change occur in intervals of less than one minute.
SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 307
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
SEC. 25.10 SIGN REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO SHOPPING CENTERS AND
OTHER MULTI-TENANT BUILDINGS ??
The following requirements shall apply to shopping centers and other multi-tenant buildings
occupied by a minimum of three (3) tenants in the C-1 and C-2 districts.
1. Ground Signs
The sign area of one (1) ground sign may be increased to one hundred fifty (150) percent
of the maximum permitted by Section 25.9, Area, Height and Placement Regulations.
This Section shall not apply unless all signs on the premises are in compliance with this
Article.
2. Number of Signs
?The maximum number of permitted ground signs may be increased from one (1) to two
(2), for a shopping center or other multi-tenant building that has a minimum of five
hundred (500) feet of frontage on one (1) major thoroughfare, or a minimum of seven
hundred (700) feet of total frontage on two (2) major thoroughfares, subject to the
following:
(a) Only one (1) sign shall be permitted on premises having frontage on more than
one street if a single sign can be located such that it is visible from both streets.
(b) Any permitted second ground sign shall be located such that it is not in direct line
of sight from the first permitted ground sign.
(c) All signs on the premises shall be in compliance with this Article.
SEC. 25.11 ABANDONED, DAMAGED, ILLEGAL AND UNSAFE SIGNS ? ??
The Township shall undertake to remove and dispose of any signs determined by the Chief
Building Official to be abandoned, damaged, unsafe or illegal. If necessary, the Township shall
seek Circuit Court approval to remove such signs at the expense of the property owner. All
expenses related to such enforcement action shall be placed upon the tax rolls for the property
unless immediately reimbursed by the property owner, and any sign removal deposit with the
Township shall be considered forfeited.
1. Damaged Signs
Damaged signs shall be repaired, replaced or removed within ten (10) days of the damage
by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon
which said sign is found. Such signs may be removed by the Building Official at the
expense of the sign owner after said owner has been ordered in writing to remove said
sign by the Building Official and has not done so within ten (10) days.
SEC. 25.10 SIGN REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO SHOPPING
CENTERS AND OTHER MULTI-TENANT BUILDINGS
SEC. 25.11 ABANDONED, DAMAGED, ILLEGAL AND UNSAFE SIGNS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 308
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
2. Illegal Signs
Illegal signs may be removed by the Building Official at the expense of the sign owner
after said owner has been ordered in writing to remove said sign by the Building Official
and has not done so within thirty (30) days.
3. Unsafe Signs
Unsafe signs shall be immediately removed or made to conform to the provisions of this
ordinance by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or
structure upon which said sign is found. If such action is not taken within twenty-four
(24) hours of notice by the Building Official, the unsafe signs may be removed by the
Building Official at the expense of the sign owner.
SEC. 25.12 PERMIT APPLICATION ??
1. Permits Required
Permits are required for the construction, alteration or relocation of all permanent,
portable and temporary signs, excluding the following:
(a) Signs specified in Section 25.5, Signs Permitted in All Districts Without a Sign
Permit.
(b) ?A permit is not required for minor repairs, painting, servicing or cleaning of an
existing sign, provided that the sign is restored to its original design and all work
is in compliance with this Ordinance and other Township Codes and Ordinances.
(c) Traffic safety and control signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body.
(d) Real estate signs.?
2. Application Form and Fee
Applicants for sign permits shall complete an application form supplied by the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement. An application fee shall accompany the
application form. Said fee shall be determined by the Township Board and shall be
sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing the application.
3. Sign Removal Deposit?
A performance guarantee shall be submitted with the application for a permit, in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of removing the sign. The performance guarantee
shall be in a form acceptable to the Township. It shall be retained by the Township
throughout the life of the sign, and shall be returned to the owner as soon as practical
after the sign has been completely removed from the premises at owner's expense. If the
?
? SEC. 25.12 PERMIT APPLICATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 309
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Township removes the sign because of inaction by the owner, then the cost of removal
shall be subtracted from the amount of deposit returned to the owner.
4. Inspection Fees
At the time of issuance of the permit, the applicant shall pay an inspection fee as
established by the Township Board per sign to defray the cost of inspecting signs for
compliance with this Ordinance. This fee shall be paid as set forth in the application
form. Inspection fees will be waived for the balance of the first calendar year and will
become due and payable on January 1 of each succeeding year.
5. License and Insurance ?
Every person who engages in the business of erecting, altering or dismantling signs in the
Township shall first submit proof of appropriate licenses and a liability insurance policy
that indemnifies the Charter Township of Plymouth and its prior, present and future
officials, representatives and employees from all damage suits or actions of every nature
brought or claimed against the erector for injuries or damages to persons or property
sustained by any person or persons through any act of omission or negligence of said
erector, his servants, agents or employees. Said policy shall contain a clause whereby it
cannot be canceled or changed until after written notice has been filed with the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement at least thirty (30) days prior to the date
of cancellation.
6. The Township Building Inspector shall issue a permit for the sign upon determining that
the proposed sign meets the requirements of this and any other applicable Township
Ordinance and after payment of the prescribed fees and deposit.
SEC. 25.12 PERMIT APPLICATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 310
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
SEC. 25.13 VARIANCE AUTHORITY ? ?
The Township Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to vary the restrictions
contained in this Article upon finding that a genuine hardship exists and that the strict application
of this Ordinance would place the applicant at a substantial and significant disadvantage with
respect to other signs controlled by this Ordinance. Any alleged disadvantage resulting from
comparison of applicant's sign to any nonconforming sign shall not constitute a hardship within
the meaning of this Ordinance.
SEC. 25.14 NONCONFORMING SIGNS ??
Any sign lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this amendment which does not fully
comply with all provisions shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and shall be permitted
to remain as long as the sign is properly maintained, and is not detrimental to the health, safety
and welfare of the community, subject to the following:
1. Nonconforming signs shall not be:
(a) Expanded or changed to another nonconforming sign.
(b) Relocated, or altered so as to prolong the life of the sign, or so as to change the
shape, size, type, placement, or design of the sign’s structural or basic parts.
(c) Enhanced with any new feature including the addition of illumination.
(d) Repaired, except if such repair brings the sign into conformance with this
ordinance, if such repair necessitates:
1) An expense that exceeds fifty (50) percent of the sign’s appraised value, as
determined by the Chief Building Official.
2) The replacement of the sign frame.
3) The replacement of the sign’s primary support pole(s) or other support
structure.
(e) Replaced.
(f) Re-established after the activity, business, or use to which it related has been
discontinued for ninety (90) days or longer.
2. Permitted Modifications
A nonconforming sign may be modified in the following ways:
(a) A change solely in the wording of the copy.
(b) Routine repair to maintain the sign in a safe and aesthetically attractive condition
exactly as it existed at the time of the enactment of this amendment.
SEC. 25.13 VARIANCE AUTHORITY
SEC. 25.14 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 311
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
3. Elimination of Nonconforming Signs
The Township may acquire by purchase, condemnation, or by other means any
nonconforming sign which it deems necessary to preserve the health, safety, and welfare
of the residents.
SEC. 25.15 NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE PERMITTED ??
Anything in this Article to the contrary notwithstanding, a sign structure permitted in this Article
as an on-premise advertising sign or an off-premises advertising sign may contain a noncommercial
message.
END OF ARTICLE 25.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
? SEC. 25.15 NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE PERMITTED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 1 of 22
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXV (25)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 2 of 22
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXV (25)
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
PURPOSE ?
The purpose of this article is to provide a framework within which the identification and
informational needs of business and industry can be harmonized with the desires and aesthetic
standards of the general public. It is intended by this Ordinance to give recognition to the
legitimate needs of business, industry and other activities, through appropriate guidelines, in
attaining their identification and informational objectives. It is a basic tenet of this article that
unrestricted signage does not benefit either business or the community.
It is further the intent of this Article to regulate the construction, alteration, repair and
maintenance of all signs with respect to structural and fire safety, location, type of sign,
dimensions, height and method of illumination; to avoid visual clutter that obstructs vision or
misleads motorists; to protect the general public from damage and injury caused by distractions,
hazards or obstructions caused by poorly designed or improperly constructed signage; to
authorize the use of signs that are compatible with their surroundings, appropriate to the activity
that displays them and legible under the circumstances in which they are seen; to seek the
removal of illegal signs; and to encourage the replacement or removal of nonconforming signs
that are incompatible with the purpose of this Article.
SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS ?
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings as set forth in this section.
1. ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which, for ninety (90) consecutive days, fails to direct a
person to or advertise a bona fide business, tenant, owner, product or activity conducted,
or product available on the premises where such a sign is displayed.
2. AWNING: A protective, rooflike
covering, attached to the face of a
building, as might be located over a
window or door.
3. AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN: A sign
which is painted on, printed on or attached
flat against the surface of an awning or
canopy.
4. ?BANNER: A sign made of fabric, cloth,
paper, or other non-rigid material that is
typically not enclosed in a frame.
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 3 of 22
5. CANOPY: A rooflike architectural structure,
typically attached to the face of a building, and
used to provide protection from the elements (e.g.,
a canopy over a walkway or a gas station canopy).
6. CHANGEABLE COPY: Moveable letters or
other forms of sign copy, not including animated
copy, that can be altered by physical, mechanical
or electrical means without replacing the sign
copy area.
7. CONSTRUCTION SIGN: See “real estate development or construction sign.”
8. DIRECTIONAL SIGN, OFF-PREMISES: A monument sign, the sole purpose of
which is to direct traffic to one or more commercial businesses which are located on
premises without frontage on or visual exposure to a major thoroughfare or collector
road. Such businesses shall front on a road or easement which is used for their primary
public ingress and egress from the major thoroughfare or collector road. The purpose of
the off-premises directional sign is to facilitate the flow of traffic, encourage the
concentration of commercial uses, discourage strip commercial development, and not to
advertise the business or products or services offered.
9. DIRECTIONAL SIGN, ON-PREMISES: A ground sign located at the entry or exit of
a business or commercial establishment which indicates traffic flow. On-premise
direction signs may be located on buildings.?
10. FLAG: A piece of cloth having a distinctive size, color and design, used as a symbol,
standard or emblem.
11. FLASHING, ANIMATED, OR MOVING SIGN: A sign that has intermittently
reflecting lights, or a sign which uses intermittent, flashing, scintillating, or varying
intensity of illustration to create the appearance of
movement, or a sign that has any visible portions in
motion, either constantly or at intervals, whether
caused by artificial or natural sources.
12. GROUND SIGN: A sign supported by one or
more uprights, poles, braces, a masonry base, or a
monument placed in or upon the ground, fastened to
a secure and permanent foundation, and not
attached to any building. Ground signs shall
include monument signs and pole signs.
13. ?INFLATABLE SIGN: A sign that is either
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 4 of 22
expanded or its full dimensions are supported by gases contained within the sign, or a
sign part, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure.
14. ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign that is illuminated by a direct or indirect source of light
so shielded that no direct rays from it are visible from any public right-of-way or from the
abutting property.
15. INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD:
A structure containing a surface area upon
which is displayed the name of a religious
institution, school, library, community
center or similar institutions, and the
announcement of its services or activities.
16. MARQUEE: A rooflike structure, often
bearing a sign, projecting over an entrance
to a theater.
17. MARQUEE SIGN: A sign attached to a
marquee projecting from and supported by
the building.
18. MENU BOARD OR ORDER BOARD: A sign which is intended to service patrons
using a drive thru facility.
19. MONUMENT SIGN: A ground sign
mounted on a base that is in contact with or
close to the ground. The base of a
monument sign shall be no less than 75% of
the greatest horizontal dimensions of the
sign face, and the vertical separation
between the lowest point of the sign face
and the highest point of the sign base shall
be not greater than twelve (12) inches.
20. MONUMENT SIGN BASE: The lower part of a monument sign, which may appear as
a separate architectural feature, and serves as its ground support.
21. NAMEPLATE: A wall sign identifying the occupant, business name and/or address of a
building or parcel of land.?
22. NEON SIGN: A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon or another gas, which
glows when electric current is sent through it.
23. NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any advertising structure or sign that was lawfully
erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and any amendments
thereto, and that fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this
Article.
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 5 of 22
24. ?OFF-PREMISES SIGN: A sign which contains a message unrelated to a business or
profession conducted on the premises, or to a commodity, service or activity, not sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
25. OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN: A sign calling attention to a product or service
not available on the same premises upon which the sign is located. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, signs commonly known as billboards.
26. PANEL SIGN: A sign whose letters and/or symbols are on a panel contained within a
frame, which is an integral part of the sign. This definition is intended to distinguish
between panel signs and signs consisting of individual freestanding letters and/or
symbols.
27. PENNANT: A long, triangular, tapering flag, often bearing an emblem.
28. POLE SIGN: A ground sign mounted on a freestanding pole(s) or other support(s) with
a clear space between the bottom of the sign face and the grade.
29. POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign, relating to the election of a person or persons to
public office, or relating to a political party, or relating to a matters to be voted upon in a
local, state or national election or referendum.
30. PORTABLE SIGN: A free standing sign not permanently anchored or secured to either
a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to "A" frame, "T" shaped, or inverted
"T" shaped structures, including those mounted on wheeled trailers.
31. PROJECTING SIGN: A sign that is attached to and projects from a building wall at an
angle of up to 90o (not including a marquee, canopy or awning sign).
32. REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary
ground or wall sign listing the name of the project developers, contractors, engineer and
architects, on the site being developed, or located at the entrance of a residential
development under construction, listing the name of the development and general
information, such as the number and types of units to be built, price range and similar
data. Such signs include “subdivision business sign” and “construction sign.”
33. REAL ESTATE SIGN: A non-illuminated sign for the purpose of advertising or
promoting the sale, lease or rent of real estate. A PERMANENT LEASING SIGN is a
real estate sign that is erected for an indefinite period of time for the purpose of offering
space in a building for lease.?
34. ROOF SIGN: A sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof
of any building, with its principal support on the roof structure. For purposes of this
section, any architectural element which is used on the wall of a structure to give the
appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or other roof type, shall be
considered as a roof. A vertical plane or fascia which is attached to and located below
the angled plane of a sloped roof and which is less than 6 inches in height, shall be
considered part of the roof.
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 6 of 22
35. SERVICE CLUB ENTRANCE SIGN: A sign, usually located along a main entrance
way to a community, displaying the names of service clubs and organizations, their
meeting schedules, and usually including the service clubs’ symbols or logos. The name
of the community and a short salutatory message may also be included. ?
36. SETBACK OF SIGN: Setback is the distance measured from the street setback line
from which the sign is to be primarily viewed to the nearest edge of the sign.
37. SIGN: The name, identification, description, object, device, structure, display or
illustration that is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, service, event, organization or business by any means,
including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or
projected images.
38. SIGNABLE AREA: A continuous surface or wall unobstructed by windows, doors and
other major architectural details.
39. SITE ENTRY FEATURE WITH SIGNAGE: An architectural feature that defines,
delineates and differentiates the entrance to a residential subdivision, apartment
community, condominium development, mobile home park or office, business or
industrial park, or similar development from a major thoroughfare without being a visual
intrusion or distraction to the general public and the traveling motorist. Signage
identifying the name of the development may be incorporated into the architectural
feature.
40. SPINNER: A spinning disc-like sign that is typically thread on a line with other spinners
to attract attention.
41. STREAMER: A long narrow banner or flag.
42. SUBDIVISION BUSINESS SIGN: See “real estate development or construction sign.”
43. TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign that is not permanently fastened to any structure and is
intended for a limited period of display, including, but not limited to inflatable signs,
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 7 of 22
banners, pennants, spinners and streamers, window signs and decorative displays for
holidays or public demonstrations.?
44. TIME-TEMPERATURE SIGN: A sign which displays the current time or outdoor
temperature or both, and which displays no other material except for the name of a
business, product or service.
45. VEHICLE BUSINESS SIGN: A sign painted or attached to a vehicle which is located
on a premises primarily for purposes of advertising the business or product for sale on the
premises. Commercially licensed vehicles which are generally used daily off-site are not
included in this definition.
46. VOICE MESSAGE SIGN: A sign that either 1) conveys a recorded message to
someone located nearby, or 2) provides for two-way voice communication (such as with
a menu board at a drive-through restaurant). A voice message sign may also be known as
a talking sign.
47. WALL SIGN: A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall and
does not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached, nor more than twelve
(12) inches therefrom, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building
wall. Included in the definition of wall signs are signs mounted flat against the building
fascia, provided the sign does not protrude beyond any boundary of the fascia.
48. WINDOW SIGN: A temporary or permanent sign painted on or affixed to a window
surface, suspended so as to hang more or less parallel with the window surface, or
otherwise displayed in a manner intended to be viewed from outside the window.
SEC. 25.2 GENERAL STANDARDS ???
The following general standards shall apply:
1. Standards of Measurement for Signs
Dimensional standards and measurements for signs shall be subject to the following:
(a) Sign Area. The entire area within a rectangle or square enclosing the extreme
limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character,
together with any frame, tower, or other material, color or internally illuminated
area forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign, shall
be included in the measurement. Parts of a sign shall be deemed to be a single
sign whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggests a
single unit, not withstanding any physical separation between parts.
?
? SEC. 25.1 DEFINITIONS
?? SEC. 25.2 GENERAL STANDARDS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 8 of 22
1) Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included
in determining the sign area, except that where two such faces are placed
back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the
area of the sign shall be taken as either: ?
a) the area of one face, if the two faces are of equal area, or
b) the area of the larger face, if the two faces are of unequal area.
2) For ground signs, the area shall include the entire area of the sign upon
which copy, lettering, drawings or photographs could be placed, excluding
necessary uprights or supports. For monument signs, the base of a
monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a
distance of thirty (30) inches above grade. Streetscape and landscape
features which in the determination of the Planning Commission, are an
integral part of the sign design shall also be excluded from the calculation
of sign area.
3) For internally-illuminated awnings or canopies, the entire flat surface of
the awning or canopy upon which the message is written shall be included
in the sign area calculation. Signs mounted on awnings and canopies that
are not internally-illuminated shall be subject to the sign area standards of
measurement specified in paragraph (a), above.
4) For paper window signs, the area shall include, the entire area of the
paper. Where adjacent paper window signs are within eight (8) inches of
each other they shall be measured as a single sign.
(b) Sign Height. The distance from the average level of the ground or pavement
directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign structure, including any
supportive or decorative appendages, without including any berm, landscaping,
grading, or artificially or unnaturally constructed raised portion of land at the
point of measurement.
(c) Sign Setback. Setback is the distance measured from the street setback line from
which the sign is to be primarily viewed to the nearest edge of the sign.?
?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 9 of 22
(d) Signable Area. The signable area shall equal the area of (a x b) or (c x d) or (e x
f) in the following illustration, at the choice of the applicant:
2. Illumination
Sign illumination shall be subject to the following:
(a) Sign illumination shall be designed, installed and maintained in a manner that
minimizes off-site glare, light trespass and light pollution. Illumination shall be
concentrated within the area of the sign to prevent glare upon the street or
adjacent property. Sign illumination shall be provided solely by electrical means
or devices, shall not be of a flashing, intermittent, moving or animated type, and
shall further comply with the specific standards defined in Section 25.9, Area,
Height and Placement Regulations.
(b) Signs shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11 P.M. and 7 A.M., except
those pertaining to a business open during these hours, and except
time/temperature signs located in C-2 districts.
3. Maintenance Contract
A contract for maintenance of all new permanent signs may be required by the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
4. Underground Wiring
Where illumination is desired, underground wiring shall be required for all signs not
attached to the building.
The following was amended on 10/27/09
SEC. 25.4 SPECIAL SIGNS IN C-1 AND C-2 DISTRICTS ?
The following signs are permitted in a C-1 and C-2 Districts:
1. Flags or Pennants
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 10 of 22
Flags or pennants bearing the official design of a corporation or award flags or pennants
subject to the following:
(a) Such corporation, or award flags or pennants shall be displayed on flag poles
only. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a flagpole is a pole used exclusively to
display a flag. Attachment to any other site fixture or feature shall be prohibited.
(b) A maximum of two (2) such flags or pennants shall be permitted for each flag
pole provided.
(c) The maximum number of flag poles permitted per individual business shall be
determined in accordance with the following table:?
STREET FRONTAGE IN FEET MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FLAG
POLES PERMITTED
0 - 210 1
211 - 300 3
301 or greater 5
(d) Placement of flag poles shall be in a manner and location subject to the following
requirements:
1) The placement shall not impact adjacent properties, in particular, those of
a residential nature.
2) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
3) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination of said flags shall not
constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
4) The height of flagpoles shall conform to the height restrictions of set forth
in Article 20 for buildings and structures. A flagpole shall be deemed to
be a structure under all provisions of this Ordinance. Flagpoles shall
comply with the setback requirements for structures.
5) No flag or flagpole shall be permitted to project into the road right-of-way
at full extension of the flag.
6) Flag poles shall not be located on the roof of a building. ?
(e) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination of said flags or pennants
shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 11 of 22
2. Banners
Banners used to draw attention to vehicle dealerships are permitted, provided that there is
a maximum of one (1) banner on each pole, and provided that they have no written
message or corporate identity. Each banner shall not exceed a maximum area of twenty
(20) square feet.
3. On-Premises Directional Signs ?
On-Premises Directional Signs may be permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Shopping
District, C-2 General Commercial District, MR Mid-Rise District, OS Office Service
District, OR Office Research District, TAR Technology and Research District, and IND
Industrial District subject to the following:
(a) Directional signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per side, nor exceed two (2)
sides.
(b) Said signs may incorporate a corporation or business logo provided the main
theme of the sign shall be to facilitate vehicular traffic flow.
(c) Placement shall be within the subject property; no such signs shall be permitted
within the street setback area or right-of-way.
(d) The size, content, coloring, placement or manner of illumination shall not
constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic
flow.
(e) Directional ground signs shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet and shall be
limited to one (1) per ingress or egress drive, located at the ingress or egress
drive.?
(f) On-premises directional signs may be located on buildings.
4. Off-Premises Directional Signs
Off-Premises Directional Signs may be permitted on a limited basis in the C-2 District, in
order to encourage the clustering of businesses, and minimize strip commercial
development in accordance with the Township Master Plan, while still allowing
necessary and reasonable identification of businesses, facilitating the orderly flow of
traffic, and avoiding unnecessary proliferation and excessive size of signs on
thoroughfares and collector roads. ?
(a) Off-premises directional signs are permitted only upon review and approval of the
Planning Commission, and subject to compliance with the following conditions:
1) Approval of the sign would serve to further the purposes of this Section.?
?
?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 12 of 22
2) The Planning Commission shall determine that the business is located in
the C-2 District; has no frontage on the major thoroughfare from which it
takes primary access; is within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of
said thoroughfare; is not visible from the major thoroughfare or is visible
from the major thoroughfare but with no clear indication of how to access
the business; and would not reasonably be able to direct traffic to or
adequately identify its location without an off-premises directional sign.
3) No off-premises directional sign shall be permitted without a recorded
easement or executed agreement that accomplishes all of the following:
a) states that the owner of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed
grants permission for the off-premises directional sign to be
located on the parcel,
b) stipulates which parcel(s) are entitled to use of the off-premises
directional sign, and
c) specifies how the sign is to be maintained and establishes a means
to assure that maintenance runs with the life of the sign.
4) Off-premises directional signs shall be located only on land zoned C-2,
and shall direct traffic only to land also zoned C-2.
5) Off-premises directional signs shall be permitted only at the intersection
of the access road for the business and a major thoroughfare, and only one
such sign is permitted at each intersection. The business access road may
be a public street, private road, or recorded access easement over which
the general public has ingress/egress rights. If multiple businesses served
by the same access road require the use of the same intersection for an offpremises
business directional sign, the same sign shall be used.?
6) Off-premises directional signs shall be located entirely on private property
and no closer than thirty (30) feet from the centerline of the street, private
road, or recorded access easement which provides access to the business.
The sign shall be located a minimum of sixty (60) feet from the centerline
of the major thoroughfare or collector road. The sign location shall
comply with all other setback and visibility requirements of the
Township.
7) Off-premises directional signs shall be monument signs with the minimum
dimensions necessary to accomplish the purpose of directing traffic;
however, in no case shall the sign height exceed the following dimensions:
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 13 of 22
NO. OF USERS ON
SIGN
MAXIMUM SIGN
AREA
MAXIMUM SIGN
HEIGHT
1 12 sq. ft. 4.5 ft.
2 24 sq. ft. 6 ft.
3 or more 36 sq. ft. 8 ft.
The base of an off-premises directional sign shall be excluded from the
calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty (30) inches above grade.
8) If multiple businesses served by the same access road require the use of
the same intersection for an off-premises business directional sign, the
same sign shall be used.
9) Space shall be allocated on the sign to allow identification of all
businesses which use the same access road to use the off-premises
directional sign. A common lettering size and style and no more than one
uniform background color shall be used. The sign shall state only the
name of the business(es) being identified. A directional arrow may also
be included on the sign. The sign base shall be of brick or decorative
masonry block.
10) The ground within five (5) feet of the base of the off-premises directional
sign shall be landscaped in low shrubbery, ground cover or flowers, and
said landscaping shall be maintained in presentable condition.
11) Off-premises directional signs may be illuminated in accordance with
Section 25.2.2, provided the illumination creates no perceptible glare on
private property at a distance greater than ten (10) feet from the sign and
on public streets and the access drive.
12) Off premises directional signs shall be prohibited where a Site Entry
Feature with Signage, as defined in Section 25.1, is determined by the
Planning Commission to be more appropriate.?
(a) The off-premises directional sign shall be maintained in a sound and presentable
condition. If a business that is identified on the off-premise directional sign
ceases to exist at its location or changes its name, the appropriate changes to the
copy of the sign shall be made within thirty (30) days of the change in the
business.
(b) The existence of an off-premises directional sign shall not affect the number and
size of other signs permitted by the Township, including any other signs on the
same parcel as the off-premises directional sign, and any other signs on the same
parcel as the business identified by the off-premises directional sign.
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 14 of 22
5. Menu or Order Board
Menu and/or order board for a drive-thru facility subject to the following:
(a) Said signs shall be located on the interior of the lot or parcel and shall not be
readable from the exterior of the lot.
(b) Said signs shall be intended to service the public utilizing the drive-thru facilities
only.
(c) The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair
vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow in any manner.
(d) The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination shall not constitute a traffic
or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow.
(e) The volume on order boards shall be maintained at the minimum level necessary
so that it is audible to users, so as to minimize extraneous noise traveling off the
site.
6. Gasoline Price Signs
Gasoline price signs shall be permitted subject to the following standards:
(a) One (1) gasoline price sign shall be permitted for each gas station.
(b) Gasoline price signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. Gasoline
price signs shall be not counted in determining compliance with the standards for
total area of wall or freestanding signs permitted on the parcel.
(c) Gasoline price signs shall comply with the setback and height requirements
specified for freestanding signs in the district in which the signs are located.
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
SEC. 25.8 SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS ?
The following signs shall not be permitted in any district:
1. Signs not expressly permitted are prohibited.
2. Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or intermittent lights.
3. Signs in the public right-of-way or on public property, except as permitted by this Article.
4. Any sign which revolves or has any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or visible
mechanical movement of any description ?or other apparent visible movement achieved
by electrical, electronic pulsations, or by mechanical means, including intermittent
electrical pulsations, or by action of normal wind currents, except for those actions
associated with street time/temperature signs.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 15 of 22
5. A sign or sign structure which is determined by the Building Official to be:
(a) Structurally unsafe.
(b) A hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or
abandonment.
(c) Not kept in good repair.
(d) Capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it.
6. Any sign which by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the
vision of drivers, or by obstructing, or detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or
control device on public streets and roads. All signs shall comply with the clear vision
regulations in Section 28.25 of the Zoning Ordinance.
7. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire
escape or other required exit way.
8. Signs which make use of such words as "stop", "look", "danger", or any other words,
phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
vehicular traffic. ?
9. Any sign, unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
10. Any sign now or hereafter existing which advertises a product, service or business no
longer available at that location.
11. Roof signs: For the purpose of this section any architectural element which is used on the
wall of a structure to give the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or
other roof type shall be considered the same as a roof and no sign shall be permitted upon
it. A vertical plane or fascia which is attached to and located below the angled plane of a
sloped roof or roof element and which is less than 6 inches in height, shall be considered
part of the roof and not used for signage.
12. Portable or inflatable signs unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance.
13. Banners, pennants, spinners and streamers except as otherwise provided for in this
Ordinance.
14. Wall panel signs.
15. Electronic or electric changeable copy signs, except as permitted Time-Temperature
signs.
16. Neon, string or rope lights used to highlight architectural features, or to frame a window
or door, except as may be permitted under Section 28.8 Exterior Lighting.
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 16 of 22
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
SEC. 25.9 AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS ? ?
1. Ground Signs
Except as specifically noted, ground signs shall be monument-type signs. All monument
signs shall comply with the following standards:
(a) For AG, R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, RM, R-2, R-2-A and PL Districts:
Minimum setback
required1 (feet)
Maximum sign area2
(square feet)
Maximum height
(feet)
5.0 50.0 4.0
Footnotes:
1 Setback measured from the street setback line or street right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
2 The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of
30 inches above grade.
(b) For OS, MR, C-1, C-2, OR, TAR and IND Districts:?
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA PREMISES WITH STREET FRONTAGE
LESS THAN 200 FEET
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum Height Maximum Sign
Area1
5 ft. 8 ft. 25 sq. ft.
6 ft. 8 ft. 26 sq. ft.
7 ft. 8 ft. 27 sq. ft.
8 ft. 8 ft. 28 sq. ft.
9 ft. 8 ft. 29 sq. ft.
10 ft. 8 ft. 30 sq. ft.
11 ft. 8 ft. 31 sq. ft.
12 ft. 8 ft. 32 sq. ft.
13 ft. 8 ft. 33 sq. ft.
14 ft. 8 ft. 34 sq. ft.
15 ft. 8 ft. 35 sq. ft.
16 ft. 8 ft. 36 sq. ft.
17 ft. 8 ft. 37 sq. ft.
18 ft. 8 ft. 38 sq. ft.
19 ft. 8 ft. 39 sq. ft.
20 ft. 8 ft. 40 sq. ft.
21 ft. 8 ft. 41 sq. ft.
22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.
Footnotes: ?
1 The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of 30
inches above grade.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 17 of 22
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA PREMISES WITH STREET FRONTAGE 200
FEET OR GREATER
Distance From Street
Setback Line
Maximum
Height2
Maximum Sign
Area1
10 ft. 10 ft. 42 sq. ft.
11 ft. 10 ft. 43 sq. ft.
12 ft. 10 ft. 45 sq. ft.
13 ft. 10 ft. 46 sq. ft.
14 ft. 10 ft. 48 sq. ft.
15 ft. 10 ft. 49 sq. ft.
16 ft. 10 ft. 51 sq. ft.
17 ft. 10 ft. 52 sq. ft.
18 ft. 10 ft. 54 sq. ft.
19 ft. 10 ft. 55 sq. ft.
20 ft. 10 ft. 57 sq. ft.
21 ft. 10 ft. 58 sq. ft.
22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
More than 22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.
Footnotes:
1 The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of
30 inches above grade.
2 The maximum height of permitted ground signs in the C-1 and C-2 Districts may be increased to
fourteen (14) feet where a single premises has a minimum of five hundred (500) feet of frontage
on one (1) collector road or thoroughfare, or a minimum of seven hundred (700) feet of total
frontage on two (2) collector roads or thoroughfares, provided that all signs on the premises are
in compliance with this Article.
(c ) Pole signs may be permitted by the Planning Commission upon finding that one
of the following conditions exist:?
1. A monument sign would block the vision of drivers (see Section 28.25 of
Zoning Ordinance).
2. A wall or projecting sign could not be legally established on a side facing
a street.
In permitting a pole sign, the Planning Commission shall permit the minimum
height necessary to achieve visibility, provided it does not exceed the height of
the building to which it is accessory.
(d) Number of Ground Signs. Except where provided for in Section 25.10, a
maximum of one (1) ground sign shall be permitted per development parcel or
premises.
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 18 of 22
(e) Placement shall be wholly within the boundaries of the property to which the sign
relates, exclusive of the street setback or road right-of-way area.
(f) Institutional Bulletin Boards, Stock Ticker, and Time-Temperature Signs may be
incorporated into any permitted ground sign structure.
(g) Monument signs shall have brick or decorative masonry block base that
complements the materials and architecture of the building. The base shall be not
less than seventy-five (75) percent of the greatest horizontal dimension of the sign
face, and the vertical separation between the lowest point of the sign face and the
highest point of the sign base shall be no greater than twelve (12) inches. Sign
copy shall be located at least thirty (30) inches above the ground to allow for
snow accumulation and plant growth.
(h) Lettering style shall be clean and simple to assure readability and shall be in
harmony with the style of architecture of the building. Generally, no more than
two (2) different fonts shall be used on each sign.
(i) It is the intent of this Ordinance to require signs to be in harmony with the
building color and architecture, therefore generally, no more than three (3) colors
may be used per sign and one (1) uniform, background color. Established
company logos are exempt from color limitations. An established company logo
is one that has historically been used as a symbol representing the company. For
the purposes of this regulation, black and white shall be considered colors.
2. Wall Signs ?
The maximum permitted sign area and sign height for wall signs in each district shall be
as follows:
(a) For the AG, R-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, R-M, R-2, R-2-A and PL Districts.
1) Maximum signable area of thirty (30) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height of twenty (20) feet, or height of wall to which the sign is
attached, whichever is less.
(b) For the OS District.
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height of twenty (20) feet, or height of wall to which the sign is
attached, whichever is less. ?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 19 of 22
(c) For the C-1 and C-2 Districts.
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet of sign area for signs in the C-1 district,
and ninety (90) square feet of sign area for signs in the C-2 district.
2) The maximum sign area for wall signs in the C-2 district may be increased
in accordance with the following table where such signs are located on
buildings that are set back two hundred (200) feet or more from the street
setback line, as measured from the closest building point to the nearest
street setback line:
?Distance of Sign
from Street
Setback Line
(feet)
Percentage Increase
in Maximum Sign
Area
(%)
Maximum Wall
Sign Area
(square feet)
200.0 - 299.0 25% 112.5
300.0 - 399.0 30% 117.0
400.0 - 499.0 35% 121.5
500.0 + 40% 126.0
3) Maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, or height of wall to which the sign
is attached, whichever is less.
(d) For the MR District.
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters, up to a
maximum of ninety (90) square feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height shall be equal to the height of the bottom edge of the
second story windowsills.
(e) For the OR, TAR and IND Districts. ?
1) Maximum signable area of forty (40) percent for individual letters and
thirty (30) percent for a panel sign, up to a maximum of ninety (90) square
feet of sign area.
2) Maximum height shall be equal to the height of the wall to which the sign
is attached.
3) Buildings that face I-275 or M-14 are permitted to have one (1) wall sign
on the front, facing the road that provides access, and one (1) sign facing
the freeway, up to an additional ninety (90) square feet.?
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 20 of 22
(f) Number of Wall Signs. One (1) wall sign shall be permitted on each façade
which has a separate public means of ingress and egress. In the case of a building
with more than one tenant (multi-tenant), shopping center or business center, one
(1) wall sign shall be permitted for each tenant having a separate, direct means of
public access from the outside.?
(g) Institutional bulletin boards and time-temperature signs may be incorporated into
any permitted wall sign structure.
3. Projecting signs
For OS, MR, C-1, C-2 and IND Zoning Districts.
Instead of a wall sign, a business may be permitted to have a projecting sign, subject to
the following specifications:
(a) The maximum area of a projecting sign shall be twenty-five (25) square feet on
buildings located ten (10) feet or less from the street setback line. The maximum
area of a projecting sign shall be permitted to increase one (1) square foot for each
additional foot of setback greater than ten feet (10) to a maximum area of fortytwo
(42) square feet.
(b) Number of Projecting Signs. One (1) projecting sign shall be permitted on each
facade which has a separate public means of ingress and egress.
(c) Placement. Projecting signs shall be permitted only on zoning lots with frontage
of fifty (50) feet or more on the side on which the sign is to be mounted.
(d) Maximum Height. Maximum height shall be the height of the wall to which the
sign is attached.
(e) Signs must project at a ninety (90) degree angle to the building surface to which it
is attached. Angular projection at the corner of a building is prohibited.
(f) Signs shall not project more than five (5) feet from the face of the building, and
shall not project into any street setback or right-of-way.?
(g) Minimum clearance beneath a projecting sign shall be eight (8) feet six (6) inches.
(h) Projecting signs shall be attached directly to a building through building mounts
or hung from a mast arm. These support members may also include decorative
appurtenances, but external bracing such as guy wires and metal framework shall
be prohibited.??
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
4. Awning, Canopy and Marquee signs
Instead of a wall sign, a business may be permitted to have an awning, canopy, or
marquee sign, subject to the following:
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 21 of 22
(a) Marquee signs. Marquee signs may be permitted in the C-2 district, subject to the
following:
? 1) The maximum area shall not exceed that which is permitted for a wall sign
in the C-2 district. Signable area shall be calculated as if the marquee did
not exist.
2) Placement. The display surface of the sign shall be attached flat against,
and shall not extend above, below, or beyond the vertical surface of the
marquee structure.
3) Maximum height. No portion of a marquee sign shall be higher than the
eave line of a building.
(b) Awning and Canopy Signs. Awning and canopy signs may be permitted in the
MR, C-1, C-2 and IND districts, subject to the following:
1) The maximum area shall not exceed that which is permitted for a wall sign
within the specified zoning district, based on using the vertical face of the
awning or canopy for calculation of signable area.
2) Placement. Awning and canopy signs shall be affixed or attached flat
against a vertical surface of the awning or canopy, and shall not extend
above, below, or beyond the vertical surface of the awning or canopy.
3) Maximum height. No portion of an awning or canopy sign shall be higher
than the eave line of a building.
5. Window Signs ?
(a) Window signs shall be limited in area to twenty (20) percent of the total surface
area of the window to which the sign is attached or visible from.
(b) Permanent window signs, internally-illuminated window signs, and window signs
with words or symbols three (3) inches or more in height shall be deemed a wall
sign for purposes of calculating sign area.
(c) Open/Closed signs shall not be larger than two (2) square feet in area, and shall
not be counted towards the maximum permitted wall sign area.
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
6. Underhanging Signs?
Where the roof structure of the building is extended over a walkway along the outer edge
of a building, one nameplate for each business or use may be attached to the underside of
the overhang, provided that all such signs shall be of identical size, shape, configuration,
lettering style and color scheme, shall contain only the name of the business, and shall
provide a vertical clearance of at least eight (8) feet six (6) inches between the sign and
the surface of the walkway.
? ?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 25: Sign Regulations
Amendments:
Page 22 of 22
The following language was amended on 10/25/07
7. Changeable Copy Signs
Changeable copy ground monument signs shall be permitted, subject to all of the
requirements for ground signs specified herein, and the following additional
requirements:
(a) Letter height shall not exceed four (4) inches,
(b) Electronic or electric changeable copy signs are not permitted.
(c) The area of the changeable copy sign shall be counted toward the maximum
ground sign area.
(d) The base of the sign shall be brick, with limestone capped brick piers on the two
ends of the sign. The changeable copy sign shall not project above the brick piers
by more than one-half of the message area’s height.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 312
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXVI
LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND LAND USE BUFFERS
PURPOSE?
The purpose of this Article is to:
1. Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by protecting the character, appearance
and value of land and neighborhoods.
2. Protect the integrity of each land parcel by requiring buffering between non-contiguous
land uses.
3. Enhance the appearance of commercial development, vehicular use areas, off-street
parking and property abutting rights-of-way thereby reducing conditions that may lead to
blighted conditions.
4. Improve and preserve the environmental quality and residential atmosphere of the
Township through the judicious and thoughtful use of landscaping and buffering
techniques.
5. Promote the use of landscape materials that present a finished and aesthetically pleasing
appearance, and enhance the visual character of the site and the surrounding
neighborhood.
6. Encourage the incorporation of pre-existing site conditions, such as existing vegetation or
topography, into the design and placement of landscaping, where possible. Where this
cannot be achieved, require replacement landscaping to mitigate the loss of substantial or
significant vegetation to the maximum extent possible.
7. Moderate, buffer or filter the visual impact of buildings and parking lots from street
rights-of-way and adjacent properties.
8. Implement Master Plan recommendations for enhanced landscaping at major and minor
community entry points, or along major roads and key open space corridors.
SEC. 26.1 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES?
Consideration by the Planning Commission of proposed landscape plans shall reflect the
following basic principles:
1. Within reasonable limits, land uses can be made compatible through the proper treatment
of perimeter areas, be they abutting other property or facing major or minor
thoroughfares.
? PURPOSE
? SEC. 26.1 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 313
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
2. Quality of community development and growth can be enhanced by reasonable and
comprehensive standards for buffering or screening through the use of plant material and
other techniques.
3. Every property owner and/or developer has the responsibility to ensure that the use and
treatment of the parcel in question does not adversely impact adjacent property and is
consistent with community planning goals and the use of resources in accordance with
their character and adaptability.
SEC. 26.2 APPPOACH?
The orientation of this Article is focused on the establishment of "Performance Standards", the
specification of objectives and the identification of alternative methods (non-inclusive) of
accomplishing the objectives. The standards of this Section are considered the minimum
necessary to achieve the purposes of the ordinance. Flexibility is allowed, where determined
appropriate by the Planning Commission, to encourage innovative and creative design and to
reflect individual site conditions. The measure of performance will be based on:
1. Planning Commission determination that the site design is in accordance with the
Purpose and Statement of Principles Sections of this Article.
2. Planning Commission determination that all landscaping, screening and buffering
elements are in compliance with applicable provisions, design parameters and standards
of this Article, as appropriate.
SEC. 26.3 SCOPE?
1. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all parcels which are hereafter developed,
altered or redeveloped within the statutory boundaries of the Charter Township of
Plymouth, including changes in lot frontages caused by road widening or reconditioning.
Such altered, developed or redeveloped parcels shall be required to comply with all
applicable provisions of this Article, except as may be approved by the Planning
Commission under extreme circumstances.
2. No development shall be approved unless development plans show landscaping
consistent with this Article.
SEC. 26.4 EFFECTIVENESS?
Landscaping, screening and buffering elements shall be effective in meeting the objectives of
this Article at the time of installation of such elements, and shall maintain that effectiveness as
the plant materials mature. The Planning Commission may require that additional plant materials
be provided, as a temporary measure to supplement permanent plant materials to achieve
immediate effectiveness. Supplemental plant materials shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
? SEC. 26.2 APPPOACH
? SEC. 26.3 SCOPE
? SEC. 26.4 EFFECTIVENESS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 314
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
1. Supplemental plant materials shall be located and arranged in a manner that provides
immediate screening or buffering without inhibiting the long-term growth potential of
permanent plant materials.
2. Supplemental plant materials shall be clearly identified as such on the landscape plan and
illustrated at their size at time of planting.
3. If appropriate for the particular installation, a schedule for the thinning or eventual
removal of supplemental plant materials from a site shall be provided on the landscape
plan. No changes to site landscaping shall occur without prior Township approval.
4. Based upon the schedule approved with the landscape plan, the Township may inspect
and re-evaluate the effectiveness of the landscaping, screening or buffering to determine
whether:
(a) The permanent plant materials have matured to the point that the supplemental
plant materials may be thinned or removed.
(b) The supplemental plant materials should be retained permanently to ensure the
continuing effectiveness of the screen or buffer.
5. Supplemental plant materials shall be thinned or removed from the site in accordance
with the approved schedule, or upon determination by the Township that they are no
longer necessary to achieve the objectives of this Article. The property owner shall be
responsible for notifying the Township when required landscaping has matured and the
supplemental landscaping can be removed.
6. Pruning shall comply with the provisions of Section 26.8 to ensure that the intended
effectiveness is maintained.
SEC. 26.5 LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW?
1. Landscape plans shall be required as part of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Plat
review processes. The landscape plan shall be submitted and approved or approved with
conditions by the Planning Commission prior to Final Site Plan Approval, or prior to the
Planning Commission recommendation on the Final Preliminary Plat to the Township
Board.
2. For developments not subject to Site Plan approval by the Planning Commission, as
defined in Section 29.4.2 of this Ordinance, a detailed landscape plan substantially
conforming to the requirements of this Article shall be submitted to the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement for review and approval by the Administrative Review
Committee prior to issuance of a building permit.
3. All landscape plans shall include the following:
(a) Scale. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals twenty
feet (1” = 20’). Enlargements shall be required to permit adequate evaluation of
? SEC. 26.5 LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 315
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
areas with extensive landscaping or unusual site features. Plants, other than
supplemental plantings, shall be illustrated at their size at mid-maturity to
facilitate evaluation of immediate effectiveness. For larger sites, an overall plan
sheet shall be provided, in addition to the detail sheets, to show the relationship of
the individual pages and the overall planting plan.
(b) Seal. All landscape plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered landscape
architect.
(c) Landscape Schedule. A list of all proposed landscaping elements, including but
not limited to trees, shrubs, perennials, grasses and other groundcover, and any
existing vegetation used to satisfy requirements of this Article, shall be provided
on the plan, with the quantity, botanical name, common name and size at
installation.
(d) Maintenance Plan. Landscape maintenance procedures shall be specified on the
landscape plan, in accordance with Section 26.8 (Maintenance). The plan must
also specify the proposed procedures for snow removal and storage.
(e) Location and description of other landscape improvements, including but not
limited to mulch, berms, walls, fences, paving etc. as necessary to allow the
Planning Commission or the Administrative Review Committee to fully evaluate
the landscape treatment proposed to ensure conformity with the spirit and intent
of this Article.
SEC. 26.6 INSTALLATION?
1. All landscaping shall be installed in a manner consistent with the standards of the
American Association of Nurserymen and the approved landscape plan. This shall
include quantity, size, type and location of plantings proposed:
(a) Major deviations in quantity, type, size and location of plant materials from the
approved landscape plan shall be subject to review and approval in the same
manner as provided in this Article for the approved landscape plan.
(b) Minor revisions or deviations from the approved landscape plan may be permitted
after affirmative recommendation by the Township’s designated expert that such
changes are consistent with the spirit and intent of this Article and the previously
approved landscape plan.
2. Installation of all landscaping, screening and buffering elements shown on the approved
landscape plan shall be completed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the
proposed development; subject to the following:
(a) If it is determined that the landscape materials would be jeopardized by weather
conditions, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued, provided that the
developer submits a completion date and cost estimate for the completion of the
? SEC. 26.6 INSTALLATION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 316
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
landscape plan, subject to review and approval by the Chief Building Official a
cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the
Township-approved cost estimate to the Charter Township of Plymouth.
(b) In no case shall the Department of Building and Code Enforcement issue a
Certificate of Occupancy or a temporary Certificate of Occupancy without the
aforementioned submission or completion of installation.
(c) Failure of the developer to comply with the completion date shall result in
forfeiture of the deposit to the Charter Township of Plymouth, but shall not
release the developer from the obligation for installation and completion of the
landscaping consistent with the approved plan. The Chief Building Official may
grant one extension for sixty (60) days upon receipt of a written request from the
developer, provided circumstances warrant such an extension.
SEC. 26.7 MATERIALS?
1. Plant Material Standards
(a) All plant material shall:
1) Conform to size and description set forth in the current edition of
"American Standard for Nursery Stock" sponsored by the American
Association of Nurserymen, Inc. and approved by the American National
Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI)
2) Be true to name in conformance to the current edition of "Standardized
Plant Names", established by the American Joint Committee on
Horticultural Nomenclature, or other source accepted by the Township.
3) Be a typical example of its species or variety, with normal growth habits
and be, well-branched and densely foliated when in leaf.
4) Be of sound health, vigorous and uniform in appearance with a well
developed root system, and free from disease, insect pests, eggs or larvae.
5) Be freshly dug and nursery grown.
6) Be chosen according to soil, climatic conditions and environmental factors
for the proposed development.
(b) Trees shall have straight trunks with leaders intact, undamaged and uncut.
(c) The following trees, because of various problems, are not considered to be
desirable landscaping elements and therefore shall, in most cases, not be
permitted. If it is demonstrated that such trees are, associated with an appropriate
wetland or other ecosystem to be preserved, or where removal of existing trees
? SEC. 26.7 MATERIALS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 317
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
would result in a substantial loss of screening or buffering of adjacent lands, uses
or public rights-of-way the Commission may permit their use: ?
SPECIES COMMON
NAME NOTES
Acer negundo Box Elder
Ulmus x Elm varieties
Except disease-resistant cultivars, such
as ‘Regal’, ‘Pioneer’, ‘Homestead’,
‘Jacan’ and ‘Accolade’
Aesculus x Horse Chestnut
Restrict use to greenbelts and transition
zones between developed and
undeveloped areas of a site
Populus x Poplar varieties
Elaeagnus x Olive varieties
Salix x Willow varieties Restrict use to appropriate wetland
ecosystems
Catalpa x Catalpa varieties
Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (female) Male trees are acceptable
Robinia pseudoacacia Black locust
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple
Fraxinus x Ash Only varieties susceptible to Emerald
Ash borer
(d) Ground cover plantings shall be subject to the following:
1) Lawn areas shall be planted in species of grass normally grown as
permanent lawns in southeast Michigan. Grass may be sodded or hydroseeded
and mulched, except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other
areas subject to erosion. Sod or seed shall be clean, free of weeds and
noxious pests or disease.
2) The creative use of groundcover alternatives is encouraged. Groundcover
used in lieu of grass in whole or part shall be planted in such a manner as
to present a finished appearance that is reasonably complete after one
complete growing season. Prairie grass and natural wildflower mix may
be used where appropriate.
(e) Stone and synthetic materials shall not be used as a groundcover.
? SEC. 26.7 MATERIALS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 318
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
(f) Mulch. Planting beds shall present a finished appearance, with shredded
hardwood bark mulch or similar natural material at a minimum depth of three (3)
inches. Mulch used around trees and shrubs shall be a minimum of four (4)
inches deep, and shall be pulled one (1) inch away from tree trunks. Pine bark
mulch shall be prohibited. An effective edge treatment must be provided to
minimize the migration of the mulch.
(g) Hedges, where provided, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a
continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen within one full planting season. Where
plants are to be used as a hedge for screening purposes, the maximum permitted
spacing will be determined by the plant proposed.
(h) Topsoil. A minimum four (4) inches of topsoil shall be provided for all lawn
areas, ground covers and planting beds.
(i) Artificial plant material shall be prohibited. ?
(j) Landscaping shall be located and maintained in a manner that minimizes conflicts
with overhead or underground utilities.
(k) Existing vegetation to be preserved shall be protected during construction through
the use of temporary fencing around the drip line.
(l) Where pavement and landscape areas interface, adequate measures shall be taken
to protect plants from vehicle encroachment.
(m) Tree sizes are determined using the following two definitions: Caliper shall be
defined as the diameter of the trunk of a tree at eighteen (18) inches above the
ground. Diameter breast height (D.B.H.) is the diameter in inches of a tree
measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above the existing grade.
(n) Minimum sizes of plant materials:
1) Deciduous shade trees: Shall be species having a trunk that can be
maintained with over seven (7) foot clear stem. Deciduous trees shall
have a minimum caliper of three (3) to three and one-half (3½) inches at
the time of planting.
2) Small deciduous ornamental trees: Ornamental trees shall have a
minimum caliper of two (2) inches at time of planting, or six (6) feet
height in clump form.
3) Evergreen trees: Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in
height at time of planting.
4) Deciduous and Upright Evergreen Shrubs: Shall be a minimum of thirty
(30) inches in height at the time of planting.
? SEC. 26.7 MATERIALS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 319
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
5) Spreading Evergreen Shrubs and Dwarf Species Shrubs: Shall be a
minimum of eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches in height or five (5)
gallon container size at time of planting.
6) Vines: Vines shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in length after one
(1) growing season and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens,
or walls to meet buffer requirements.
2. Variety of Plant Material Sizes at Installation ?
To ensure adequate variety, and to avoid monotony and uniformity within the site, the
overall landscape plan shall comply with the following:
LANDSCAPING
MATERIALS
PERCENTAGE OF
TOTAL
MINIMUM SIZE AT
INSTALLATION
50% 3.0 – 3.5 inches caliper
Deciduous Shade Trees 30% 3.5 – 4.0 inches caliper
20% 4.0 inches caliper
50% 8.0 feet high
Evergreen Trees 30% 10.0 feet high
20% 12.0 feet high
Deciduous Ornamental 50% 6.0 feet high
Trees
(Clump Form) 50% 8.0 feet high
50% 2.0 inches caliper
30% 2.5 inches caliper
Deciduous Ornamental
Trees
20% 3.0 inches caliper
Deciduous 50% 30.0 inches high
Shrubs 50% 36.0 inches high
Upright 50% 30.0 inches high
Evergreen Shrub 50% 36.0 inches high
Spreading Evergreen 50% 24.0 inch spread
Shrubs 50% 30.0 inch spread
3. Modifications
For specific landscape installations that require uniformity of plant size, such as hedges,
mass plantings of shrubs as groundcover, and planted used as ornamental design accents,
the Commission may approve variations in the above percentages. Also, for
reforestation, wooded area infill, and other applications determined appropriate by the
Planning Commission, small caliper, park-grade trees may be approved.
? SEC. 26.7 MATERIALS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 320
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
SEC. 26.8 MAINTENANCE?
The owner of the property shall be responsible for all maintenance of site landscaping, as
follows:
1. Landscape maintenance procedures and frequencies to be followed shall be specified on
the landscape plan, along with the manner in which the effectiveness, health and intended
functions of the various landscape areas on the site will be ensured.
2. Landscaping shall be kept in a neat, orderly and healthy growing condition, free from
debris and refuse.
3. Pruning shall be minimal at the time of installation, only to remove dead or diseased
branches. Subsequent pruning shall assure proper maturation of plants to achieve their
approved purpose.
4. All dead or diseased plant material shall be removed and replaced within six (6) months
after it dies or in the next planting season, whichever occurs first. For purposes of this
Section 26.8.4, the planting season for deciduous plants shall be between March 1 and
June 1 and from October 1 until the prepared soil becomes frozen. The planting season
for evergreen plants shall be between March 1 and June 1. Plant material installed to
replace dead or diseased material shall be as close as practical to the size of the material it
is intended to replace.
5. The approved landscape plan shall be considered a permanent record and integral part of
the Site Plan Approval. Unless otherwise approved in accordance with the
aforementioned procedures, any revisions to, or removal of, plant materials will place the
parcel in non-conformity with the approved landscape plan, and shall be viewed as a
violation of this Ordinance and the agreed upon terms of the Final Site Plan Approval.
6. The developer, at the time of submission of the final site plan shall demonstrate that
adequate provisions have been made to supply water to all landscape areas. This shall be
accomplished by installation of an underground irrigation system to provide water for the
landscape areas specified on the landscape plan. The Commission shall have the
authority to waive or modify this requirement, where the Commission determines that
such action would be in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this Article.
SEC. 26.9 EXISTING NATURAL RESOURCES?
1. The existence of significant natural resources, including but not limited to trees, ponds,
water, steep slopes, and wetlands, shall be protected and reinforced with sufficient
landscaping to protect their environmental quality and prevent deterioration. To
adequately review the proposed development, a topographic survey shall be provided that
identifies the following:
? SEC. 26.8 MAINTENANCE
? SEC. 26.9 EXISTING NATURAL RESOURCES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 321
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
(a) Perimeters of areas of existing vegetation, such as tree-rows, hedgerows and
woodlands, with notes describing the character of each area (i.e. “wooded
wetland,” “oak-hickory,” etc.).
(b) When outside of wooded areas, the location, size, and name of all individual trees
eight (8) inches D.B.H. or larger. Within wooded areas, all trees twenty-four (24)
inches D.B.H. or larger shall be identified.
(c) All intermittent and perennial streams, floodplain and floodway limits, wetlands,
steep slopes and soils with structural limitations (such as hydric or muck soils).
2. Where healthy trees exist on a site prior to development, expansion, redevelopment or
change in use, landscape standards may be adjusted to allow for preservation of quality
trees, in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this Article, and the following:
(a) All existing trees and wooded areas to be preserved shall be delineated on the site
by the applicant for field inspection by the Township to verify that the trees are of
high quality and will fulfill the requirements of this Article.
(b) The landscape plan submission shall include a recent aerial photograph of the site
upon which is delineated the wooded areas and individual trees. Points along the
perimeter of all wooded areas and regularly spaced within wooded areas shall be
marked on the aerial photo. Site photographs shall be submitted to establish the
quality and general density of vegetation at each such point.
(c) All trees and wooded areas must be labeled “to be removed” or “to be saved” on
the landscape plan. If existing plant material is to be saved, protective measures
shall be implemented and described on the landscape plan. Such measures may
include the installation of snow fencing and stakes at the dripline of each a1rea to
be saved. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored
within the dripline of any tree or other plant material intended to be saved.
(d) Prior approval from the Township is required before any de-limbing, root pruning
or other work is performed on preserved trees or wooded areas. No earthwork
shall be permitted prior to field verification by the Township of the limits of areas
to be preserved.
(e) If as a result of site conditions, a substantial quantity of trees or individual
significant specimen trees must be removed as part of the landscape plan, then
replacement trees shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) inch caliper for each four
(4) inches D.B.H., or in an amount considered sufficient by the Planning
Commission. ?
(f) In the event that healthy plant materials that are intended to be saved to meet the
requirements of the Ordinance are cut down or otherwise damaged or destroyed
during construction, said plant material shall be replaced in accordance with the
? ? SEC. 26.9 EXISTING NATURAL RESOURCES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 322
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
following schedule, unless otherwise approved by the Township Planning
Commission based upon the site and building configuration, available planting
space, and similar considerations:
REPLACEMENT TREE SPECIFICATIONS
TYPE OF TREE REPLACEMENT RATIO
Deciduous One inch caliper for each inch D.B.H. of tree damaged
Evergreen One foot for each foot in height of tree damaged
1) Each replacement deciduous tree shall be a minimum of four inches
caliper; larger trees may be permitted.
2) Each replacement evergreen tree shall be a minimum of eight feet in
height; larger trees may be permitted.
SEC. 26.10 CHARACTER OF LANDSCAPING, SCREENING OR BUFFERING
AREAS?
The selection and placement of plant materials shall be such that the general maintenance and
upkeep of the areas shall be low, so that the success of the planting area can be anticipated
without placing undue hardship on the landowner or lessee.
1. Where landscape treatment is required for screening purposes, the Planning Commission
shall insure that the plan proposed meets the following objectives:
(a) The proposed plan effectively forms a complete visual and physical separation
between the two unlike land uses.
(b) The proposed plan effectively forms a transition zone between the unlike uses and
affords sufficient protection and is compatible with the character of the adjacent
residential area.
(c) The proposed plan effectively reduces the adverse effects of the proposed use, in
particular, glare of headlights, lighting from parking areas, noise, unsightly areas
such as trash pickup points and contrasting views such as parking areas and
access drives.
2. When the landscape treatment is required as a buffer or green area, the Planning
Commission shall insure that the plan proposed meets the following objectives:
(a) The proposed plan breaks up the area and the proposed plant material creates a
partial visual separation.
? SEC. 26.10 CHARACTER OF LANDSCAPING,
SCREENING OR BUFFERING AREAS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 323
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
(b) The proposed plan forms a transition zone which helps break up the visual pattern
of paving areas.
(c) The proposed plan, through the use of plant material, creates a ground and
overhead area which consists of plant material which is more compatible with the
general character of the Township, and with the residential districts in the
Township.
SEC. 26.11 METHODS OF SCREENING?
1. Solid Wall with Planting Strip
(a) A solid wall, six (6) feet in height, constructed of brick shall be required. The
solid wall shall be located at the property line.
(b) A six to eight (6 - 8) foot wide planting strip shall be provided abutting the base
on the interior side of the wall. The strip shall be planted with deciduous shade
trees planted thirty-five (35) feet on center and a mixture of shrubs and perennials.
(c) The Planning Commission shall have the authority to modify the wall height,
material and location standards of this Section, provided that the alternative meets
the screening objectives of this Article, and to require that the masonry materials,
colors and wall design be consistent with adjacent building facades or adjacent
existing walls.
2. Screening Mound or Berm
A screening mound or berm shall have a minimum height five (5) to six (6) feet with
side slopes no steeper than 3:1 (three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical). The top
of all berms shall have a level horizontal area of at least three (3) feet in width. The
mound or berm shall be designed and graded to blend with existing topography, shall be
graded smooth, and shall be appropriately sodded, hydro-seeded and mulched, or planted.
Deciduous shade and ornamental trees, evergreen trees and shrubs shall be planted along
the berm area.
3. Evergreen Screen
Evergreen screening shall consist of evergreen trees with year-round screening
characteristics that meet the objectives of this Article. Such trees shall be planted ten to
fifteen (10 – 15) feet on center in two (2) staggered rows ten (10) feet apart.
? SEC. 26.11 METHODS OF SCREENING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 324
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
SEC. 26.12 AREAS REQUIRING SCREENING AND/OR BUFFERING?
1. Non-residential Uses or Districts adjacent to Residential Use or District
(a) ?Screening shall meet the aforementioned objectives of this Article and shall be
accomplished by any of the following:
1) A solid wall with planting strip.
2) Screening mound or berm.
3) Evergreen screen.
4) A combination of the above.
2. Abutting Residential Uses, Districts or Developments
(a) When the proposed development is a special land use or residential use, and is of
a nature that requires substantial parking areas, access drives, mechanical unit
locations, solid waste pickup points, concentrations of people for recreation
(pools, tennis courts, etc.), or is of a significantly different scale or character than
the abutting residential district or use, screening and/or buffering is required and
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to insure that it that accomplishes
the following objectives:
1) The screen effectively forms a visual and physical separation between the
residential use and the abutting use areas that are of a significantly
different scale or character that would adversely affect the residential use.
2) The buffer, when visual and physical separation is not a necessity, forms a
sufficient transition zone between the two uses to afford sufficient
protection of the adjacent residential district or use.
(b) Screening or buffering shall meet the aforementioned objectives for this Section
and Article and shall be accomplished by any of the following:
1) A solid wall with planting strip.
2) Screening mound or berm.
3) Evergreen screen.
4) A combination of the above methods, or an alternative the Commission
determines would be best suited for the existing conditions, meets the
objectives of this Article and results in reduction of the impacts of the
proposed facilities on the adjacent properties.
?
? SEC. 26.12 AREAS REQUIRING SCREENING
AND/OR BUFFERING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 325
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
3. Off-Street Parking, Vehicular Use Areas and Service Areas ?
(a) All off-street parking areas, vehicular use areas and service areas shall be
screened or buffered in a manner that meets the aforementioned objectives of this
Article and shall meet the following specific objectives:
1) Off-street parking and vehicular use areas shall be buffered in a manner
that separates the proposed facility from the public right-of-way, the view
of the general public, and abutting existing or proposed public walks, and
creates a scale more appropriate to the individual.
2) Service areas shall be completely screened from adjacent residential areas
and view from the public right-of-way.
3) All screening or buffer areas shall be contained within the subject
property.
(b) Screening or buffering shall meet the aforementioned objectives of this Section
and Article, and shall be accomplished by the following:
1) A minimum ten (10) foot buffer area between off-street parking or
vehicular use areas and the street setback line. The buffer area shall
include deciduous trees, flowering trees and shrubs located in a manner to
meet the aforementioned objectives.
2) Service areas shall be screened by appropriate plant materials, and/or
architectural materials, such as a decorative fence or wall, or a
combination of both, to meet the screening objectives of this Section.
3) The ten (10) foot buffer area shall be increased five (5) feet in width for
each sixty (60) feet or part thereof which the parking area and/or vehicular
use area exceeds sixty-five (65) feet when measured perpendicular to the
street setback line up to a maximum buffer width of thirty (30) feet, in
accordance with the following table:
DEPTH OF PARKING/VEHICULAR
USE AREA WIDTH OF BUFFER
Up to 65 ft. 10 ft.
66 – 120 ft. 15 ft.
121 – 180 ft. 20 ft.
181 – 240 ft. 25 ft.
241 ft. or greater 30 ft.
SEC. 26.12 AREAS REQUIRING SCREENING
AND/OR BUFFERING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 326
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
4. Public Utilities and Communication Facilities
(a) Communication facilities (not including buildings), public utility transformer
stations, sub-stations and gas regulator stations shall be screened. The screen
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to insure that it accomplishes the
following objectives:
1) The proposed screen effectively separates the facility from the public
right-of-way and the view of the general public.
2) The proposed screen effectively establishes some form of separation and
human scale between the facility and abutting public walks.
(b) Screening shall meet the aforementioned objectives and shall be accomplished by
any the following:
1) Screening mound or berm.
2) Solid wall with planting screen.
3) Fence with evergreen screen.
4) A combination of the above.
5. Development Adjacent to a Major Thoroughfare or Expressway ?
(a) Residential Development. Where a residential development abuts a major
thoroughfare or expressway, a buffer area shall be provided between the
thoroughfare and/or expressway and the proposed development, subject to the
following:
1) ?The buffer area shall include a combination of deciduous shade trees,
evergreen trees, flowering and ornamental trees, and shrubs as deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission to meet the objectives of this
Article, and located in a manner to reduce the impact of said thoroughfare
or expressway on the development.
2) The plant materials used are hardy characterized by low maintenance
requirements and suitable for severe conditions.
3) The buffer area along a major thoroughfare shall be no less than twenty
(20) feet wide, and may include berming to increase the effectiveness of
the screening and buffering provided.
? SEC. 26.12 AREAS REQUIRING SCREENING
AND/OR BUFFERING
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 327
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
4) The buffer area along an expressway shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet
wide, exclusive of any lot or condominium unit and exclusive of any road
right-of-way. The expressway buffer area shall include the landscaping
required above, and either a solid masonry noise wall or landscaped berm,
each with a minimum height of twelve (12) feet above grade.
5) The Commission shall have the authority to waive or modify this
requirement, where the Commission determines that such action would be
in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this Article.
(b) Nonresidential Development. A buffer area shall be provided between an
expressway and any industrial or other nonresidential development abutting the
expressway. This buffer shall be provided in addition to all required screening for
parking, loading, vehicle use and service areas, subject to the following:
1) The buffer area shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide, exclusive of
road right-of-way.
2) The buffer area shall include a combination of trees, and shrubs as deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission to meet the objectives of this
Article, and located in a manner to enhance the appearance of said
development from the road. A solid wall and/or berming may be included
to improve the screening and buffering provided.
3. The plant materials used are hardy, characterized by low maintenance
requirements and suitable for severe conditions.
4) The Commission shall have the authority to waive or modify this
requirement, where the Commission determines that such action would be
in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this Article. ?
SEC. 26.13 PLANTING ISLANDS FOR PARKING LOTS?
1. Parking lots shall be broken up by the use of planting strips, islands or staggering of trees.
The location and design of the proposed planting strips and islands shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission to insure that the following objectives are accomplished:
(a) The planting islands are designed in a manner that will ensure proper protection
of the plant material located within the island.
(b) The plant materials used are hardy, characterized by low maintenance
requirements and suitable for severe conditions.
(c) The planting islands and proposed plantings will successfully create visual breaks
within the large paving area, are in scale with the overall site.
? SEC. 26.13 PLANTING ISLANDS FOR PARKING
LOTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 328
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
(d) The planting islands clearly defines the egress/ingress points, the interior
circulation system and fire lanes.
2. Planting island standards
(a) Planting islands shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet, and a minimum area
of one hundred sixty (160) square feet. To improve maneuvering, the length of
the islands shall be two (2) feet shorter than the adjacent parking spaces.
(b) Planting islands shall be protected by curbing, and dimensions shall be shown on
the landscape plan.
(c) A minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree shall be provided for each eighty (80)
square feet of planting area within the island. Ornamental trees, shrubs, mulch or
groundcover shall be used to cover all unplanted areas of the island.
(d) Planting islands shall be provided with an automatic underground irrigation
system, unless an alternate form of irrigation is approved by the Planning
Commission.
SEC. 26.14 ISLAND TURNAROUNDS?
Where, non-through streets are planned within a residential development, adequate provision
must be made for landscape and maintenance of turnaround islands. Such provisions shall be
included in the landscape plan with an indication of the date by which the work will be
completed, how the landscaping will be maintained, proposed maintenance funding sources, and
who will be responsible for long-term maintenance of the landscaping.
SEC. 26.15 STREET YARD LANDSCAPING?
Street yard areas are hereby defined as the area between the curb or edge of pavement of a street
and the street setback line, combined with any required setback area from the street setback line.
Street yard landscaping shall be provided in addition to any required screening for parking,
loading, vehicle use and service areas, subject to the following:
1. Street yard areas of sites that are developed, altered or redeveloped shall be landscaped in
a manner that meets the objectives of this Article, and the following specific objectives:
(a) To enhance the visual character of streets and roads in the Township.
(b) To effectively minimize the adverse impacts of vehicular traffic on adjacent uses
or districts.
(c) To satisfy applicable design guidelines or recommendations contained in the
Master Plan.
? SEC. 26.14 ISLAND TURNAROUNDS
? SEC. 26.15 STREET YARD LANDSCAPING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 329
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
2. Street yard area landscaping within the street setback area shall be accomplished by the
following:
(a) Street tree plantings shall consist of deciduous shade trees planted in one (1) or
more rows at regular intervals, or in informal groupings, along the margins of
street rights-of-way.
1) Such trees shall be planted along the entire length of the site frontage, in
an amount equal to a minimum of one (1) street tree per forty (40) feet of
site frontage, as measured at the street setback line.
2) Street trees shall be located in planting strips within the street right-ofway,
or, if utilities or circumstances prevent planting within the right-ofway,
shall be located directly adjacent to the right-of-way in a manner
acceptable to the Planning Commission.
(b) The use of appropriate plant materials, including ornamental trees, shrubs and
perennials, to meet the objectives of this Section.
(c) The location and type of street yard landscaping within the right-of-way must
meet the standards of and be approved by the Wayne County Department of
Public Services or the Michigan Department of Transportation.
3. Street yard area landscaping within any required setback area from the street right-of-way
shall be accomplished by any of the following:
(a) Street trees.
(b) Screening mound or berm.
(c) Architectural materials, such as a decorative fence or low decorative wall, or a
combination of both, to meet the objectives of this Section.
(d) Use of appropriate plant materials, including deciduous shade and ornamental
trees, shrubs and perennials, to meet the objectives of this Section.
(e) A combination of the above. ?
SEC. 26.16 DETENTION AND RETENTION BASIN LANDSCAPING?
Where a detention or retention basin, or similar stormwater management facility, is required,
landscaping shall be provided, subject to the following:
? SEC. 26.15 STREET YARD LANDSCAPING
? SEC. 26.16 DETENTION AND RETENTION BASIN
LANDSCAPING
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 330
Article 26: Landscaping, Screening and Land Use Buffers
Amendments:
1. To the extent possible, basin configurations shall be incorporated into the natural
topography. Where this is not practical, the basin shall be shaped to emulate a naturally
formed or free-form depression.
2. The basin edge shall consist of sculptured landforms to filter and soften views of the
basin.
3. Plantings shall replicate a natural environment. Deciduous shade and ornamental trees,
shrubs, perennials, grasses and other groundcover shall be clustered around the basin to
achieve a variety of plant materials.
4. Trees shall be planted above the freeboard line of the basin. Any plantings proposed
below the freeboard line shall be tolerant of wet or moist soil conditions. The location of
plant materials shall take into consideration the need to provide access for routine basin
maintenance.
5. Basins may be planted with a mixture of groundcover plantings native to southeast
Michigan, such as native grasses or wildflowers, provided that such plantings present a
finished appearance with minimal maintenance.
6. Basins shall be designed to avoid the need for perimeter fencing; however, if such
fencing is required it shall be decorative, in the determination of the Planning
Commission.
SEC. 26.17 EXCEPTIONS?
1. Where buffering has been accomplished along adjacent perimeters by means of earlier
development, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement for additional
screening.
2. Within the intent of this Article, the Planning Commission may approve alternatives it
determines to be necessary to accommodate peculiar circumstances or unforeseen
problems, or to carry out the spirit, intent and purpose of this Article.
3. Where land is used, but not zoned or master planned for residential purposes, the
Commission may substitute a lesser standard reflective of the temporary nature of the
residential use.
? SEC. 26.17 EXCEPTIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 331
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
PURPOSE
27.1 NONCONFORMING LOTS OR
PARCELS OF RECORD IN THE R-1
DISTRICT
ARTICLE XXVII
NONCONFORMITIES
PURPOSE
This Article is hereby established for the following purposes:
1. Recognition of Nonconformities
To recognize that, within the districts established by the adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance there exists lots, parcels, structures, and uses which were lawful before this
Ordinance was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or
restricted under the terms of this Ordinance.
2. Regulation of Nonconformities
To regulate the completion, restoration, and reconstruction of nonconforming structures,
the extension, enlargement, and substitution of nonconforming uses and the
circumstances and conditions under which nonconformities shall be permitted to
continue.
3. Classification or Nonconforming Structures and Uses
To establish two classes (Class A and Class B) of nonconforming structures and uses that
distinguish between those that are no desirable (Class B), and those that may not have a
significant adverse impact upon nearby properties or he public health, safety, and welfare
(Class A).
4. Elimination of Class B Nonconforming Structures and Uses
To declare that Class B nonconforming structures and uses are incompatible with
permitted uses in the district, and are likely to have a negative impact on neighboring
properties. It is the intent of this Article to eliminate Class B nonconforming structures
and uses as rapidly as is permitted by law without payment of compensation.
5. Continuation of Nonconformities
To permit the continuance of nonconformities subject to requirements of this Article, but
not to permit their enlargement, expansion, or extension, except where provided for in
this Article.
SEC 27.1 NONCONFORMING LOTS OR PARCELS OF RECORD IN THE R-1
DISTRICT
It is recognized that within the R-1 District, there are recorded lots or parcels of record, which
lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, which do not meet the minimum
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 332
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
27.1 NONCONFORMING LOTS OR
PARCELS OF RECORD IN THE R-1
DISTRICT
27.2 DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
OF NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES AND USES
requirements for width or area. The purpose of this Article is to allow such lots or parcels of
record to be utilized as long as reasonable living standards can be provided.
The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming lots or parcels of record within the R-1
District:
1. Development of Nonconforming Lots or Parcels of Record within the R-1 District
A single-family dwelling and customary accessory structures may be erected on any
single lot or parcel of record in the R-1 District that was in existence at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this Article. This provision shall apply even if the lot or
parcel does not meet the minimum area or width requirements of the R-1 District,
provided that any principal or accessory structure constructed on the lot or parcel
complies with all other yard, floor area, height, and access requirements of the R-1
District.
2. Review and Approval Procedure
An application for the construction of a single-family residence on a nonconforming lot
or parcel of record in the R-1 District shall be submitted to the Chief Building Official for
review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. In reviewing the
application, the Chief Building Official shall determine that all other requirements not
involving area or width have been met. In addition, the Chief Building Official shall
determine whether any additional information and/or approvals must be obtained to
ensure compliance with this Article, and to preserve the general public health, safety, and
welfare.
3. Variation to Yard Requirements
If the nonconforming lot or parcel of record in the R-1 District requires a variation of the
yard requirements in order to erect a structure, then such structure shall be permitted only
if a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SEC. 27.2 DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION OF NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES AND USES
Two (2) different classes of nonconforming structures and uses (Class A and Class B) are hereby
established by this Article, with the terms for completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension or
substitution different for each applicable class. The classes shall distinguish between those that are
not desirable and should be eliminated as rapidly as possible (Class B), and those that may not have a
significant adverse impact upon nearby properties or the public health, safety and welfare (Class A).
All nonconforming structures and uses not designated Class A by the Planning Commission shall be
classified as Class B nonconforming structures or uses.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 333
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
SEC. 27.3 CLASS B NONCONFORMITIES
SEC. 27.3 CLASS B NONCONFORMITIES
Nonconforming structures and uses that have been designated Class A shall not be subject to the
requirements of this Section, but rather shall be subject to the provisions of Section 27.3, Class A
Nonconforming Designation. Class B nonconforming structures and uses may be continued, subject
to the following regulations and restrictions:
1. Class B Nonconforming Structures
Class B nonconforming structures shall be allowed to continue after the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Expansion and Alteration Restricted. Class B nonconforming structures shall not be
enlarged upon, expanded, extended, altered in a way which increases their
nonconformity, or considered as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Such structures may be enlarged upon,
expanded, extended or altered where such work does not increase their
nonconformity, where repairs are determined by the Chief Building Official to be
necessary for safety or to ensure the continued advantageous use of the Class B
nonconforming structure during its natural life.
(b) Normal Repairs and Maintenance. This Article shall not prevent work required for
compliance with the provisions of the State Construction Code or Michigan housing
laws regulating the maintenance of buildings or structures. Normal repair,
maintenance or replacement of interior non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, plumbing
or heating and cooling systems in Class B nonconforming structures may be
permitted in accordance with applicable code requirements, provided that such
improvements do not result in an enlargement of a nonconforming structure or use,
and provided that the cost of such improvements does not exceed the state equalized
value of the structure at the time such work is proposed.
(c) Buildings under Construction. Nothing in this Article shall require a change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building or structure for which
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this Ordinance and diligently carried on until completion. Construction shall
include the placement of materials in a permanent manner or demolition and removal
of an existing structure preparatory to rebuilding in accordance with an approved site
plan.
(d) Damaged Structures. Any Class B nonconforming structure that has been destroyed
or damaged by fire, explosion, Act of God, public enemy or other means to the extent
that the cost of repairs and restoration exceeds the state equalized value of the
structure (as determined through the real property assessment for tax purposes prior
to the time such damage occurred) shall not thereafter be reconstructed, except in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
If the cost of repairs and restoration is less than the state equalized value of the
structure, then it may be restored to the same configuration as existed before such
damage, provided that such restoration shall be subject to site plan approval by the
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 334
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
SEC. 27.3 CLASS B NONCONFORMITIES
Planning Commission. Said restoration shall be commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the date of site plan approval and shall be diligently carried on to
completion.
(e) Unsafe Structures. Nonconforming structures that are determined by the Chief
Building Official to be unsafe shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt,
but rather shall be immediately removed.
(f) Height of Building as Originally Planned. A building may be erected to its full
height of use, as originally planned, when foundations and structured members are
designed to carry such building, when said building has been partially erected
previous to the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance.
(g) Relocation. Should any Class B nonconforming structure be moved any distance for
any reason it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
2. Class B Nonconforming Uses
Class B nonconforming uses shall be allowed to continue after the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this Ordinance subject to the following conditions:
(a) Class B nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged, reconstructed, increased in
intensity, extended to occupy a greater area of land or building floor area, altered or
moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel or adjoining lot or
parcel. No additional structures shall be constructed for a Class B nonconforming
use.
(b) A Class B nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building
which were manifestly arranged or intended for such use at the time of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land
outside such building.
(c) No existing structure devoted to a Class B nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
extended, except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district
where it is located.
(d) Where a Class B nonconforming use occupies a structure, removal or destruction of
the structure, or damage to the structure to an extent greater than the state equalized
value of the structure, shall eliminate the nonconforming use status, and subsequent
uses shall conform to the use provisions of the district where it is located.
(e) If a Class B nonconforming use is changed or superseded by a permitted use, any
future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(f) When a Class B nonconforming use ceases or is discontinued for a period of more
than three hundred sixty-five (365) days, it shall not be resumed and subsequent uses
shall conform to the regulations of the district where it is located.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 335
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
SEC. 27.3 CLASS B NONCONFORMITIES
SEC. 27.4 CLASS A NONCONFORMING
DESIGNATION
(g) The use shall be maintained in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county
and Township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes, other than the use regulations
for the district where the use is located. Failure to do so, or failure to bring the use
into compliance with current laws, ordinances, regulations and codes within onehundred
eighty (180) days of their effective date, shall constitute grounds for the
Township to seek court approval to terminate or remove the use.
SEC. 27.4 CLASS A NONCONFORMING DESIGNATION
It is the intent of this Section to recognize that certain nonconforming structures and uses may not
have a significant adverse impact upon nearby properties or the public health, safety and welfare, and
to establish a “Class A” designation that the Planning Commission may approve for these
nonconforming structures or uses, subject to the following procedure and standards:
1. Application
A written application shall be filed setting forth the following information:
(a) The address, parcel identification number and legal description of the total land area
of the application.
(b) Use(s). A map showing the existing and proposed use(s) of the subject property and
adjacent lands with sufficient detail to properly define nearby parks, public lands,
roads, highways, available discharge points or routes for surface drainage, sewer and
water facilities and zoning district boundaries.
(c) Site Plan. A plan for alterations, enlargements, extensions, and other site
improvements, if any, associated with the application for a Class A designation.
(d) Any information as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to make a
determination on the request.
2. Public Hearing (as amended on 9/30/07)
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a request for a Class A
designation for a nonconforming structure or use, to acquaint the public and particularly
adjoining property owners with the request. One (1) notice shall be published in a newspaper
which circulates in the Township, and sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of
property for which approval is being considered; to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question; and to
the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the property regardless of
whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. This notice shall be
given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be considered. If the
name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in mailing notification.
The notice shall:
(a) Describe the nature of the request.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 336
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
SEC. 27.4 CLASS A NONCONFORMING
DESIGNATION
(b) Indicate the property which is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a
listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not
need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property.
If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used.
(c) State when and where the request will be considered.
(d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
3. Standards for Approval of a Class A Designation
The Planning Commission may approve a Class A designation for a nonconforming structure
or use only upon determining that the following conditions exist:
(a) Continuance of the nonconforming structure or use would not create an immediate
danger to public health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood and the community as
a whole.
(b) Continuance of the nonconforming structure or use does not and is not likely to
significantly depress the value of nearby properties.
(c) Continuance of the nonconforming structure or use does not and is not likely to create
a general nuisance to the nearby properties.
(d) No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions of this
Ordinance with which the use or structure does not conform.
(e) The structure or use was lawful at the time of its inception, and is nonconforming as
defined in this Ordinance.
(f) The change of one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use shall result in a
change in use which will have less of a negative impact on neighboring properties
than the existing nonconforming use of land and would therefore bring the use and
development of the property into greater conformity with the spirit and intent of the
Ordinance. In permitting such change the Planning Commission may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in keeping with the spirit and intent of other
provisions of this Ordinance and to protect the neighboring properties from a
negative impact.
(g) The proposed alteration, extension, expansion or replacement will not have a negative
impact on neighboring properties and will bring the use into greater conformity with
the spirit and intent of the Ordinance. In permitting such alteration, extension,
expansion or replacement the Planning Commission may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in keeping with the purpose of this Article and Section,
and to mitigate any negative impacts of the nonconforming structure or use.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 337
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
SEC. 27.4 CLASS A NONCONFORMING
DESIGNATION
Conditions may include a requirement that all signage on the structure or land in
question be brought into compliance with the sign regulations of this Ordinance,
improvements to the site to bring the site more into conformance with current
Ordinance site design standards, and other improvements as deemed necessary to
protect surrounding uses.
4. Planning Commission Decision
Subsequent to a public hearing, the Planning Commission may deny, approve or approve
with conditions a request for a Class A designation, after review of the application and the
standards established in this Section. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be
incorporated in a statement to be made part of the official minutes of the meeting and shall
contain the conclusions relative to the application under consideration. The Commission shall
specify the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. No vested interest shall arise
out of a Class "A" designation.
5. Effect of Approval of a Class A Designation
Class A nonconforming structures may be permitted to be perpetuated, expanded,
enlarged, altered, improved or reconstructed if damaged or destroyed only after approval
of the Planning Commission, and in accordance with an approved plan, the provisions of
this Section and any conditions of approval. Should such a structure be moved for any
reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
Class A nonconforming uses may be perpetuated, expanded, enlarged, increased or extended,
either on the same or adjoining lot or parcel, only after approval of the Planning Commission,
and in accordance with an approved plan, the provisions of this Section and any conditions of
approval. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion
of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance, except after approval of the Planning Commission.
6. Effect of Denial of a Class A Designation (as amended 4/9/09)
The following shall not be eligible for appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals:
1. An application for a Class A designation that has been denied by the Planning
Commission.
2. An administrative decision made by the Chief Building Official regarding a
modification of a Class B structure or use that has been previously denied by the
Planning Commission for Class A status.
Notwithstanding the above, a previously denied application for Class A status may be
resubmitted for Planning Commission consideration as a new application after a minimum of
three hundred sixty five (365) days have elapsed from the date of denial by either the
Planning Commission or Chief Building Official.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 338
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
SEC. 27.4 CLASS A NONCONFORMING
DESIGNATION
SEC. 27.5 CHANGE OF TENANCY PERMITTED
SEC. 27.6 REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMITIES
BY TOWNSHIP ACTION
7. Cessation or Removal of Class A Nonconforming Structures or Uses
If a Class A nonconforming structure is permanently removed, or when a Class A
nonconforming use is discontinued or ceases to exist for a period of more than three hundred
sixty-five (365) days, the Class A designation may be revoked by the Planning Commission.
If the Class A nonconforming use is changed or replaced by a conforming use, the
designation shall be deemed removed.
Any subsequent structure or use shall conform with the provisions of this Ordinance for the
district where it is located, unless a change to another nonconforming use has been approved
by the Planning Commission.
8. Revocation of Class A Designation
Upon a finding that the structure or use no longer qualified for Class A designation, as a
result of any change of conditions or circumstances, or failure to maintain or improve a
Class A nonconforming structure or use in accordance with the provisions of this Section, an
approved site plan or any conditions of approval, the Planning Commission may take action
to revoke the Class A designation. Such action shall be subject to the following:
(a) Public Hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing subject to the
notice requirements set forth in Section 27.3.2, at which time the owner, operator or
person having use of property occupied by a Class A designated nonconforming
structure or use shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to
revocation.
(b) Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the Commission with
regard to the revocation shall be made and written notification provided to said
operator or person having use of property occupied by a Class A designated
nonconforming structure or use.
SEC. 27.5 CHANGE OF TENANCY PERMITTED
There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of an existing nonconformity without
affecting its nonconforming status, provided that there is no change in the nature or character of the
nonconformity.
SEC. 27.6 REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMITIES BY TOWNSHIP ACTION
The Township may acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, private property or an interest
in private property for the purpose of removing nonconformities. The elimination of the
nonconformities in a zoning district may be declared to be for a public purpose and for a public use.
The Township Board may institute and prosecute proceedings for condemnation of nonconformities
under the power of eminent domain in accordance with Public Act 149 of 1911, as amended, being
Sections 213.21 to 213.41 of the Michigan-Compiled Laws, or other applicable statute.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
Page 1 of 4
END OF ARTICLE 27.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
Page 2 of 4
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXVII (27)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
Page 3 of 4
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXVII (27)
The following language was added on 03/22/15
SEC 27.1 NONCONFORMING LOTS OR PARCELS OF RECORD IN THE R-1
DISTRICT
It is recognized that within the R-1 District, there are recorded lots or parcels of record, which
lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, which do not meet the minimum
requirements for width or area. The purpose of this Section is to allow such lots or parcels of record
to be utilized, as long as reasonable living standards can be provided.
The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming lots or parcels of record within the R-1
District:
1. Development of Nonconforming Lots or Parcels of Record within the R-1 District
A single-family dwelling and customary accessory structures may be erected on any single
lot or parcel of record in the R-1 District that was in existence at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Section. This provision shall apply even if the lot or parcel
does not meet the minimum area or width requirements of the R-1 District, provided that any
principal or accessory structure constructed on the lot or parcel complies with all other yard,
floor area, height, and access requirements of the R-1 District.
2. Review and Approval Procedure
An application for the construction of a single-family residence on a nonconforming lot or
parcel of record in the R-1 District shall be submitted to the Chief Building Official for
review and approval, prior to the issuance of a building permit. In reviewing the application,
the Chief Building Official shall determine that all other requirements not involving area or
width have been met. In addition, the Chief Building Official shall determine whether any
additional information and/or approvals must be obtained to ensure compliance with this
Section, and to preserve the general public health, safety, and welfare.
3. Variation to Yard Requirements
If the nonconforming lot or parcel of record in the R-1 District requires a variation of the
yard requirements in order to erect a structure, then such structure shall be permitted only if a
variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The following language was amended on 04/09/09
6. Effect of Denial of a Class A Designation
An application for a Class A designation that has been denied by the Planning Commission
shall not be eligible for appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals, but may be resubmitted for
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 27: Nonconformities
Amendments:
Page 4 of 4
Planning Commission consideration as a new application after a minimum of three hundred
sixty-five (365) days have elapsed from the date of denial.
The following language was amended on 09/30/07
2. Public Hearing
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a request for a Class A
designation for a nonconforming structure or use, to acquaint the public and particularly
adjoining property owners with the request. One (1) notice shall be published in a
newspaper which circulates in the Township, and be sent by mail or personal delivery to
the owners of property for which approval is being considered; to all persons to whom
real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property
in question; and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet. This
notice shall be given not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days before the date
the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term
"occupant" may be used in mailing notification. Notification need not be given to more
than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1)
dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive
notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or
other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the
structure who shall be requested to put the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
At a minimum, the notice shall describe the nature of the request, indicate the property
that is the subject of the request, state when and where the request will be considered and
indicate where written comments concerning the request may be sent
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 339
Article 28: Special Provisions
ARTICLE XXVIII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
The following special provisions shall be applicable to all zoning districts, unless otherwise
indicated in this Article or the district.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
DEVELOPMENT RELATED PROVISIONS
28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
28.2 DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND
28.3 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
28.4 DWELLING LOCATIONS
28.5 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING AND EXCAVATION
28.7 WATER SUPPLY AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
28.8 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
28.9 WASTE RECEPTACLES
28.10 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND SERVICES
28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION OPTION
28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
28.15 YARD GRADING AND DRAINAGE
28.16 SIDEWALKS
28.17 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS (added 4/09/09)
28.18 - 28.19 RESERVED
DIMENSIONAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
28.20 BUILDING PROJECTIONS AND YARD AREA ENCROACHMENTS
28.21 FRONT YARD EXCEPTIONS
28.22 STREET SETBACK AND RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS
28.23 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS
28.24 LOTS ADJOINING ALLEYS
28.25 CORNER VISIBILITY AND CLEAR VISION ZONES
28.26 ESTABLISHED SINGLE FAMILY PATTERN PRESERVATION
28.27 RESIDENTIAL NONCONFORMING LOT HEIGHT LIMIT
28.28 –28.29 RESERVED
GENERAL PROVISIONS
28.30
ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS
28.31
PLACEMENT OF AIR CONDITIONING CONDENSER UNITS AND SIMILAR
ACCESSORIES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 340
Article 28: Special Provisions
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
28.32 RESERVED
28.33 DANGEROUS OR OBNOXIOUS ANIMALS OR INSECTS
28.34 STORAGE OF DISABLED VEHICLES
28.35-28.39 RESERVED
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
28.40 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
28.41 CARNIVALS, FAIRS, BLOCK PARTIES AND SIMILAR USES
28.42 TENT SALES OR SIMILAR USES
28.43 GRAND OPENINGS, SPECIAL SALES OR SPECIAL EVENTS
28.44 SALE OF CHRISTMAS TREES
28.45 TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
28.46 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OR CAMPER PARKING
28.47 VOTING PLACE
28.48-28.59 RESERVED
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
28.60 ESSENTIAL SERVICES
28.61 WIND ENERGY (added 10/16/11)
28.62 RESERVED
28.63
LARGE SCALE INSTITUTIONAL USES, INCLUDING LARGE SCALE
CHURCHES
28.64 STATE LICENSED CHILD AND ADULT CARE FACILITIES
28.65 ELDERLY HOUSING
28.66 RESERVED
28.67 RESERVED
28.68 RESERVED
28.69 RESERVED
28.70 HOME OCCUPATIONS
28.71 BED-AND-BREAKFAST INNS
28.72 VETERINARY CLINICS OR ANIMAL HOSPITALS
28.73 KENNELS
28.74 RESERVED
28.75 RESERVED
28.76 RESERVED
28.77 RESERVED
28.78 RESERVED
28.79-28.99 RESERVED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 341
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
DEVELOPMENT RELATED PROVISIONS
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUMS
1. Purpose
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978 (MCL
559.101 et seq., MSA 26.50(101) et seq.), condominium subdivision plans shall be
regulated by this Ordinance as site condominiums. The intent of this Section is to ensure
that site condominium subdivisions are developed in compliance with all applicable
Zoning Ordinance requirements, and standards applicable to subdivision developments
established under Chapter 93, Township Subdivision Regulations and the Land Division
Act, P.A. 288 of 1967, as amended.
2. General Requirements
(a) Definitions. The terms used in this Section are defined in Article 36, Definitions,
and the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended. The terms are used in a
manner intended to make possible comparison between the provisions of this
Section and Ordinance, the Condominium Act, Chapter 93, Township Subdivision
Regulations, and other applicable Township Codes and Ordinances. Specifically:
(1) “Subdivision lot” shall be synonymous with the term “site condominium
unit.”
(2) “Building” or “structure” shall be synonymous with the term “building
envelope.”
(3) “Tentative preliminary plat” shall be synonymous with the term
“preliminary condominium subdivision plan.”
(4) “Final preliminary plat” shall be synonymous with the term “final
condominium subdivision plan.”
(5) “Subdivision” or “single-family residential subdivision” or “industrial
subdivision” shall be synonymous with the term “site condominium
project.”
(6) “Proprietor” shall be synonymous with the terms “applicant” or
“developer.”
(b) Design and Layout. Site condominium projects shall comply with the design
layout and improvement standards of Chapter 93, Township Subdivision
Regulations, and all applicable provisions of this Ordinance (including all
setback, height, coverage yard setback and area restrictions of Article 20,
Schedule of Regulations)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 342
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
(c) Use. Each site condominium unit shall be located in a zoning district that permits
the proposed use.
(d) Setbacks. Required yards shall be measured from the street setback or private
road easement and site condominium unit boundaries to the nearest edge of the
building envelope.
(e) All condominium projects that are not being developed as site condominiums
shall comply with the design standards appropriate to the district in which the
project is located and shall be required to obtain site plan approval per Article 29.
Condominium documents shall be submitted to the Township for approval prior
to the construction of any condominium project.
3. Condominium Subdivision Plan Review
Township approval of the condominium subdivision plan, condominium documents and
construction plans shall be required prior to the start of construction, expansion or
conversion of a site condominium project. No permits for construction, grading, or
installation of public water or sanitary sewer facilities shall be issued for property in a
site condominium project until all necessary approvals have been granted by the
Township.
(a) Review Procedure. Condominium subdivision plan review shall follow the pattern
established for traditional subdivisions in Chapter 93, Township Subdivision
Regulations. The subdivision condominium plan review process shall be a two
step procedure, as follows:
(1) Preliminary Condominium subdivision plan: A preliminary condominium
subdivision plan shall include all plans, survey, sketches, drawings,
statements and additional information required by Chapter 93, Township
Subdivision Regulations for tentative approval of a preliminary
subdivision plat. In addition, the following information shall be provided:
a) Proposed name of condominium project.
b) Legal description of the condominium project boundaries.
c) Names, address and telephone numbers of the proprietor, the
professional seal of the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor
who designed the condominium project layout.
d) The names of abutting subdivisions and condominium
developments, layout of streets indicating street names, right-ofway-
widths and connections with adjoining platted or private
streets, and locations of alleys, easements and public and private
walkways, and lot layouts.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 343
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
e) A location map or vicinity sketch showing the relationship of the
proposed site condominium to the surrounding area.
f) Land use and existing zoning of the proposed site condominium
project and adjacent properties.
g) The tentative plan shall be at a scale of 1 inch equals one hundred
(100) feet or larger.
h) Statement of intended use of the proposed condominium project,
such as: residential, single family, two-family and multiple
housing; commercial, industrial; recreation; or agricultural. Also,
proposed sites, if any for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry and other non-public uses exclusive of singlefamily
dwellings. Also, any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds,
schools or other public uses.
i) A map of the entire area scheduled for development, including
future street rights-of-way, if the proposed Single Family
Condominium is a portion of a larger holding intended for
subsequent development.
j) Layout, numbers and dimensions of units, including building
setback lines.
k) Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside
for public use or for the common use of property owners in the site
condominium project. The site plan shall show the location of all
floodplain and wetland areas.
l) Location of any existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or
adjacent to the proposed site condominium project, including the
location dimensions of easements thereof.
m) Contours shall be drawn on the Tentative Single Family
Condominium Site Plan at five (5) foot intervals where slope is
greater than ten (10) percent and two (2) foot intervals where slope
is ten (10) percent of less. Topography to be based on U.S.G.S.
datum.
n) The proprietor shall submit preliminary plans for streets, water,
sewers, sidewalks and other required public improvements. The
plans shall contain sufficient detail to enable the Township
Engineer to make preliminary determination as to conformance of
the proposed improvements to applicable Township and Wayne
County Department of Public Services regulations and standards.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 344
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
(2) Public Hearing (as amended on 9/30/07): Any condominium subdivision
plan submitted to the Township shall contain the name and address of the
applicant or his authorized representative to whom notice of a public
hearing shall be sent and no plan shall be acted on by the Commission
without affording a hearing thereon. On request of the Commission, notice
shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township, and
sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which
approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and
to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless
of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction.
The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the
application will be considered. The notice shall:
a) Describe the nature of the condominium subdivision plan request.
b) Indicate the property that is the subject of the condominium
subdivision plan request. The notice shall include a listing of all
existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do
not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently
exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other
means of identification may be used.
c) State when and where the condominium subdivision plan request
will be considered.
d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the subdivision condominium plan request.
(3) Approval of the Preliminary Condominium Subdivision Plan: A
preliminary condominium subdivision plan shall be approved according to
the procedures required for approval of a tentative preliminary plat, under
Chapter 93, Township Subdivision Regulations.
(4) Review of Condominium Documents: The applicant shall submit a copy
of all condominium documents, including but not limited to the
condominium master deed, bylaws and all related exhibits, to the
Township Board of Trustee approval. These documents should specify
who is responsible for maintenance of common elements and open space,
including accessory structures. Prior to final condominium subdivision
plan approval, the applicant shall submit the necessary documents to the
Township Attorney for review. The required documents shall include the
following provisions:
a) The conditions upon which the approval is based, with reference to
the approved condominium subdivision plan.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 345
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
b) When open space or common areas are indicated in the
condominium subdivision plan for use by the condominium
owners, the open space or common areas shall be conveyed in fee
or otherwise committed by dedication to an association of the
residents, and the use shall be irrevocably dedicated for the useful
life of the residences, and retained as open space for park,
recreation, or other common uses.
1. A program and financing for maintaining common areas
and features, such as walkways, signs, lighting and
landscaping.
2. Assure that trees, waterways and woodlands will be
preserved as shown on the condominium subdivision plan.
3. Assure the construction and maintenance of all streets and
necessary utilities, including public water, wastewater
collection, and treatment, through bonds or other
satisfactory means, for any and all phases of the
condominium project.
4. Address and other concerns of the Township regarding
construction and maintenance.
5. Revisions may be required to ensure compliance with
applicable laws, ordinances and established Township
policies.
5) Outside Agency Approval: The applicant shall be responsible for
forwarding a copy of tentative condominium subdivision plan to all
applicable State, County, and local agencies having jurisdiction over
specific aspects of the condominium project, such as wetlands, storm
drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, and utilities. All necessary
permits or approvals from applicable outside agencies shall be received
prior to final condominium subdivision plan approval.
6) Final Condominium Subdivision Plan Review: The final condominium
subdivision plan shall include all information required for the approved
preliminary condominium subdivision plan, and any additional
information required in Chapter 93, Township Subdivision Regulations for
final approval of a preliminary subdivision plat. Additionally, the
following information shall be provided:
a) Complete metes and bounds description of the site condominium
project boundary.
b) Copies of the site condominium subdivision plan from each of the
required authorities, after all necessary approvals have been secured.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 346
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
c) Final Engineering Construction Plans for all improvements to be
constructed in connection with the proposed site plan in accordance
with Township Construction Standards.
7) Approval of Final Condominium Subdivision Plan. A final condominium
subdivision plan shall be approved according to the procedures required for
final preliminary plat approval under Chapter 93, Township Subdivision
Regulations.
4. Required Improvement
Construction of utilities, streets, sidewalks, and other improvements may commence only
after final approval of the development agreement by the Township Board, and approval of
construction plans by the Township Engineer. Site condominium projects shall further
comply with the following:
(a) Utilities. Each condominium unit shall be connected to the public water, sanitary and
storm sewers. To the extent practicable, all utilities, including electric and cable
services, shall be underground.
(b) Street lights may be required to be installed at all condominium development entrances.
(c) Monuments shall be set at all boundary corners and deflection points and at all road
right-of-way intersection corners and deflection points. Unit irons shall be set at all
condominium unit corners and deflection points of condominium unit lines. The
Township may grant a delay in the setting of required monuments or irons for a
reasonable time, but not to exceed one (1) year, on condition that the developer
deposits with the Chief Building Official a performance guarantee equal to the
estimated cost of such work. Such deposit shall be returned to the developer upon
receipt of a certificate by a surveyor registered in the State of Michigan that the
monuments and irons have been set as required, within the time specified. If the
developer defaults, the Township Board shall promptly require a registered
surveyor to set the monuments and irons in the ground as shown on the site
condominium plans.
(d) Streets and Necessary Easements. Condominium projects shall comply with all
street requirements applicable to conventional subdivisions, and shall provide all
easements necessary to construct, operate, inspect, maintain, repair, alter, replace
and/or remove pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar
character for the purpose of providing public utilities. Public utilities shall
include, but not be limited to, conveyance of sewage, water and storm water
runoff across, through and under the property subject to such easement, and
excavating and filling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of such
structures.
Streets shall be constructed in conformance with the applicable Township
engineering standards. Public street connections shall be provided to all adjacent
parcels, as determined necessary by the Township to provide adequate continuity
and connectivity to the public street system.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 347
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
5. Building Permits
Prior to the issuance of building permits for any condominium units, the applicant shall
submit the following to the Chief Building Official:
(a) A copy of the recorded condominium documents (including exhibits).
(b) A copy of any recorded restrictive covenants.
(c) A copy of the approved final condominium subdivision plan in a format
acceptable to the Township.
(d) The warranty deed and bylaws, and easement documents for all rights-of-way and
easements dedicated to the public.
(e) Final Acceptance and Submission of As-Built Drawings: After construction, asbuilt
drawings of the completed development shall be submitted, in an acceptable
format, to the Township for review. Final acceptance of the development and
release of the final certificate of occupancy and any performance guarantees shall
not take place until the as-built drawings have been approved by the Township.
(f) Revision of Condominium Subdivision Plans and Amendments to Condominium
Documents:
1) Any revision to the final condominium subdivision plan that would
materially alter the approved site design, uses or intent and conditions of
final condominium subdivision plan approval shall be submitted for
review as a revised final condominium subdivision plan following the
procedure in Section 28.1.3, Condominium Subdivision Plan Review.
2) Any revision to the final condominium subdivision plan that would not
materially alter the approved site design, uses or intent and conditions of
final condominium subdivision plan approval may be reviewed following
the procedures for administrative site plan review in Section 29.4.2,
Administrative Review.
3) Any revision to the condominium documents or development agreement
that affect the approved final condominium subdivision plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township Attorney and Township Board.
6. Relocation of Boundaries and Subdivision of Condominium Unit
(a) Relocation of boundaries between adjoining condominium units, if permitted in
the condominium documents and provided for in the Condominium Act, as
amended, shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located.
(b) Subdivision of condominium unit sites or units is permitted subject to Planning
Commission approval and the submittal of the amended bylaws and master deed
to determine the effect of the subdivision on conditions of zoning or site plan
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 348
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
SEC. 28.2 DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND
approval, and shall be made as part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the
master deed. Each condominium unit that results from a subdivision of another
condominium unit shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which
located.
7. Guarantee of Completion of Improvements
To ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and any conditions imposed
there under, a financial guarantee shall be required for any condominium project in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 93, Township Subdivision Regulations.
8. Condominium Conversions
All conversion condominium projects shall be subject to the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance and shall require site plan approval by the Administrative Review Committee
prior to the occupancy of any unit converted to a condominium unit. The site plan
submitted for a conversion project shall include all existing conditions and clearly
identify all proposed site changes. The proposed condominium documents must also be
submitted for Township Attorney review prior to final approval by the Administrative
Review Committee.
SEC. 28.2 DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND
Any division of unplatted land, other than a lot which is described and fixed in a recorded
plat, is subject to the provisions of the Land Division Act, Act. 288, P.A. 1967 and
Section 28.26 of this Ordinance shall be subject to the following:
1. Application
Applications shall be in writing, in such form as the Community Development
Department may determine and accompanied by such fees as the Board of Trustees may
determine by resolution, and the following:
(a) Tentative Parcel Map (Survey). A survey of the total unplatted land to be divided,
certified by a registered Land Surveyor, and in conformance with the
requirements of the Certified Surveys Act, Public Act 132 of 1970, as amended.
The survey shall include:
1) The existing and proposed parcel boundaries, all public utility and other
easements and rights-of-way and the proposed boundaries for each
resulting parcel dimensioned on the map.
2) Locations and setback for existing structures and improvements
dimensioned on the survey, and lot coverage for the existing (pre-split)
parcel(s). Front yard setbacks shall be dimensioned from the street
setback line, as described in Section 28.22 of this Article.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 349
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.2 DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND
3) Buildable area for each resulting parcel (based upon required setbacks,
topography, wetland/floodplain boundaries and other site constraints),
proposed setbacks for any existing structures or improvements, and
proposed lot coverage for each resulting parcel.
4) The location and conceptual design for vehicle access to each resulting
parcel from the street right-of-way.
(b) Legal descriptions for the existing parcel to be divided, and each resulting parcel.
(c) Proof of title ownership and land division rights allowed under the Land Division
Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended; and documentation of the parcel’s land
division history since March 31, 1997.
(d) Affidavit stating that the Township is not responsible for the extension of utilities
to any parcel created as a result of the land division.
2. Review Procedure
All land division applications shall be subject to the following review and approval
procedure prior to such division, and before any Certificate of Occupancy or building
permit may be issued for parcels resulting from such division:
(a) Prior to the Community Development Department’s consideration, the application
materials shall be distributed to appropriate Township officials, agents, and
employees for review and comment.
(b) The Community Development Department shall review the division of unplatted
land application to verify conformance with the standards of this Section and the
Ordinance:
1) Denial: Upon determination that an application does not comply with the
standards of this Section or Ordinance, or would require extensive
revisions to comply with said standards, the application shall be denied. If
an application is denied, a written record shall be provided to the applicant
listing the reasons for such denial.
2) Tentative Approval: Upon determination that an application is in
compliance with the standards of this Section and Ordinance, the
Community Development Department shall grant tentative approval of the
proposed land division.
3) Conditions: The Community Development Department may grant
tentative approval of the land division application subject to one or more
conditions, upon determining that minor modifications are necessary to
bring the proposed land division into full compliance with the standards of
this Section and Ordinance.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 350
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.2 DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND
SEC. 28.3 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
(c) The Township Supervisor shall grant final approval of a land division application
upon determination that the proposed division conforms with the requirements of
this Section and Ordinance, and any Community Development Department
conditions of the tentative approval.
3. Standards for Approval
Each resulting parcel shall meet all applicable requirements of this Ordinance, and the
following:
a) The depth of each resulting parcel shall not be greater than four (4) times the
parcel width (4:1) at the front parcel boundary. Land divisions may be approved
where the existing parcel and resulting parcels exceed this maximum 4:1 length to
width ratio, where the proposed division would improve compliance with this
Section.
b) Each resulting parcel shall abut a dedicated and improved public street, or an
approved private road with a dedicated private right-of-way easement and
roadway pavement and improvements constructed and maintained in compliance
with Chapter 43, Private Road Construction and Maintenance, of the Charter
Township of Plymouth Code of Ordinances.
c) Each resulting parcel shall have access to sufficient right-of-way for utilities and
services (including but not limited to water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas,
electric, telephone and street lighting), a driveway, sidewalks, road access and
other improvements reasonably necessary for the type of development and the
circumstances of the particular case.
4. Approval Limitation
Approval of a division is not a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other
ordinances or regulations.
SEC. 28.3 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
Any new one family detached dwelling unit located outside a mobile home park, erected after the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance shall be subject to the following
conditions prior to issuance of a building permit:
1. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Section is to protect the economic welfare and property values of
surrounding residential uses, and the Township as a whole, by establishing reasonable and
consistent standards governing the design and appearance of all dwellings, including
manufactured homes, mobile homes, modular homes or site (“stick”) built homes where
developed on individual lots or home sites within the Township. It is the intent of these
regulations to allow architectural variation and variation in housing types and styles, while
ensuring reasonable compatibility of dwellings in a manner that will not adversely affect
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 351
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.3 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
the stability, desirability of, and investment in, existing neighborhoods and to realize
development consistent with the Township Master Plan.
2. Dimensional Standards
Such dwelling units shall comply with the minimum standards listed in Article 20 for the
zoning district in which it is located, including minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
minimum floor area, required setbacks, and maximum building height, except as
provided in Section 27.1 for nonconforming lots or parcels of record in the R-1 District.
3. Local, State and Federal Standards
Such dwelling units shall conform to all applicable Township codes and ordinances and
the State Construction Code. All construction, plumbing and electrical apparatus and
insulation within and connected to a manufactured home shall conform to the
"Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards" [United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD)]. Additionally all minimum requirements for
roof snow load and strength shall be met.
4. Foundation
Such dwelling units shall be firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the
site in conformance with the State Construction Code, with a perimeter wall constructed
of such type and materials as required in the State Construction Code for one family
dwellings. Manufactured homes shall have a perimeter wall as required above, and shall
be installed and secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device in
conformance with the manufacturer's instructions and the Michigan Manufactured
Housing Commission General Rules.
5. Storage Area
Each such dwelling unit shall contain a storage area equal to ten (10) percent of the
square footage of the dwelling or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. This
storage area shall consist of a basement, attic, attached garage, or a separate detached
accessory structure which complies with the standards of this Zoning Ordinance
regarding accessory buildings and structures. The intent of these standards is to limit the
extent of outdoor storage.
6. Compatibility
Such dwelling unit shall be compatible in design and appearance with other dwellings in
the residential development or surrounding residential areas. The compatibility of design
and appearance shall be determined by the Chief Building Official, subject to appeal by
an aggrieved party to the Zoning Board of Appeals. In reviewing any proposed dwelling
for compatibility in design and appearance, the Chief Building Official shall insure that
the following provisions are met, based upon a comparison to the character, design and
appearance of any dwelling unit on abutting lots, plus a minimum of five (5) dwelling
unit on lots in the surrounding neighborhood:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 352
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.3 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
SEC. 28.4 DWELLING LOCATIONS
(a) Exterior finish materials (brick, stone, siding, windows, etc.) shall be similar to
dwellings located in the residential development or the surrounding residential
neighborhood, and shall be comparable in composition, appearance and durability
to exterior material commonly used for site built homes.
(b) Roof designs and roofing materials shall be similar to dwelling units located
within the residential development or in the surrounding neighborhood, subject to
the following:
1) The pitch of the main roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of one foot
per four feet of horizontal run (1:4).
2) Dwellings shall be designed with overhangs or eaves extending a
minimum of one (1) foot from each building wall.
(c) The dwelling’s exterior building wall configuration in regards to width to depth
ratio shall reasonably conform to the configuration of dwelling units located
within the residential development or in the surrounding neighborhood.
(d) The minimum width across any front, side or rear elevation shall be twenty four
(24) feet.
(e) The above standards shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts
involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or variation from the
common or standard designed home.
SEC. 28.4 DWELLING LOCATIONS
1. Principal Buildings
In all AG, R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, R-M and R-2 Districts, only one (1) principal
building shall be placed on a lot of record, including a single lot in a recorded subdivision
plat or site condominium development, or a single parcel created by a metes-and-bounds
land division.
2. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures are not permitted on a lot without a principal building.
3. Lot Width
Every single family dwelling shall be located on a lot, parcel or tract of land having a
width of not less than sixty (60) feet at the front or rear building line, whichever is less,
except as provided in Section 27.1 for nonconforming lots or parcels of record in the R-1
District.
4. Street Right-of-Way
Every single family dwelling shall be located on a lot which abuts a dedicated and
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 353
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.5 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE
REQUIREMENTS
improved public street, of not less than sixty (60) feet in width or an approved private
road with a private right-of-way easement sufficient in form, description, size, extent and
location to provide it and adjoining unplatted lands with right-of-way for water, sanitary
sewer, gas, electric, telephone, street lighting, road and sidewalk, utility services and
improvements reasonably necessary for the type of development, in compliance with
Chapter 43, Private Road Construction and Maintenance, of the Charter Township of
Plymouth Code of Ordinances. No stub end of a street right-of-way shall serve as the
required sixty (60) foot frontage of any lot.
SEC. 28.5 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Uses in all districts of the Township shall comply with the following performance standards,
which shall be applied using generally accepted methods of collection, measurement and
scientific analysis:
1. General Prohibition
There shall not be discharged from any source whatsoever, such quantities of air
contaminants or other material which cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to
any considerable number of persons or to the public or which endanger the comfort,
repose, health or safety of any such persons or the public or which cause or have a natural
tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property. The Federal Clean Air Act
shall be complied with in all applicable cases.
2. Glare
Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding, or acetylene torch cutting)
which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such manner as not to be seen
from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard.
3. Radioactive Materials
Radioactive materials and wastes, and including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray
machines operation, shall not be permitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the
U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line.
4. Measurable Noise
No operation or activity shall be conducted within any district which results in
measurable noise levels beyond the property line of the operation or activity, except in
compliance with the Charter Township of Plymouth Noise Control Ordinance (Chapter
34).
The decibel reading shall be the average of five (5) readings taken at intervals
approximately five (5) feet apart along the property line, at a height of five (5) feet above
the established grade, and taken within a time limit of five (5) minutes.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 354
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.5 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE
REQUIREMENTS
5. Vibration
No activity shall cause a ground displacement exceeding .003 of one (1) inch as
measured at the boundary of the property line. All machinery shall be mounted and
operated so as to prevent transmission of ground vibration. Operation of any device that
creates vibration above the vibration perception threshold at any adjacent property or
street right-of-way line shall be prohibited.
For purposes of this Section, the vibration perception threshold shall be the minimum
ground or structure-borne motion necessary to cause the Township Code Enforcement
Officer to be aware of the vibration by sensation, touch or visual observation of moving
objects.
6. Odor
The emission of noxious odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at a
point along the property line so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard is prohibited.
7. Sewage Wastes
No industrial sewage waste shall be discharged into sewers that will not comply with
established standards or that will cause chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly,
with the pipe or other structure materials, impair the strength or durability of sewer
structures, cause mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures,
cause restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures, place unusual demands on
the sewage treatment equipment or process, limit the effectiveness of the sewage
treatment process or cause danger to public health and safety.
8. Drifted and Air Borne Matter, General
The drifting of air borne material (such as dust, particles or debris) beyond the property
line shall be unlawful.
9. Fire and Safety Hazards
(a) The storage, utilization or manufacturing of materials or products ranging from
incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the Fire Chief, is permitted
subject to compliance with all other performance standards mentioned above and
the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Plymouth.
(b) The storage, utilization, or manufacturing of materials, goods, or products ranging
from free, to active burning, to intensive burning, as determined by the Fire Chief
is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and
performance standards previously listed, and the Fire Prevention Code of the
Township of Plymouth, and provided that the following conditions are complied
with:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 355
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.5 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE
REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING, FILLING AND
EXCAVATION
1) All activities shall take place within completely enclosed buildings or
structures having noncombustible exterior walls, meeting Michigan State
Construction Code requirements.
2) All such buildings shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler
system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National
Fire Protection Association and the Fire Prevention Code of Plymouth
Township.
3) The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases
and explosives shall comply with applicable state rules and regulations as
established by the Fire Prevention Code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as
amended, or by the Fire Prevention Ordinance of the Township of
Plymouth, whichever is the most stringent.
10. Hazardous Materials
Methods of on- and off-site disposal, handling, or storage of any hazardous waste or
materials, including the type of hazardous substances used, stored or disposed of on or off
the site, the location of material handling or use, and the method of containment shall
comply with federal and state requirements. A pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP)
shall be in place, as applicable.
SEC. 28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING, FILLING AND EXCAVATION
1. No filling, dumping, removal, adjusting or balancing of land by reason of which the existing
topography of the land is altered, shaped or changed shall be allowed within any zoning
district of the Chapter Township of Plymouth, except in the following permitted instances:
(a) The amount of material utilized for filling, dumping, removal, adjusting or
balancing, whether obtained on the land involved or from outside the premises,
does not exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards and the material is composed only
of gravel, clay, natural rock, earth, or topsoil, and provided that such material is
placed or removed in such a manner as will not adversely affect the existing use
or occupancy of abutting lands and the normal development thereof, impair,
obstruct, divert or change any drain, creek, river or other water course on the land
involved or any abutting lands, or encroach or occur upon the floodway or
floodplain thereof; or
(b) The filling, dumping, removal adjusting or balancing occurs pursuant to a site
plan or plat that has been approved in accordance with Township Ordinances.
(c) The filling, dumping, removal, adjusting or balancing occurs pursuant to a
Grading, Filling or Excavation Plan approved in conformity with the following
procedures:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 356
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING, FILLING AND
EXCAVATION
2. Application and Procedure for Grading, Filling or Excavation Plan approval
The owner of premises may apply to the Department of Building and Code Enforcement
for approval of a Grading, Filling or Excavation Plan, upon such forms as may be
designated by the Department and payment of such fees as the Board of Trustees may set
by resolution, in the following manner:
(a) Grading, filling or excavation that will disturb an area less than one acre, or to
create or alter a pond less than two acres in surface area, or for landscape or
ornamental berming, or similar earth change activities may be approved by the
Chief Building Official after review by the Township Engineer.
(b) Grading, filling or removal of soil from any property for purposes of a business
enterprise shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission after
review by the Township Engineer for conformance with this section and other
applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) The Chief Building Official may refer any application to the Planning
Commission for review and approval if, in the Chief Building Official’s opinion,
the activities proposed in the application may adversely impact the use, or future
use, of the property in question, or adjoining lands.
(d) Preliminary Approval. An applicant may apply for a preliminary approval without
a detailed design plan by submitting an application containing the following:
1) Names and addresses of owner of the premises and type of ownership.
2) Legal description of the premises.
3) Name and address of owners of adjacent premises.
4) Written description of the nature of the proposed filling, dumping,
removal, adjusting or balancing to be undertaken, including the quantity of
fill or removal and the composition of same.
5) A scale drawing of the premises designating property lines and
dimensions; adjacent public roads, drains, creeks, rivers or other water
courses and the flood area or plain thereof on the premises and on adjacent
premises; landmarks and topographical features of the premises; and areas
to be filled or subject to removal.
6) Statement of intended land use for the premises following the completion
of grading, filling and excavation work and the expected time needed to
complete such work.
The Chief Building Official or the Planning Commission at its next regular
meeting, will consider the preliminary approval application and determine
whether the proposed earth change activity shall be granted preliminary approval.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 357
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING, FILLING AND
EXCAVATION
In determining the same, the Chief Building Official or Planning Commission
shall consider the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the impact of the
proposed activity on existing water drainage, detention, flood plain, floodway and
flow, the prevention of water pollution and sedimentation, the prevention of wind
erosion, wind blown dust and wind blown litter, the composition and compaction
qualities of the fill, the provision for ground cover and other flora or constructed
improvements to prevent erosion or the collection of stagnant water, and the
suitability of the proposed work in relationship to the existing use and occupancy
and normal development on the premises and on adjacent neighboring premises
so that the earth change activity will not adversely affect the same.
In no event shall the dumping of junk, offal, garbage, rubbish, ashes, slag,
industrial wasters, construction materials or other refuse be permitted in any
zoning use district other than industrial zoning districts.
If the preliminary approval is granted, the applicant may proceed to apply for final
approval. Preliminary approval vests no rights in the applicant, or the applicant’s
successors, heirs and assigns.
(e) Final Approval. A final approval application shall contain the following
information:
1) An affirmation that the contents of the same are in accordance with the
application and plan granted preliminary approval, if any.
2) A map certified by a registered engineer or land surveyor at a scale not
less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch showing:
a) Boundaries of the premises.
b) Outline of the earth change areas.
c) Outline of the areas from which material will be removed from the
site or from which material will be obtained for filling elsewhere
on the site.
d) Existing topographical elevations which shall be expressed on
U.S.C. & G.S. datum and by accurate contours at intervals not
exceeding two (2) feet extending a minimum of fifty (50) feet
beyond the site or work limits.
For large sites, the existing topography may be limited to those areas
proposed to be altered providing however that adequate surrounding
topographic information is provided to evaluate impacts to adjoining
areas.
3) A map certified by a registered engineer or land surveyor to the same scale
as required in Section 28.6.2(e)(2) above showing the surface elevations
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 358
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING, FILLING AND
EXCAVATION
and slopes which will be established when the earth change activities are
complete.
4) A statement of a registered professional engineer certifying the quantities,
location and composition of the disturbed material and reference to the
map required in Section 28.6.2(e)(3) above.
5) If the earth change area is to be included in a plat, subdivision, or other
type of development, the maps required in Section 28.6.2 (e) (3) above
shall show the proposed subdivision layout including without limitation,
the future location of streets, building sites and utility easements.
6) A statement specifying the nature and location of ground cover and other
flora or constructed improvements sufficient to prevent erosion or the
collection of stagnant water.
The Chief Building Official or the Planning Commission at its next regular
meeting will consider the final approval application and determine whether the
proposed earth change activity shall receive final approval, which determination
shall be based on the same criteria as are applicable to the determination of
preliminary approval. The final approval may be conditioned upon the applicant
posting bond or other security sufficient to guarantee performance of the earth
change activity to be undertaken in conformance with the final plans.
3. Permit and Inspection
The permit shall be issued by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement and
may incorporate by reference all material contained in the preliminary approval
application and the final approval application and may contain such specific terms and
conditions as the Chief Building Official or Planning Commission determine reasonably
necessary for the circumstances of the particular case to prevent the filling of flood
plains, to prevent water pollution, to provide for compaction, to regular the composition
of the fill, to provide cover on the disturbed areas for erosion protection, to regulate the
hours of work performed, to prevent dust, wind erosion and litter, to insure proper surface
and storm water drainage and to prevent an adverse effect upon the existing use or
occupancy of abutting property and the normal development thereof. The effective term
of the permit shall not exceed one (1) year. Should an applicant propose the actual
construction and work pursuant to the permit will be performed by a party other than the
applicant, the permit shall be issued to the permit applicant and the contractor, jointly and
severally, and each shall be bound by the terms thereof and obligated by any bond or
other security required.
Where the Chief Building Official or Planning Commission determines that it is
necessary to have the Township Engineer perform inspection or review field test reports
of the earth change construction, the applicant will be required to deposit inspection fees
to cover the cost of same pursuant to the current rate schedule approved by the Board of
Trustees. The Township Engineer shall determine the initial deposit amount based on an
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 359
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING, FILLING AND
EXCAVATION
estimate of the time required; if the actual time exceeds this amount, the applicant will be
required to deposit subsequent fees to cover the actual inspection costs. The Township
Engineer shall keep a written record of the inspections and provide the Chief Building
Official with copies on a weekly basis.
Issuance of the permit by the Chief Building Official shall not obviate the applicant from
obtaining other County, State or Federal permits that may apply to the proposed work.
Copies of such permits shall be provided to the Chief Building Official prior to the
commencement of the earth change activity.
The permittee shall notify in writing the Department of Building and Code Enforcement
of the commencement of the work and of the completion of the same. The Department of
Building and Code Enforcement, its officials, agents and employees, shall at all times be
permitted access to and travel upon the premises subject to the permit for the purposes of
making such inspections as they may deem necessary. At any time, the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement may suspend or cancel the permit if the work being
performed fails to timely accord with the terms of the permit of such directions of the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement as may be given the permittee for
accomplishing the purposes of said permit and conforming with all applicable ordinances.
Upon completion of the earth change activities, the permittee shall supply to the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement a plan certified by a registered engineer
or land surveyor showing the same mapped information as required by Section
28.6.2.(e)(2) above, and applicable to the premises as of a date on or immediately after
completion. Following such written notification of completion and the supplying of such
map, the Department of Building and Code Enforcement shall inspect the premises and
either issue a certificate of completion to the permittee or in writing detail all deficiencies
to the permittee who shall forthwith correct the same.
The Department of Building and Code Enforcement shall keep a record of all permits and
certificates of completion.
Failure to accord with the terms and conditions of the permit and the directions of the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement in pursuance thereof shall be illegal and
no person shall permit or cause any act contrary to the same.
4. Dangerous Excavations Prohibited
The construction, maintenance or existence within the Charter Township of Plymouth of
open, unprotected or un-barricaded excavations, holes, pits or wells that are determined
by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement to constitute a danger or menace to
the public health, safety or welfare are hereby prohibited. This Section shall not prevent
construction or excavations under a permit issued by the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement, where such excavations are properly protected and appropriate
warning signs posted.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 360
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING, FILLING AND
EXCAVATION
SEC. 28.7 WATER SUPPLY AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
5. Dumping Prohibited
In no event shall the dumping of junk, offal, garbage, rubbish, ashes, slag, industrial
wastes, construction materials or other refuse be permitted in any zoning use district,
except where otherwise permitted by this Ordinance.
6. Encroachment into Drainage Channels and Floodplains Prohibited.
Drainage channels and flood plains, which exist and which are indicated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Map, are essential for the
maintenance of the health and general welfare of the people of the Township. Any
encroachment, filling or destruction of these drainage channels or floodplains is a
violation of this Ordinance.
However, this shall not prevent the development of the property where adequate
facilities, as determined by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement,
Township Engineer and appropriate agencies having jurisdiction, have been provided to
maintain the uninterrupted flow of surface water (see Article 3, Floodplain District, for
regulations concerning drainage channels and flood plains).
SEC. 28.7 WATER SUPPLY AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
All uses, parcels and lots in the Township shall be served by an adequate and approved supply of
sanitary water for human consumption, and an adequate and approved means of disposing of
waste water and effluent. No building permit shall be issued under the terms of this Ordinance,
until the applicant for such permit has obtained approval from the Wayne County Health
Department and Plymouth Township Department of Public Works:
1. Water Supply for Human Consumption
(a) Public Water Supply. Where available, a public water supply shall be used as the
water supply source.
(b) Private Wells.
1) Where a public water supply system is not available, each well utilized for
human consumption shall meet the requirements of the Wayne County
Health Department.
2. Waste Water and Effluent Disposal
All lots must be served by a municipal sewer system or an approved disposal system
capable of disposing of waste water and effluent, subject to the requirements of the
Wayne County Health Department.
(a) Sanitary Sewer System. Where sanitary sewers are available they shall be used for
the disposal of sanitary wastes.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 361
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.7 WATER SUPPLY AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
SEC. 28.8 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
(b) Private Septic Systems. A building permit may be issued for a parcel or lot with
an approved and functional private septic system in areas where a public sanitary
sewer system is not available, provided such system meets the approval of the
Wayne County Health Department.
3. Unlawful Waste Discharge Prohibited
No existing or proposed principal or accessory use shall discharge any quantities of
wastes, liquids, water or other materials on open ground or into a septic tank or field that
would endanger the general public comfort, health or safety, or would cause injury,
detriment, damage or nuisance to any individuals, businesses, properties. Such excess
discharge of wastes, liquid, water or other materials must be discharged into a sewer
system regulated by Water and Sewer Ordinance as amended.
SEC. 28.8 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
The purpose of this Section is to require sufficient but not excessive exterior lighting for parking
areas, walkways, driveways, building entrances, loading areas and common areas, to ensure the
security of property and safety of persons and to encourage the use of exterior lighting that
complements and enhances the environment and character of the Township. The standards of this
Section are intended to prevent the adverse effects of inappropriate lighting, including glare,
light trespass onto adjoining properties, light pollution, sky glow and waste of energy.
1. General Requirements
(a) Exterior lighting shall be provided in an amount sufficient to permit safe
movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night.
(b) All lighting for parking areas, external illumination of buildings or grounds and
illumination of signs shall be concealed source fixtures, shielded, directed
downward and shielded away from adjacent properties, with particular
consideration to protecting residential districts and uses. Such fixtures shall be
designed to prevent light from projecting above a horizontal plane.
(c) Lighting shall be so arranged as to not adversely affect driver visibility on
adjacent public rights-of-way.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 362
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.8 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
(d) The lighting shall be high-pressure sodium, metal halide or other type of lighting
approved by the Commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities
of high pressure sodium or metal halide lights.
(e) Maximum light intensity shall be a given in the following table:
LIGHT INTENSITY MAXIMUM (footcandles)
Overall average for the site 5.0
At any point within the site 10.0
At any property line or street
setback line
0.5
(f) Light intensity shall be measured at grade level within a site, and at a height of
five (5) feet above grade at any property line or street setback line. A photometric
plan may be required to ensure that adequate light levels are provided on the site
and that the site conforms with the standards of this Section.
(g) Non-essential lighting shall be turned off after business hours, except for
minimum necessary security lighting.
(h) The type of lighting utilized shall be consistent through-out a project.
2. Specific Requirements
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 363
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.8 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
(a) Lighting under gasoline station canopies and similar structures shall be limited to
fully recessed lighting fixtures.
(b) Freestanding pole lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet,
except in the TAR, Technology and Research District, and IND, Industrial
District, where such fixtures shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet. Such
heights shall be measured from the ground level to the top of the light fixture.
Fixtures shall be arranged to provide an overlapping pattern of light.
(c) Where the proposed project is part of an industrial, technology, research or office
park development, the type of lighting shall be consistent throughout the
development.
3. Prohibited Exterior Lighting
(a) The installation of mercury vapor fixtures shall be prohibited.
(b) Unshielded illumination of the exterior of a building or landscaping shall be
prohibited.
(c) The use of laser light sources, strobe lighting, or similar high intensity light for
outdoor advertising, promotion or entertainment projected above the horizontal
plane shall be prohibited, except where permitted as a temporary use under
Section 28.43, Grand Openings, Special Sales or Special Events.
(d) Neon: Neon accent lighting around and within window and door openings shall be
prohibited.
4. Exceptions
(a) The following types of exterior lighting shall be exempt from the provisions of
this Section:
1) Decorative exterior light fixtures for residential dwellings, provided that
such fixtures do not cause off-site glare. Each fixture shall be limited to a
maximum light intensity equivalent to one (1) 100-watt incandescent
lamp.
2) Security lighting for residential dwellings, provided such fixtures are
concealed source, directed downward and shielded away from adjacent
properties. Each fixture shall be limited to a maximum light intensity
equivalent to two (2) 150-watt incandescent lamps.
3) Holiday decorations, provided such lighting is temporary and installed no
more than (30) thirty days prior to and fifteen (15) days following the
holiday such decorations represent.
4) Street lights that do not cause off-site glare or light pollution.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 364
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.8 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
SEC. 28.9 WASTE RECEPTACLES
5) Fossil fuel light produced directly or indirectly from the combustion of
natural gas or similar fuel (e.g., gas lamps).
6) Lighting for temporary uses permitted under Section 28.41, Carnivals,
Fairs, Block Parties and Similar Uses; or Section 28.43, Grand Openings,
Special Sales or Special Events.
7) Temporary lighting necessary for construction, security or emergencies.
8) Lighting necessary for civic uses or the illumination of government or
political flags, provided that the light intensity is strictly limited and area
of illumination is confined to a specific target surface.
(b) Accent Lighting. The Planning Commission may approve luminous tube (neon)
lighting, internally illuminated architectural bands or similar shielded lighting
accents as architectural details on the exterior of any building facade, subject to
site plan approval and provided that such lighting accents would enhance the
aesthetics of the site and would not cause off-site glare or light pollution.
(c) Uplighting. The Planning Commission may approve uplighting of buildings for
aesthetic purposes, subject to site plan approval and provided that the light
intensity is strictly limited and area of illumination is confined to a specific target
surface.
(d) Lighting for Gasoline Station Canopies and Dealership Sales Lots. The Planning
Commission may approve light intensities of up twenty (20) footcandles under a
gasoline station canopy or within a dealership sales lot, subject to site plan
approval and provided that site lighting is otherwise in compliance with this
Section.
(e) Additional exceptions may be permitted where the Planning Commission
determines that unique or special conditions on the site warrant the exception.
SEC. 28.9 WASTE RECEPTACLES
The regulations in this Section are intended to require sufficient screening of outdoor waste
receptacles, minimize adverse effects of trash storage, recycling, and disposal activities on
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way and encourage the development and use of
appropriate screening structures and measures that complement and enhance the environment
and character of the area and the Township as a whole.
1. Requirements
The owner, lessee, or their agent, and occupants of every building where waste, garbage
or recyclable materials accumulate shall be jointly and severally responsible for
providing clean, and proper locations and receptacles for storage, disposal and recycling
of such wastes, subject to the following:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 365
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.9 WASTE RECEPTACLES
(a) No occupant, owner, lessee, or their agent, shall permit the storage or
accumulation of waste, garbage or recyclable materials in open yards or lots.
(b) All waste, garbage or recyclable materials shall be contained within properly
designed receptacles located in designated storage areas, and regularly removed
from the site.
(c) Outdoor storage areas for such materials shall be kept free of loose litter and
debris, and maintained in a neat, orderly and sanitary condition.
(d) Waste receptacle enclosure gates shall be closed and secured when not in use.
(e) Receptacles for storage of food wastes, grease and other restaurant or food service
garbage shall be properly sealed and secured to minimize odors and prevent
animal or insect infestations.
2. Enclosures
Where required by this Ordinance or otherwise deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission, waste receptacle enclosures shall conform with the following:
(a) Waste receptacles shall be completely enclosed and secured by a decorative
masonry screen wall on three sides, and steel reinforced, opaque and lockable
wooden gates. Bollards or other protective devices may be required to prevent
damage to the screen walls.
(b) The type, color and pattern of enclosure materials shall match or complement the
exterior façade materials of the principal building.
(c) The height of the enclosure shall be sufficient to completely screen all waste
receptacles and materials, up to a maximum of six (6) feet.
(d) The surface within waste receptacle enclosures shall be constructed of concrete,
and shall extend a minimum of ten (10) feet in front of the enclosure.
(e) Waste receptacle enclosures shall be screened to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission, in accordance with Section 26.11, Methods of Screening.
(f) Waste receptacle enclosures shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet away
from doors, building overhangs, eaves and similar features, and shall not block
pedestrian or vehicle access. If the building is of non-combustible construction,
the waste receptacle enclosure may be placed against the building subject to the
approval of the Township Fire Department. Such enclosures shall be located in a
side or rear yard to minimize visibility from adjacent properties and street rightsof-
way.
(g) The Planning Commission shall have the authority to modify waste receptacle
enclosure height, material and location standards, provided that the alternative
meets the screening objectives of this Section.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 366
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.9 WASTE RECEPTACLES
SEC. 28.10 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
3. Trash Compactor Screening
Outdoor trash compactors and dumpsters for storage of compacted wastes shall be located
in a side or rear yard to minimize visibility from adjacent properties and street rights-ofway.
Screening for such facilities shall be in accordance with Section 26.11, Methods of
Screening, and subject to Planning Commission approval.
SEC. 28.10 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Subject to applicable State and Federal regulations, all utilities, including but not limited to
electric, natural gas, cable TV and telephone, shall be located underground to the extent feasible.
Significant upgrades or re-construction of existing above-ground utilities shall include relocation
of such utilities underground where feasible. All such facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission
or other agency with jurisdiction.
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND SERVICES
A zoning ordinance can only regulate new technology after its discovery and use. Therefore, as
scientific discovery creates new possibilities, a community must look to its Master Plan and
community image to guide the manner in which technological advancements are accommodated.
Over time, some discoveries that at first seem to be only novelties, such as electricity, become
fundamental to our way of life. These public necessities or “essential services,” if unavailable or
removed, would cause great inconvenience, negatively impact the public health, safety, and/or
general welfare, and result in revised patterns of development. Because our standard of living and
the public health, safety and general welfare depend on the provision of essential services, zoning
ordinances often allow essential services providers to follow more lenient design standards than
would be applied to private developers.
Other technological advancements are not essential, but have become convenient to our way of life.
We would like to accommodate these conveniences efficiently, but with greater concerns for
aesthetics and location. We have seen that wireless communication has evolved to be a public
convenience and that as public acceptance and use of wireless communication systems increased,
the equipment required to provide this convenience has become smaller and/or less obtrusive on the
environment. We believe that wireless communication will continue to grow and that as it grows,
the trend to smaller and/or less obtrusive equipment will continue.
1. Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to:
(a) Carry out the will of the United States Congress by permitting facilities within the
Township that are necessary for the operation of wireless communications
systems.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 367
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
(b) Reduce the need for additional facilities by encouraging co-location of multiple
antennae on a single tower, and permitting facility heights that can maximize
service while being as unobtrusive as possible.
(c) Enable the highest level of wireless communication to be available to and within
Plymouth Charter Township while addressing the concerns of the community
regarding visual intrusion into residential areas by ensuring that wireless
communication systems are situated in appropriate locations in relation to other land
uses, structures and buildings.
(d) Limit visual impacts by promoting the use of screening and innovative designs for
such facilities, prevent potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure,
and promote the timely removal of facilities upon the discontinuance of use.
(e) Provide development standards that protect the aesthetic and health, safety and
general welfare interests of the Township, while allowing requests for wireless
communication systems to be processed efficiently.
2. Prohibited Structures and Locations
(a) Wireless communication facilities shall not be permitted in the area bounded by Joy
Road, Lilley Road, Ann Arbor Road and Haggerty Road due to the proximity of the
Mettetal Airport.
(b) A lattice tower, guy-wired tower or a wooden pole shall not be permitted as an
antenna support structure or a facility for wireless communication within the
Township.
3. Approval Requirements – Process and Permit Requirements
Wireless communication systems may be provided in the zoning districts in accordance
with the following table, subject to compliance with the following approval process,
development standards and building permit requirements, below:
APPROVAL PROCESS FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
ZONING DISTRICT
ATTACHED
ANTENNA ON
EXISTING
STRUCTURE
TYPE OF FACILITY
FEATURE
TOWER
MONOPOLE
PL A S S
R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, RM A
R-2, R-2-A A
VP, OS, OS-ARC A
C-1, C-2 A
ARC A S
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 368
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
4. Administrative Approval
Applications under the administrative approval process shall be made by the property owner
or his agent filing an application for a building permit with the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement for an attached antenna as provided above, or a monopole facility in the
IND, Industrial District, payment of fees as indicated in the Schedule of Fees and
submission of all information that is needed to permit the Chief Building Official to
determine compliance with the requirements of this Section and Ordinance, including
Section 28.11.6, Building Permit Requirements.
5. Approval of Special Land Uses
(a) Applications for approval under the special land use process shall be made by the
property owner or agent by filing the appropriate application for Planning
Commission approval, and the following:
1) Payment of fees as indicated in the Schedule of Fees.
2) Submission of a site plan which meets the requirements of Article 29, Site
Plan and Development Approval and the additional requirements of this
ordinance.
3) Submission of all other necessary information, including information
required by Section 2.7, Special Land Uses, to allow the Planning
Commission to hold a public hearing on the request and determine
compliance with the requirements of Section 2.7, this Section and this
Ordinance.
(b) After receiving approval of the special land use and site plan from the Planning
Commission, the property owner or his agent must file a building permit application
with the Department of Building and Code Enforcement for review and approval
consistent with the requirements of this Section, the State Construction Code
enforced by the Township and any other requirement of the Chief Building Official.
6. Building Permit Requirements
Prior to approval of a building permit for a wireless communication system, the Chief
Building Official must find that the proposal satisfies the following requirements, in
addition to all other building permit requirements.
MR, OR, TAR A S
IND A S A
A = Administrative Approval
S = Special Land Use
[Blank] = Not Permitted
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 369
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
(a) The nature and extent of the applicant’s ownership or lease interest in the property or
structure has been submitted.
(b) Facilities shall be self-collapsing, where any collapse will be completely contained
within the subject property, and shall comply with all State Construction Code and
Electrical Code regulations. The applicant shall provide all necessary engineering
information, site plans, and drawings to make these determinations with the
application. No structure, (other than the associated support building) sidewalk,
parking lot or other pedestrian or vehicular traffic area shall be permitted within the
self-collapsing or “safe fall” area.
(c) No part of any antenna or facility shall project over, or be constructed, located or
maintained at any time, permanently or temporarily within any setback area required
in the zoning district.
(d) Antennas and metal towers shall be grounded for protection against lightning strikes,
and shall comply with all State Electrical Code requirements, and with all applicable
local statues, regulations, and standards.
(e) Facilities with antennas shall be designed to withstand a uniform wind loading as
prescribed in the State Construction Code or other applicable engineering standard.
(f) The facility construction plans shall be certified by a registered structural engineer,
who shall verify that the antenna mount and structure have been reviewed, and that
the structure and installation are in compliance with all applicable engineering
standards.
(g) All antennas and facilities must meet the standards of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(h) All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending substantially
horizontally above the ground between towers, or between a tower or antenna and a
structure, shall be at least eight (8) feet above the ground at all points, unless buried
underground.
(i) Structures shall be subject to current State and Federal regulations concerning nonionizing
electromagnetic radiation. If more restrictive State or Federal standards are
adopted in the future, the system shall be upgraded to conform within one hundred
eighty (180) days of their effective date. Failure to make such required upgrades
shall constitute grounds for the Township Board to revoke any special use permit.
Costs for testing and verification of compliance shall be borne by the operator of the
antenna.
(j) All new wireless communication systems shall be designed within the applicable
ANSI standards and N.E.C. standards.
(k) Metal facilities shall be constructed of (or treated with) corrosion resistant materials.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 370
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
(l) Any proposed facility shall be designed, constructed and maintained in a manner
that accommodates co-location of multiple antenna arrays on a single tower
mounted at varying heights.
(m) The issuance of a Building Permit by the Plymouth Charter Township Building
Department and compliance with any other requirements of the Township and or
any other required body shall be required.
(n) Financial guarantees (in the form of a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit) shall
be provided in an amount sufficient to guarantee removal of a vacant or abandoned
system, and to ensure that the site is restored to its original condition.
(o) The wireless communication provider shall provide proof of insurance for liability
and property damage of not less than $1,000,000, or as otherwise required by the
Township.
7. Development Requirements
(a) An attached wireless communication antenna (as defined in Section 36.2) shall be
approved administratively by the Chief Building Official, subject to compliance with
this Section and the following:
1) The proposal will not materially alter the appearance of the existing
structure.
2) An agreement between the titleholder of the property and the antenna
provider shall be submitted to show that it would require co-location.
3) A coverage area map shall be submitted of the area served by the provider’s
existing wireless communications facilities, along with a map of the same
area showing the coverage provided by the addition of any proposed
facilities and sufficient documentation to demonstrate the need for the
antenna.
4) The wireless communication provider’s master plan (as defined in Section
36.2) shall be submitted.
5) Any accessory equipment for the antenna shall be placed inside the structure
to which the antenna is attached, or in the rear yard with screening provided
so that the equipment is not visible from adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way.
6) The issuance of a Building Permit by the Plymouth Charter Township
Building Department and compliance with any other requirements of the
Township and or any other required body shall be required.
(b) A wireless communication facility (as defined in Section 36.2) shall be approved
subject to compliance with this Section 28.11 and the following:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 371
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
1) Coverage Area Maps and Master Plan: The coverage area map and wireless
communication master plan (as defined in Section 36.2) shall be submitted
for review. The coverage area map for the proposed site shall include
documentation for a minimum of three (3) antenna heights; one (1) at the
proposed height, the second at a height that is no less than twenty-five feet
lower and the third at no less than twenty-five (25) feet higher than the
proposed height. The applicant shall demonstrate a justification for the
proposed structure height and provide an evaluation of the impacts of such
alternative designs on coverage and co-location options, which might result
in a different height from the proposed height being approved.
2) Existing Locations and Co-Location: Wherever possible, systems shall
locate on existing buildings, structures and existing wireless communication
facilities. Further, no new pole or tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that
no existing building, structure, facility or alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers can accommodate the proposed antenna. The
agreement between the property titleholder and the wireless communication
facility provider shall be submitted to show that co-location shall be required
and that a total of three antenna arrays shall be allowed to co-locate, and
shall limit accessory utility buildings on the site to one (1) that shall be
designed to accommodate all current, proposed and future providers. If a
provider fails to or refuses to permit co-location, said structure and its’
existing wireless communication systems shall become a nonconforming
structure and shall not be altered or expanded in any way. No lattice towers,
guy-wired poles or wooden poles shall be permitted.
3) Site Plan: The site plan must address the wireless communication facility
plus the existing site development. A condition of any site plan approval
shall be that the entire site, and not just the area proposed for the wireless
communication facility shall be reviewed so that any necessary
improvements to existing nonconforming aspects are modified to bring the
site into compliance with the Ordinance to the fullest that is practical extent.
Also, any delayed maintenance shall be completed to the satisfaction of the
Chief Building Official.
4) Height: Maximum height of a wireless communication facility shall be one
hundred fifty (150) feet. A height no greater than two hundred (200) feet
may be considered by the Planning Commission for approval as a special
land use, where the applicant has sufficiently demonstrated that the
additional height will reduce the total number of potential communication
facilities in the Township. Further, the maximum height shall be the
minimum demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by
the applicant, including co-location. The accessory utility building shall be
limited to the maximum height permitted for an accessory structure in the
zoning district.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 372
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
5) Setbacks: Minimum yard setbacks shall be equal to no less than one and onehalf
(1½) times the height of the facility, unless documentation is submitted
that confirms the facility has been designed to eliminate all safety concerns
from falling or collapse of a structure. However, in no case shall any setback
be less than the setback that would be required for a primary structure in the
zoning district.
A wireless communication facility must be located a minimum of one
thousand (1,000) feet from any property that is zoned or used for residential
purposes.
6) The facility and all equipment shall be located in the rear yard, in an area of
the site where the visual impact to the public is minimized. Alternate
locations may be approved by the Planning Commission upon determining
that an alternate location provides better screening of the facility and
equipment from public view.
7) Commercial signs, advertising, and logos, and artificial lighting such as
strobe lights (other than lighting or other identification required by the FAA
or FCC) shall be prohibited on the facility. However, the Planning
Commission may approve signage that identifies the community, logos
and/or lighting that is designed to accent a feature tower.
8) Proposed access to the facility and overall circulation shall be reviewed and
approved. An access road that serves only the facility may be constructed of
gravel and/or aggregate sufficient to maintain adequate access to the site.
The Planning Commission may require the access to be paved if it
determines that paving is needed to satisfy overall circulation needs. A
driveway permit, where required, must be submitted by the applicant prior to
a building permit being issued.
9) The need for anti-climbing devices and/or other security measures must be
addressed and shall be provided if required.
10) The issuance a Building Permit by the Plymouth Charter Township Building
Department and compliance with any other requirements of the Township
and or any other required body shall be required. Facilities shall not be
demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the
public safety and welfare, and shall be located and designed to be
harmonious with the surrounding areas.
(c) A wireless communication monopole (as defined in Section 36.2) proposed in the
IND, Industrial District, may be approved administratively by the Chief Building
Official subject to the following:
1) The monopole and equipment shall meet all setbacks in Article 20, Schedule
of Regulations for a primary structure in the zoning district.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 373
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
2) The monopole and all equipment shall be located in the rear yard and
screened from public view.
(d) A wireless communication monopole may be approved by the Planning Commission
as a special land uses in the PL, Public Lands District provided that the proposal
complies with all requirements for a monopole specified in Section 28.11.7(c)
above, and will be placed a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any
property that is used or zoned for residential purposes.
(e) A wireless communication feature tower (as defined in Section 36.2) proposed in the
ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor District, MR, Mid-Rise District, PL, Public Lands
District, TAR, Technology and Research District and IND, Industrial District may
be approved by the Planning Commission as a special land use, subject to
compliance with the following:
1) The height of the feature tower shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet.
The Planning Commission may grant special land use approval for a height
of up to two hundred (200) feet, provided the applicant submits
documentation to show that no other option is feasible.
2) The tower and all equipment shall meet all setback requirements for a
primary structure in the zoning district as shown in Article 20, Schedule of
Regulations. A feature tower shall be located in the rear yard of the site so
that the feature tower appears to be more in scale with the area. However, the
Planning Commission may approve an alternate location upon determining
that the feature tower design and location conceals its utilitarian function,
offers an aesthetic benefit to the public, avoids a concentration of support
structures and minimizes negative views from residential areas and public
rights-of-way.
8. Co-Location Required
(a) Feasibility. It is the policy of the Township to minimize the overall number of newly
established locations for wireless communication facilities within the community, by
requiring co-location and the use of existing structures for attached wireless
communication antennas. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out
and encourage conformity with this policy. Co-location shall be deemed to be
feasible for purposes of this Section where all of the following are met:
1) The provider under consideration for co-location will undertake to pay
market rent or other market compensation for co-location.
2) The site on which co-location is being considered is able to provide
structural support, taking into consideration reasonable modification or
replacement of a facility.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 374
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
3) The co-location being considered is technologically reasonable, and will not
result in unreasonable interference, in relation to the structure and existing
antennas.
4) Any proposed increase in structure height necessary for co-location will not
exceed that deemed permissible by the Township.
(b) Process and Conditions.
1) A special land use permit for a new wireless communication facility shall not
be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that a feasible co-location is not
available for the coverage area and capacity needs.
2) All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall accommodate
co-location. If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless
communication facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to
accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible co-location, such facility
shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure
and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect.
3) Co-location of a wireless communication antenna upon an existing
monopole or feature tower shall be approved administratively by the Chief
Building Official, subject to compliance with the above items and the
requirements for a wireless communication antenna.
9. Maintenance
(a) Routine maintenance shall be provided to ensure the continued soundness of the
wireless communication system, and to ensure that the site will be kept in a safe
condition. Any system that is determined to be unsafe, unlawfully erected or not
maintained shall be in violation of this Section and Ordinance. The use of said
system shall be discontinued until all violations are corrected, or it shall be
immediately removed.
(b) All facilities shall be inspected by the provider at least once per year, and serviced as
necessary to maintain the facilities in a safe condition. Reports regarding inspections
and servicing shall be made available to the Chief Building Official upon written
request.
(c) Wireless communication systems shall not interfere with reception in nearby
residential areas. In the event such interference occurs, the provider shall take all
steps necessary to eliminate such interference.
10. Removal
(a) All abandoned or unused (as defined in Section 36.2) wireless communication
antennas, equipment, facilities or systems shall be removed within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the cessation of operations on the site, unless a time
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 375
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
AND SERVICES
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
extension is approved by the Chief Building Official. In the event that a tower is
not removed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the cessation of operations,
the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the Township and the costs
of removal assessed against the property.
(b) It shall be the obligation of the wireless communications provider to inform the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement of any wireless communication
system termination or upgrade.
(c) The Township shall require a bond, satisfactory to the Chief Building Official, to
secure the future removal of any abandoned or unsafe wireless communication
system or structure.
(d) Plymouth Township may secure the removal of the structure if it is still standing
thirty days after the Township has sent a notice to the operator stating the need to
remove the structure.
(e) Unused portions of towers located above a manufactured connection shall be
removed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the time of antenna relocation.
The replacement of portions of a tower previously removed shall be subject to a new
special land use approval.
(f) The base of any tower and/or support anchors shall be removed to a point no less
than twelve (12) feet below grade. The excavation shall be filled with suitable soil,
than covered with topsoil and hydroseeded.
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
Natural gas or oil processing facilities, including but not limited to “sweetening” plants, shall be
permitted only if the proposed facility satisfies all of the conditions and requirements of this
Section and Ordinance. Oil or petroleum refineries as defined herein are specifically excluded
from these provisions. It has been determined that it is reasonably foreseeable that sour gas will
be produced in the Township or conveyed via pipeline into the Township for sweetening
(removal of hydrogen sulfide) and other processing. The transmission or processing of sour gas
in the Township poses health risks to Township residents from accidental releases of hydrogen
sulfide from pipelines or at the processing facility. The following standards have been
established to protect the health and safety of Township residents from such events:
1. Application Requirements
The following application requirements must be met, in addition to other application
requirements of this Ordinance:
(a) Environmental Impact Report. A report shall be provided that evaluates the likely
adverse environmental and health, safety and welfare impacts from a proposed
facility or equipment, and any feasible and prudent alternative locations,
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 376
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
techniques, and methods. The report shall address any secondary or cumulative
impacts from any related facilities, processes or activities. The minimum contents
of this report shall include:
1) Name(s) and address(es) of person(s) or firm(s) responsible for
preparation of the impact assessment and a brief statement of their
qualifications.
2) An aerial photograph and narrative illustrating the entire site, areas within
one-half (1/2) mile of the site, adjacent uses, zoning, public roadways,
utilities, significant woodlands, soils types, wetlands and floodplains,
drainageways and general topography.
3) A conceptual site plan illustrating a general layout of proposed facilities,
and describing the proposed uses, facilities and project phasing. A detailed
description of any treatment or processing to be done on the site and at any
other related locations within the Township must be included.
4) A description of the extent of compatibility between the proposed uses,
existing land uses in the area surrounding the site, and the goals,
objectives and future land uses included in the Township Master Plan.
5) A description of any potential increases in light, noise, air, water or other
pollution levels, including anticipated methods of compliance with
established environmental standards.
6) Results of the required air dispersion model [see subsection (b) below]
shall be provided, along with the following documentation:
a) The maximum concentration of hydrogen sulfide gas to be
contained in or the flow through any pipeline, facility or equipment
during its lifetime; and
b) The estimated volume or rate of hydrogen sulfide that would enter
the atmosphere in the event of a credible release.
c) A detailed description of any credible accidental or deliberate
releases reasonably possible as a result of the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair, monitoring or termination, closure,
abandonment and removal of any facility, equipment or of the
proposed facility.
d) A safety study for any facility, or equipment to be used in the
system, certifying that credible accidental releases for the site will
not result in health hazards in areas accessible to the public.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 377
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
e) Proof that the system and structures, or any use thereof, shall meet
any hydrogen sulfide public health and safety criteria or standards
of federal or state public health officials.
f) A detailed description of all proposed monitoring and warning
systems, equipment, or devices, including but not limited to
operation, installation and maintenance, and how information from
such equipment will be made known to the public.
7) A detailed statement of measures to be taken to control truck traffic, noise,
vibration, dust, odors, erosion, emissions, discharges, releases or other
adverse environmental impacts.
8) A description of any impacts expected to wildlife areas, lakes, streams,
ponds and regulated wetlands. Documentation by a qualified wetland
specialist shall be required where a regulated wetland may be impacted by
the proposed project. Conceptual mitigation or replacement measures
under consideration shall be described.
9) Methods of on-and-off site disposal of solid wastes shall be identified. The
information shall describe the types of hazardous substances expected to
be used, stored or disposed of on the site, general locations within the site
and methods of containment. A Pollution Incident Prevention Plan (PIPP)
shall be submitted with documentation of compliance with applicable
federal ands state requirements.
10) Describe the anticipated impact on police and fire protection. In particular,
describe the relationship of the use to municipal fire stations and the need
for any new facilities or equipment.
(b) Air Dispersion Model. An air dispersion model which evaluates the effects of a
credible release of natural gas on the general population shall be performed by an
independent consultant selected by and reporting to the Township. The applicant
shall be responsible for all costs associated with the required air dispersion
modeling. To be considered eligible for approval as a use subject to special
conditions, the results of the model must demonstrate that the proposed
processing facility, including any sweetening or compressing, does not present an
unacceptable risk to the public health or safety. The dispersion model shall be
consistent with the best available model or technique sanctioned by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR Sec. 68, for atmospheric
dispersion of turbulent, heavier-than-air gas releases.
Any proposed facility with an average predicted exposure at any point off the site
greater than 0.1 ppm for more than ten (10) minutes shall not be permitted. The
predicted exposure that occurs on the site shall comply with all Township,
County, State, and Federal laws and regulations.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 378
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
Sufficient information to conduct the air dispersion model analysis, including
equipment specifications and the volume, temperature, pressure, and chemical
composition of the gas being delivered to the facility shall be provided in the
application. If the information is unknown, the modeling will assume the gas
contains 10,000 ppm hydrogen sulfide, at 1800 psi, at a temperature of 70oF., at a
rate of 500 million cubic feet per day.
If the application contains information regarding the concentration of hydrogen
sulfide in the gas being delivered to the facility, such information shall be
determined using tests modeled and conducted in accordance with the American
Society for Testing and Materials Standard D-2385-66, the Gas Processors
Association plant operation test manual, GPA publication 2265-68, or other
methods as may be approved by the Township.
(c) The applicant shall submit proof of permits and approvals from all Federal, State,
and County agencies with jurisdiction.
(d) An application may be amended if the applicant obtains additional adjacent
property sufficient to contain the modeled release within the site boundary.
2. Exceptions
The permitting and application requirements of this Section shall not apply to oil or gas
wells that have been lawfully permitted under Part 615 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101, et seq. (“NREPA”) and injection wells
permitted under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 USC 300f et seq., for the disposal of
salt water or spent brine into the same formation from which it was withdrawn after
extraction of halogens or their sales, unless (1) a federal or state permit has been revoked
or terminated, or (2) hydrogen sulfide is present in the formation in quantities greater
than 100 parts per million. Further, even though a permit is not required under this
Ordinance for such activity, the owner or operator of the injection well must file a copy
of federal and state permits, applications and supporting documentation with the
Township.
3. Setbacks
In no instance shall any equipment or facility regulated by this Section be located less
than 1,320 feet from the site’s property line or leased area boundary, or less than 2,640
feet from the zoning district boundary of any AG, R-1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, R-M, R-2,
R-2-A, or OS District or property line of the nearest dwellings, schools, churches,
hospitals, nursing homes or care facilities or similar places where there may be a
concentration of population. No equipment or facility regulated by this Section shall be
located less than 660 feet from any wetlands or surface water.
4. Access
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 379
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
Any site regulated by this Section shall be directly accessible from a major thoroughfare
via a paved drive capable of supporting 50,000 pound vehicles. Additionally, the truck
haul route for transporting any natural gas or oil to/from the facility shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township.
5. Hours of Operation
Any facility regulated by this Section shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M.
6. Processing Facility Design and Construction Standards
All sweetening, processing, and compressing facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with the Canadian Standards Association standard CSA Z662-96, Oil and Gas Pipeline
Systems or by using alternative standards and design which exceeds the standards
contained in CSA Z662-96.
7. Number of Facilities and District
There shall be no more than one (1) facility for the processing of oil or natural gas in the
Township, and such facility may be permitted only in the IND, Industrial District.
8. Sulphur Storage
There shall be no open storage of elemental sulphur on any site regulated by this Section.
Storage of sulphur shall also comply with applicable building and fire code regulations.
9. Measurable Noise
Noise emissions of any facility regulated by this Section shall comply with the
requirements of Section 28.5, Environmental Performance Requirements.
10. Maximum Height
Any facility regulated by this Section shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, including
stacks at processing facilities.
11. Screening
Any facility regulated by this Section shall be adequately and continuously screened on
all sides in accordance with Section 26.11, Methods of Screening.
12. Monitoring and Alarm Systems
All processing facilities shall have an effective monitoring system capable of detecting
any release of natural gas containing concentrations of hydrogen sulfide in gaseous or
vapor form that exceed 0.1 ppm at the site boundary. Any such release shall trigger an
alarm which shall be transmitted to the Township emergency dispatcher, who shall notify
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 380
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
the Fire Department. The system shall also activate an alarm audible one (1) mile from
the site. The system shall be designed such that discontinuance of the alarm and warning
system can be performed only at the site. All monitors/sensors shall be maintained in
working order at all times.
Within thirty (30) days of any alarm, a report shall be provided by the Plant Operator to
the Township which shall include remedial actions taken to prevent the recurrence of the
event that triggered the alarm. The Plant Operator shall also maintain an ongoing record
of all emissions which trigger a response by the system, the cause of such emissions, and
the response and remedial actions taken to prevent a recurrence and make this record
available to the Township upon request. The Plant Operator also shall maintain a record
of the maintenance and testing of the monitors/sensors and provide a copy of the record
to the Township no later than January 10 of each year and immediately upon demand.
The monitoring system shall be effective to an accuracy of 0.1 ppm at a temperature
range of -20? F to 110? F. The monitoring system shall be designed to detect a release
effectively at the property line and at the point where a vertically oriented release from
the greatest of the processing equipment would fall to ground under average weather
conditions if groundfall is beyond the property lines or leasehold boundary.
Sensors shall be placed no more than one hundred linear (100) feet apart along the site
perimeter and at the boundary of the groundfall if it is beyond the perimeter of the site.
13. Emergency Preparedness and Evacuation Plan
The Plant Operator shall prepare and maintain an Emergency Preparedness and
Evacuation Plan acceptable to the Township. The Plant Operator shall be responsible for
all costs related to Emergency Preparedness Plans, Evacuation Plans, and the equipment
needed to implement the plans. The Plant Operator shall be responsible for all costs
associated with implementing the provisions of the Emergency Preparedness Plans and
Evacuation Plans, including lodging and food for persons displaced by an emergency.
14. Site Security
The Plant Operator shall provide and maintain the following security measures, at a
minimum in addition to the requirements for fencing and screening contained in this
Section:
(a) Any facility regulated by this Section shall provide adequate protective or security
fencing around the entire perimeter.
(b) All doors and gates shall be kept closed and locked.
(c) “Poisonous Gas” or other appropriate warning signs with reflective surfaces shall
be placed at fifty (50) foot intervals around the perimeter of the site.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 381
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
(d) Lighting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 28.8,
Exterior Lighting.
(e) In the event of a break-in or other security lapse, a bonded alarm system shall
automatically become operative, and operating personnel shall notify local law
enforcement officials.
15. Site Closure
Whenever any facility used to obtain, transport, or process natural gas or oil is not used
for a period exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days, all equipment, foundations, and
piping shall be removed. The site shall be graded and seeded.
16. Hydrogen Sulfide
Pipelines expected to carry or contain natural gas or oil with a concentration of hydrogen
sulfide greater than eighty (80) ppm during its lifetime shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) Such pipelines shall be setback at least 400 feet from the boundary of any AG, R-
1-E, R-1-H, R-1-S, R-1, R-M, R-2, R-2-A, or OS District and the property line of
the nearest dwellings, schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes or care
facilities or similar places where there may be a concentration of population.
(b) Such pipelines shall be subject to meeting the air dispersion modeling
requirements of this Section. The air dispersion model shall test the predicted
exposure from a worst-case event as determined by the professional consultant
preparing the model. Any proposed pipeline with an average predicted exposure
greater than 0.1 ppm for more than ten (10) minutes, measured at the 400 foot
minimum required setback, shall not be permitted.
(c) All pipelines shall be constructed to the standards set forth in the National
Association of Corrosion Engineers standard MR-01-75, 1996 edition, entitled
“Sulfide Stress Cracking Resistant Metallic Material for Oil Field Equipment,”
except when more rigorous construction guidelines are required for Class 4
districts in the Michigan Gas Safety Code, P.A. 165 of 1969, as amended, in
which case these standards shall apply.
(d) The pipeline operator shall cause an annual inspection of all transmission
equipment, using a camera or other equipment as needed, by an independent
consultant acceptable to the Township and provide a copy of the report to the
Township within three (3) calendar days of its receipt.
17. Drilling Operations
All drilling operations shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(a) Seismic testing shall be required during all drilling operations to assure
compliance with Section 28.5, Environmental Performance Requirements. These
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 382
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER
PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
SEC. 28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DEVELOPMENT
results shall be provided to the Township on a daily basis. Seismic testers shall be
licensed by the Township.
(b) All drilling mud shall be removed from the site daily and disposed of in
accordance with applicable laws and regulation.
(c) Drilling operations must comply with Section 28.5, Environmental Performance
Requirements, including restrictions regarding measurable noise and the
Plymouth Charter Township Noise Control Ordinance (Chapter 34).
(d) No drilling operation shall be allowed to operate between the hours of 10:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M.
SEC. 28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DEVELOPMENT
Open Space Preservation developments may be approved in the AG, R-1-E, and R-1-H Districts,
subject to the following standards and review procedures.
1. Purpose (as amended on 9/30/07)
The purpose of Open Space Preservation Development is to preserve undeveloped land.
The regulations in this Section are intended to accomplish this purpose by providing for
grouping of homes onto the most buildable portions of a site, so that the remainder of the
site can be preserved in an undeveloped state.
As used in this subsection, the term “undeveloped state” shall have the meaning given to
it in Section 506, of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Michigan Public Act 110 of
2006, as amended, which is a natural state intended to preserve natural resources, natural
features, or scenic or wooded conditions; agricultural uses; open space; or a similar use
or condition. Land in an undeveloped state shall not include a golf course but may
include a recreational trail, picnic area, children’s play area, greenway, or linear park.
Land in an undeveloped state may be privately held or dedicated to the use of the public.
2. Applicability
Property in the AG, R-1-E, R-1-H Districts are eligible to be developed according to the
Open Space Preservation development standards of this Section, and the other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance.
3. Review and Approval Process
(a) An application for approval shall be made by the owner or owners of any parcel
where use of an Open Space Preservation development is contemplated. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee determined by Township Board
resolution to cover the cost of evaluating the application.
(b) Proposals for Open Space Preservation development shall be reviewed following
the same procedures and include the same information used for conventional
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 383
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DEVELOPMENT
subdivision or condominium proposals. The application shall include the
following:
1) A site analysis, which identifies the character, structure and potential of
the site as it relates to this development option. The analysis shall include
maps and written analysis which shall identify, describe and quantify the
following features, at minimum: existing vegetation, topography at twofoot
contour intervals, water courses, drainage patterns, wildlife habitats,
roads and road rights-of-way, easements, soils (based on U.S. Soil
Conservation Survey or soil borings), MDEQ-regulated wetlands,
floodplains, woodlands and tree lines, rare and endangered species
habitats, and any additional features uniquely affecting the site.
2) A metes and bounds and legal description of the acreage comprising the
proposed Cluster Housing Development, including a disclosure of mineral
rights ownership.
3) Topographic survey, including natural and manmade features at a scale of
one inch equals fifty feet (1”=50’), with a contour interval not to exceed
two (2) feet.
4) Adjacent Land Uses: Indicate type and impact on adjoining lands,
direction and distance to community facilities; show transportation routes
related to site.
1. Drainage: Natural watershed (direction), drainage swales and
swamp areas.
2. Soils: Depth of topsoil and type of soils.
3. Vegetation: Locate and identify existing tree masses, locate and
identify specimen plant material and indicate type of ground cover.
4. Existing Conditions: Structures, utilities and circulation.
5. Special Features: Lakes, streams, ponds and wetlands, dramatic
views and significant natural, archeological, historical or cultural
features.
6. General Development Plan: A plan of sufficient detail to define the
proposed location of buildings, parking, interior circulation,
landscape areas and method of handling storm water run-off,
sanitary sewer and water facilities. (Scale 1"=50’ minimum).
7. Proposed method of ownership.
8. Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission or Township Board to make a determination
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 384
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DEVELOPMENT
concerning the desirability of applying the provisions of this
Section.
4. Permitted Density
The overall density of residential uses in an Open Space Preservation development shall
not exceed the density that would be permitted if the site was developed as a
conventional single family subdivision.
(a) The permitted density shall be based on the net buildable area of the site which
consists of the portions of the site that are not encumbered by regulated wetlands,
steep slopes, existing and proposed road rights-of-way, easements, existing
structures or lots, or other existing or proposed features that would prevent
construction of a building or use of the site for residential purposes.
(b) To assist the Planning Commission in determining net buildable area, the
applicant shall submit an parallel plan, consistent with State, County, and
Township requirements that shows how the site could be developed under
conventional zoning. The parallel plan shall meet all standards for lot area, lot
width, roadway improvements, and an area sufficient for storm water retention.
(c) Modifications permitted under Open Space Preservation Development that result
in reduction in land area dedicated to individual dwelling units shall be
compensated for by an equivalent amount of open space, which shall be
maintained and preserved in accordance with the standards specified in this
subsection.
5. Dimensional Standards
(a) Building Setbacks. The minimum front, rear and side yard setback for detached
single family structures and accessory structures thereto shall be based on sound
planning and design principles, taking into account the degree of compatibility
between adjoining uses, sensitivity to the characteristics of the site, the need for
free access for emergency vehicles, the need for adequate amounts of light and air
between buildings, and the need for proper amounts of open space for the use of
residents on the site.
(b) Minimum Lot Size. Open Space Preservation developments shall generally
comply with the following minimum lot size requirements:
ZONING
DISTRICT
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
R-1-H 12,000 square feet
R-1-E 20,000 square feet
AG 2.0 acres
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 385
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DEVELOPMENT
Variation from these lot size standards may be required or permitted where the
Planning Commission finds that either of the following circumstances exist:
1) A larger lot size may be required to satisfy established private well and/or
septic system standards.
2) A smaller lot size may be required to achieve the density permitted under
this Section.
(c) Distances between Buildings. Any detached single family structure (or accessory
structure thereto) shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any other detached
single family structure or accessory structure. The Planning Commission may
require additional distance between buildings to ensure compatibility with
adjacent residential developments.
(d) Floor Area and Height Standards. Buildings in an Open Space Preservation
development shall comply with the floor area and height standards for the district
in which the development is located.
6. Open Space Requirements
Open Space Preservation developments shall provide and maintain open space in an
undeveloped state, which shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Open Space Preservation developments shall reserve at least fifty (50) percent of
the parcel in an undeveloped state.
(b) Open space shall be located on the parcel to meet the following objectives:
1) To preserve distinctive natural features, scenic or wooded conditions, and
rural characteristics.
2) To minimize impact from development on wetlands, streams, and other
sensitive environmental areas.
3) To maintain open, rural character along main roads.
(c) In addition, no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the open space may be
developed with children’s play facilities, picnic facilities, trails, and similar
passive recreational facilities to satisfy the needs of future residents of the
development, provided that all such facilities shall be compatible in design with
other open space requirements and objectives.
(d) Required open space shall not include the area of any public or private road, the
area of any easement providing access to the site, the area of any commercial
recreation use.
(e) The required open space shall be set aside by the developer through an
irrevocable conveyance, such as a deed restriction, conservation easement, plat
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 386
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DEVELOPMENT
dedication, restrictive covenant, or other means that runs with the land, whereby
all rights to develop the land are conveyed to a land conservation organization or
other public body, assuring that the open space will remain undeveloped. Such
conveyance shall:
1) Indicate the proposed use(s) of the required open space.
2) Provide for the privately-owned open space to be maintained by private
property owners having an interest in the open space.
3) Provide maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule.
4) Provide notice of possible assessment to the private property owners by
Plymouth Township for the maintenance of the open space in the event
that it is inadequately maintained and becomes a public nuisance.
5) After approval from the Township, the developer shall record the
irrevocable conveyance with the Wayne County Register of Deeds to
provide record notice of the restrictions to all persons having or seeking an
interest in the property contained in the Open Space Preservation
development. Evidence that the document has been recorded shall be
provided to the Township prior to issuance of any permits to commence
construction.
7. Building Location
The Planning Commission shall review and the Township Board of Trustees approve
building and/or lot locations as part of the review process, in relation to topography,
existing trees or vegetation, proposed grading or landscaping, or other existing or
proposed site features or conditions.
8. Roads and Driveways
The amount of site disruption caused by road and driveway construction and associated
grading required for construction shall be minimized in Open Space Preservation
developments. Accordingly, Open Space Preservation developments shall comply, to the
greatest extent feasible, with the following standards:
(a) All open space developments shall provide improvements for streets as provided
in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations for the Township. All interior roads,
both those designed for the public and private, shall be constructed in compliance
with the existing construction standards as adopted by Wayne County Department
of Public Services for residential streets. The Planning Commission may waive
this requirement after review and recommendation by the Township Engineer
provided the proposed waiver shall not materially impair the intent and purpose of
this Section or the public interest.
(b) Roads shall follow existing contours to minimize the amount of cut and fill.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 387
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DEVELOPMENT
SEC. 28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
(c) Where sites include linear features, such as existing access roads, tree lines, and
stone rows, roads shall follow these features to minimize the visual impact of the
roads.
(d) Use of common driveways to serve up to two (2) units is permitted to minimize
the amount of paving and reduce the number of curb cuts onto public roads.
9. Stormwater Management
(a) Existing natural drainage shall be maintained to the maximum extent feasible.
(b) Retention and detention basins, where proposed or required, shall resemble
natural ponds with gradual slopes and shall be landscaped with plant material that
enhances the wildlife habitat.
10. Landscaping and Lawns
(a) Existing trees and other plant growth shall be preserved in areas where
disturbance is not necessary outside of the building envelope.
(b) Conversion of woods, meadows, and other natural features into lawns shall be
avoided, except where lawn areas are a part of the open space design or serve as
residential yard space.
(c) Landscaping shall be required as specified in Article 26.
11. Existing Structures
(a) When a parcel contains existing structures deemed by the Planning Commission
or Township Board to be of historic, cultural or architectural significance (such as
farm structures), and where these structures are suitable for rehabilitation, the
structures shall be retained.
(b) Adaptive reuse of existing structures for residential use or permitted accessory
residential uses shall be permitted.
SEC. 28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Purpose and Construction
The purpose of this Article is to establish a consistent set of standards for the design and
appearance of non-single-family residential structures, which includes buildings,
canopies, or gateway structures, within each zoning district of the Township, in order to
improve and enhance the overall visual character of the community. These standards are
also intended to encourage architectural variety within the context of creating a highquality
and harmonious aesthetic environment. This Article shall apply to new
construction as well as additions or alterations to existing non-single-family residential
structures. All new construction, and/or all additions or alterations to existing non-singleCharter
Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 387a
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
family residential structures that require site plan and/or administrative review shall
conform to the requirements of this Section. This Article shall be construed consistently
with the design and development requirements set forth in other Articles; however, to the
extent that there is a conflict between a provision of another Article and this Article, the
requirements of this Article shall control.
2. Building Massing and Form
(a) All buildings shall incorporate architectural features, including, but not limited to:
arches, arcades, porticos, cornices, peaked rooflines, or towers.
(b) Building walls over 100 feet in length shall be broken up by varying rooflines,
projections, recesses, wall insets, arcades, windows or faux windows,
architectural accents, and other details to create rhythm and interest in building
facades. Repeating patterns of changes in color, texture, and materials are
encouraged.
3. Facade Materials
(a) A minimum of 75% of all building facades, excluding the roof and windows, shall
consist of masonry products, such as: brick, cut stone, integral colored split face
block, cast stone, limestone, granite, or an equivalent material, as determined by
the Planning Commission or the Administrative Review Committee. The use of
aluminum metal panel systems may be permitted for buildings located within the
Industrial District or an industrial area of a nonresidential district, or for buildings
of a high-technology or industrial nature. Aluminum metal panel systems may
also be permitted for automobile dealerships. The Planning Commission or
Administrative Review Committee may modify the 75% exterior finish
requirement, if the proposed project is found to meet the objectives of this Article.
(b) The remaining maximum 25% of the building facade may utilize other materials
such as: fiberglass-reinforced concrete, cement board siding, stucco, polymer
plastic (Fypon), or EIFS, provided that such materials do not constitute the base
of the building.
(c) The facade materials for any screening structure, which may be used to screen
elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment, vents, ducts,
pipes, or other similar apparatus, shall complement the facade materials of the
principal building.
4. Color and Texture
(a) Variations in color shall be kept to a minimum.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 387b
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
(b) Building colors shall be in harmony with the surrounding area. Traditional colors,
such as: red, subtle earth tones, or neutral colors shall be used for the building
facade material. Roof colors shall complement the color of the building facade.
The use of high-intensity, metallic, or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
(c) Accent colors may be permitted if considered by the Planning Commission, or the
Administrative Review Committee, to be part of the overall architectural theme
for the project.
(d) Awnings located above windows and doors shall consist of a solid color and shall
not incorporate stripes or patterns. Dark colors, such as: dark brown, navy blue,
black, maroon, dark green, or dark red, are encouraged. Backlit or underlit
awnings are prohibited.
(e) Simple and uniform texture patterns within the building facade materials are
encouraged.
5. Roof Design
(a) Variations in the roofline are required to reduce the scale of the structure and add
visual interest.
(b) Rooftop equipment shall be screened from view by parapet walls or other
architectural elements which complement the overall building design.
6. Canopies
Overhead canopies for gasoline service stations or other uses shall be designed to be
compatible with the architectural characteristics and color of the principal building.
Canopies shall incorporate peaked, hipped, or gabled roofs with shingles, support
structures which match or simulate the materials of the principal building, and fully
recessed lighting fixtures.
7. Alterations or Additions to Existing Buildings
(a) For an alteration proposed to an existing building facade, the entire façade shall
be subject to this Article. However, the Planning Commission or the
Administrative Review Committee may limit compliance with this Article to only
the portion of the building affected by the proposed alteration, provided that the
materials and colors of the altered portion of the building complement the
materials and colors of the existing unaltered portion of the building.
(b) For an addition proposed to an existing building, the materials of the existing
portion of the building may be utilized for the proposed addition, provided that
the following conditions are met:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 388
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
SEC. 28.15 YARD GRADING AND DRAINAGE
SEC. 28.16 SIDEWALKS
1) The addition does not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the existing
building floor area.
2) The facade of the existing portion of the building does not consist of
materials or colors that would be prohibited under Section 3 or 4 of this
Article.
3) All new facades substantially constitute a continuation of the existing
facades relative to color, texture, size, height, and location of materials.
4) The visual effect is to make the addition appear as part of the existing
building.
(c) If the alteration or addition is proposed for an existing building located within the
Ann Arbor Road Corridor (ARC) District, then the entire building shall be
brought into full compliance with this Article. The Planning Commission or the
Administrative Review Committee may modify this requirement if the proposed
project is found to meet the objectives of the ARC District.
8. Façade Modification
The Planning Commission or the Administrative Review Committee may approve
alternatives to the exterior building design or materials, provided that the proposed
project is found to be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Article.
SEC. 28.15 YARD GRADING AND DRAINAGE
All yard and open space areas in the Township shall be graded in a manner which shall avoid the
ponding of stormwater unless said conditions have been designed to occur as part of a storm
detention plan which has been approved by the Township and such grading shall comply with
the engineering design standards for the Township prior to issuance of a permit.
Drainage channels and flood plains, which exist and which are indicated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Map, are essential for the
maintenance of the health and general welfare of the people of the Township. Any
encroachment, filling or destruction of these drainage channels or floodplains is a violation of
this Ordinance.
However, this shall not prevent the development of the property where adequate facilities,
determined by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement, Township Engineer and the
appropriate agencies having jurisdiction, have been provided to maintain the uninterrupted flow
of surface water (see Article 3, Floodplain District for regulations concerning drainage channels
and flood plains).
SEC. 28.16 SIDEWALKS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 389
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.16 SIDEWALKS
1. Sidewalks shall be installed along all public street frontages and within the interior of any
project which requires site plan or subdivision plat approval. Required sidewalks shall
meet the following standards:
(a) Sidewalks along street frontages shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width.
(b) Interior sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width. Interior sidewalks
adjacent to a parking space must be a minimum of six (6) feet in width.
(c) All sidewalks shall conform to the standards as established by the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement and the Township Engineer.
2. Sidewalk Feasibility Determination
(a) Engineering review. If the owner of one or more lots, units or parcels for which
sidewalk installation is required, believes the sidewalk installation is impractical
or not feasible, said owner may apply to the Township for a Sidewalk Feasibility
Determination and a review by the Township Engineer. A fee for this review shall
be paid in accordance with the Township’s adopted fee schedule.
The Township Engineer shall review the site to determine the feasibility and
practicality of the installation of a sidewalk as required by the Ordinances of the
Township. The review shall consider the following features of the site and the
surrounding area as well as planned future development:
1) The grade of any proposed sidewalk installation, especially referencing
pertinent structures and proposed future development;
2) The apparent and expected use by pedestrians:
3) Site specific features impacting the feasibility of the installation of a
sidewalk;
4) Future and/or expected utility, structure, road or railroad installations,
improvements or modifications;
5) A plan created by or utilized by the Township concerning the installation
of sidewalks, walking paths, bike paths or other pedestrian resources in the
area;
6) Alternative installations, i.e. elevated boardwalks, bridges or pedestrian
resources in the area; and
7) Any other engineering consideration or environmental feature likely to
impact the practicality and feasibility of the installation of sidewalks.
The Township Engineer shall determine whether the installation of a sidewalk on
any given site or parcel is practical or feasible based on the above factors
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 390
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.16 SIDEWALKS
SEC. 28.17 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS
(b) Payment in lieu of installation. Upon a determination that the installation of a
sidewalk on a particular lot, unit or parcel is impractical or not feasible, a sum
shall be paid, equivalent to the estimated cost of providing such sidewalk
improvement as determined by the following formula:
Sum equals the running feet of sidewalk multiplied by the dollar amount per
running foot as established annually by the Township Engineer.
The estimated amount shall be paid by the applicant to the Township in lieu of the
installation of the sidewalk based upon the recommendation of impractically or
unfeasibility.
(c) Escrow. Any monies delivered to the Township as payment in lieu of installation
based upon a determination of impracticality or infeasibility shall be separately
tracked in the Township general fund or a separately maintained sidewalk
installation/repair fund being utilized by the Township for sidewalk installations
only.
(d) Change in Conditions. Upon any change of the conditions used to make a
sidewalk feasibility determination, the result of which is a change in the
Township Engineer’s recommendation as to the practicality or feasibility of the
installation of a sidewalk(s), the Township shall utilize such payment in lieu of
installation to construct sidewalks on the affected sites or parcels.
SEC. 28.17 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS (added 4/9/09)
1. Definition
A fire apparatus access is defined as a road (this is a general term inclusive of all other
terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot land and access roadway)
that provides fire vehicles access to a facility, building and portions thereof.
2. Fire Apparatus Access Requirement
All buildings, facilities and all portions thereof shall be located within 150 feet of a fire
apparatus access. This distance shall be considered the maximum distance unless
otherwise modified and approved by the Township Fire Chief or his designee.
3. Additional Fire Apparatus Access Required
(a) Multiple Family Residential
Every multiple family residential development with more than 100 units must include a
second separate fire apparatus access. Subject to the approval of the Township Fire Chief
or his designee, the second access road may be permitted to be closed to public access,
and may be a locked, gated entrance accessible only by fire and emergency vehicles.
(b) Commercial and Industrial
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 391
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.17 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS
SEC. 28.18-SEC. 28.19 RESERVED
SEC. 28.20 BUILDING PROJECTIONS AND YARD
AREA ENCROACHMENTS
Every commercial or industrial development with a building exceeding 62,000 square
feet, including every facility, building, or portion of a building constructed or moved
within the Township, must include a second separate fire apparatus access in the
determination of the Fire Chief or his designee.
4. Length, Width and Turnaround Requirements
In addition to the requirements above, all access roads shall meet the following
requirements:
Length Width Turnaround Required
0-150 ft. 20 ft. None
151-500 ft 20 ft.
If a hydrant is present,
the width shall be
increased to 26 ft. for a
distance of 20 ft. on
either side of the hydrant.
Must have one of the
following turnarounds:
1. 120 ft hammerhead;
2. Y turn; or
3. 96 ft. diameter cul-de-sac
501-750 ft. 26 ft. Must have one of the
following turnarounds:
1. 120 ft. hammerhead;
2. Y turn; or
3. 96 ft. diameter cul-de-sac
Over 750 ft. Special Approval Required
5. Vertical Clearance
The vertical clearance above the fire apparatus access shall be a minimum height of
thirteen feet and six inches (13’6”) and maintained as such.
SEC. 28.18 - 28.19 RESERVED.
DIMENSIONAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
SEC. 28.20 BUILDING PROJECTIONS AND YARD AREA ENCROACHMENTS
1. Yard Area Encroachments
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 392
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.20 BUILDING PROJECTIONS AND YARD
AREA ENCROACHMENTS
Buildings. No building shall be erected, nor shall an existing building be altered, enlarged or
rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity with the regulations hereby established for the district in which such
building is located.
(a) Lot Area. No portion of a lot used in complying with the area, height or bulk
requirements of this Ordinance (such as required yard setbacks, open space
dwelling unit density, or lot coverage) in connection with an existing or proposed
building or structure) shall be used to satisfy the lot requirements for another use
or structure (including tents and permitted temporary structures) on the same lot.
(b) Access Drives. Access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards,
subject to the requirements of Section 24.4 of this Ordinance, so as to provide
access to rear yard, and/or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not
be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk,
terrace or other pavement serving a like function that is less than nine inches (9”)
above grade shall not be considered a structure and shall be permitted in any
required yard.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED YARD ENCROACHMENTS
PERMITTED BUILDING
PROJECTIONS
FRONT SIDE REAR
Decks, patios and terraces above
grade, porches, steps, unenclosed
and unroofed platforms, other
ground or first floor projections
12 feet but no
nearer than 20
feet to street
setback line
No nearer than 4
feet to side lot line
No nearer than 20 feet
to rear lot line
Fireplace/chimney 12 inches 12 inches 12 inches
Bay window 18 inches 18 inches 18 inches
Roof overhangs 18 inches 18 inches 18 inches
2. Building Projections
Outside stairways, fire escapes, porches, unenclosed and unroofed platforms, balconies, decks,
chimneys, bay windows and similar projections shall be considered as part of the principal
building and therefore shall not encroach into the minimum yard setback requirements, except as
provided in the table “Maximum Permitted Yard Encroachments”, above and for the following:
(a) All permitted building projections and encroachments shall conform with the
maximum lot coverage requirements of this Ordinance.
(b) Permitted fireplace or chimney projections into required setbacks shall not exceed
eight (8) feet in length.
(c) The permitted depth of roof overhang projections into required setbacks shall
include the gutter.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 393
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.20 BUILDING PROJECTIONS AND YARD
AREA ENCROACHMENTS
SEC. 28.21 FRONT YARD EXCEPTION
(d) Decks, patios, balconies and terraces nine (9) inches or more above grade,
permitted to encroach into required setbacks shall not be enclosed or covered by a
permanent roof structure. Front porches permitted to encroach into the required
front yard setback shall not be enclosed, but may be covered by a permanent roof
structure.
(e) Fire Department Review: The Chief Building Official shall refer all proposed
projections or encroachments to the Fire Department for review. Projections or
encroachments determined by the Office of Fire Prevention to present a public
health, safety or welfare hazard shall not be permitted.
SEC. 28.21 FRONT YARD EXCEPTION
Where a discernable building line has been established by the location of a majority of
residential or business buildings in a block built prior to the adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, no building erected or altered shall project beyond the setback of the established
building line, subject to the following:
1. The established building line shall be based upon the pattern of existing building
orientations and distances from the street setback for buildings with frontage in the same
block within two hundred (200) feet of the subject lot.
2. For developments subject to site plan review, the Planning Commission shall have the
authority to determine whether an established building line exists in a particular location.
The Chief Building Official shall make such determinations for building projects not
subject to Planning Commission review.
3. No building shall be required by this Section to be set back more than fifty (50) feet.
4. This requirement shall be waived where compliance would reduce the buildable width of
a corner lot.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 394
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.21 FRONT YARD EXCEPTION
SEC. 28.22 STREET SETBACK AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 28.22 STREET SETBACK AND RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS
1. Street Setback
In all districts there shall be provided a street setback as measured from the centerline of
the road for the purpose of determining the lot line for each specific district as follows:
(a) Thirty (30) feet from the centerline of all streets not otherwise mentioned.
(b) The edge of the private road easement or thirty (30) feet from the centerline of
any private road, whichever is greater, unless otherwise permitted by this
Ordinance.
(c) Forty-three (43) feet from the centerline of McClumpha, Wilcox, Canton Center,
Gottschalk, Ann Arbor Trail (from Mill Street to Eckles), Bradner (from
Schoolcraft to Five Mile), Powell (west of Ridge Road), Rollins, Keel (from Five
Mile to Helm), Helm, and Halyard.
(d) Fifty-three (53) feet from centerline of Ann Arbor Road (from Rocker Avenue to
General Drive).
(e) Sixty (60) feet from the centerline of Schoolcraft (from Wilcox to Five Mile),
Ann Arbor Road (from Joy Road to Rocker Avenue and east of General Drive),
Ann Arbor Trail (from Ann Arbor Road to Sheldon), Beck, Five Mile, Northville,
Joy, Lilley, Napier, North Territorial, Phoenix, Plymouth, Powell, Ridge,
Sheldon, Edward Hines Drive, South Main, Eckles, Powell (east of Ridge Road)
and Haggerty.
(f) One hundred and two (102) feet from the centerline of Schoolcraft (from Wilcox
to Eckles).
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 395
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.22 STREET SETBACK AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 28.23 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS
2. Required Right-Of-Way
In all districts, there shall be provided adequate street rights-of-way in accordance with
the Master Plan Circulation Plan for the Charter Township of Plymouth, and any
projected future rights-of-way requirements as may be established by the Wayne County
Division of Roads, Michigan Department of Transportation or other appropriate agency
with jurisdiction. No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure located
in any position which might circumvent the continuation or extension of any existing or
proposed street, or the widening of any street right-of-way to its ultimate required width.
SEC. 28.23 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS
The following exceptions to maximum height requirements shall be permitted:
1. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, silos, penthouses, stacks,
stage or scenery lofts, water towers, pumping towers, radio or television reception
antennae, monuments, steeples and cupolas accessory to the principal use(s) of the
building shall not be included in calculating the height of the principal structure.
Where an energy saving windmill is proposed as a free-standing structure, the height of
said structure shall be limited to the specified maximum height allowed within the
specific zoning district it is to be located.
2. Amateur (Ham) Radio Antennas
Amateur (Ham) radio antennas for reception and/or transmission shall be permitted in all
zoning districts, subject to the following:
(a) A maximum of one (1) such antenna shall be permitted per lot.
(b) The antenna shall be accessory to a principal use and building on the same lot,
and shall be located in the rear yard of the lot.
(c) The antenna shall have a maximum height of sixty (60) feet, and shall be set back
from all lot boundaries a minimum distance equal to its height.
3. Wireless Communications Facilities
The height of wireless communication facilities as defined by this Ordinance shall be as
regulated by Section 28.11 of this Ordinance.
4. Mechanical Appurtenances
Rooftop mechanical appurtenances accessory to the principal use of the lot (such as
cooling towers, air conditioners, heating apparatus, dust collectors, filters, transformers,
satellite dishes and similar apparatus) may extend not more than five (5) feet above the
maximum permitted building height, subject to the following:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 396
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.23 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS
SEC. 28.24 LOTS ADJOINING ALLEYS
SEC. 28.25 CORNER VISIBILITY AND CLEAR
VISION ZONES
(a) Opaque screens or parapet walls shall be provided with sufficient height to
completely screen the apparatus.
(b) The screening device design shall be compatible with the architectural design of
the building.
5. Parapet Walls
Parapet walls may extend not more than five (5) feet above the maximum permitted
building height.
6. Public Buildings
The height of public or semi-public buildings, churches, cathedrals, temples, hospitals,
sanitariums, or schools shall not exceed fifty five (55) feet, unless otherwise permitted in the
district. If the height of any such building exceeds the maximum height allowed in the district,
then the building shall be set back from all lot lines a minimum distance equal to the required
yard dimensions concerned, plus not less than one (1) foot per foot of height in excess of the
maximum height allowed in the district.
SEC. 28.24 LOTS ADJOINING ALLEYS
In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins a dedicated alley or lane, for the purpose of applying
lot area requirements of this Ordinance, one-half (1/2) of the width of such alley abutting the lot
shall be considered as part of such lot.
SEC. 28.25 CORNER VISIBILITY AND CLEAR VISION ZONES
No wall, fence, planting or other obstruction shall be established or maintained or planted on any
lot which creates a public hazard and which will unreasonably obstruct or interfere with traffic
visibility on a curve or at any street intersection.
1. Standards
Clear vision zones shall be provided as follows:
(a) Intersecting Streets or Roads. The clear vision zones shall consist of triangular
areas defined by the street setback lines and a line connecting two points located
on the street setback lines set back a distance of twenty (20) feet from their point
of intersection.
(b) Intersection of a Driveway and a Street or Road. The clear vision zones shall
consist of triangular areas defined by the street setback line, the access easement
line (or edge of driveway pavement where no easement is provided), and a line
connecting two points located on these lines set back a distance of ten (10) feet
from their point of intersection.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 397
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.25 CORNER VISIBILITY AND CLEAR
VISION ZONES
SEC. 28.26 ESTABLISHED SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
PATTERN PRESERVATION
2. Vision Obstructions Prohibited
Within these clear vision zones, the area extending from a height of thirty (30) inches
above grade to six (6) feet above grade shall remain clear and unobstructed, with the
intent of permitting clear visibility for pedestrians and motorists. Shade trees up to thirty
(30) inches in caliper, provided that all branches are at least six (6) feet in height above
the ground and non-obscuring streetscape elements which do not obstruct vision, such as
individual brick piers, and non-obscuring fencing, may be permitted within the clear
vision zone.
3. Additional Requirements
A larger clear vision area may be required where determined to be necessary by the
Planning Commission in view of anticipated traffic volumes, traffic speeds, geographic
or topographic conditions, or a traffic engineering analysis using the standards of the
American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
SEC. 28.26 ESTABLISHED SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PATTERN
PRESERVATION
It is recognized that there are portions of the Township that have been platted and developed as
single family residential subdivisions with lots of width or area, or both, which exceed the
minimum dimensions required by this Ordinance under Article 20. Over time, these subdivision
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 398
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.26 ESTABLISHED SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
PATTERN PRESERVATION
SEC. 28.27 RESIDENTIAL NONCONFORMING LOT
HEIGHT LIMIT
SEC. 28.28-SEC. 28.29 RESERVED
SEC. 28.30 ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS IN
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
neighborhoods have matured and established a character of single family dwellings on a specific
pattern of lot width and area, resulting in a stable character consistent with the spirit and intent of
this Ordinance. To maintain the stability, established character, and quality of single family
residential life, and to protect property values and existing investments, while allowing some
flexibility, the following standards shall apply:
1. Lot Width
No subdivision lot zoned R-1, R-1-S, R-1-H, R-1-E or R-2 shall be divided to create a lot
width less than eighty (80) percent of its width existing as of the date of adoption of this
section; nor shall any lot be created which would have a lot width less than the average of
the two (2) adjacent lots (one (1) on each side) with frontage on the same side of the
street.
2. Public Street Frontage
A subdivision lot shall not be further divided unless it has frontage on a public street for
the entire minimum lot width required by Section 28.22.1, above.
SEC. 28.27 RESIDENTIAL NONCONFORMING LOT HEIGHT LIMIT
On any single family residentially zoned lot which does not meet the requirements of this
Ordinance for lot width or area, or both, and which shares a common side yard with one or more
lots occupied by an existing single family dwelling(s), the height of the proposed single family
building shall not be more than 190% of the average of the height(s) of the dwelling(s) on the
lot(s) sharing a common side yard.
SEC. 28.28 – 28.29 RESERVED
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 28.30 ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS
In business and industrial districts, accessory buildings and uses may occupy any of the ground
area which the principal buildings are permitted to cover, provided such accessory building
meets any required setback, yard, or separation requirement for principal buildings. Accessory
buildings for parking attendants, guard shelters, gate houses, transformer shelters and similar
buildings may be located in the front or side yard in IND Districts.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 399
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.31 PLACEMENT OF AIR CONDITIONING
CONDENSER UNITS & SIMILAR ACCESSORIES
SEC. 28.31 PLACEMENT OF AIR CONDITIONING CONDENSER UNITS AND
SIMILAR ACCESSORIES
1. Placement
For the purpose of this Ordinance, air conditioning condenser units, heat pumps or
similar accessories installed outside of one and two family residential dwellings,
including the concrete slab upon which the condenser is mounted, shall be located in
accordance with the following:
(a) Front Yards. Such units shall be prohibited in any front yard area.
(b) Rear Yards. Such units shall be permitted in the rear yard, provided the unit is
located between and not less than five (5) feet from an extension of the side
building lines, and not more than two (2) feet from the rear building line or
overhang, as measured from the nearest surface of the unit to a vertical line
extended down from the building line or edge of the overhang, as measured from
the nearest surface of the unit to a vertical line extended down from the building
line or edge of the overhand.
(c) Side Yards. Such units shall be permitted in any side yards, subject to the
following:Adjacent to a Window: Where the side yard is located adjacent an
adjacent dwelling wall with a window (other than a basement window), the
following minimum separation distance between dwelling the adjacent dwelling
and the unit shall be provided:
DISTANCE BETWEEN
UNIT AND ADJACENT
DWELLING
LOCATION
0 - 30 feet Placement of the unit in the side yard is prohibited.
30 - 100 feet
Placement of the unit in the rear one-third of the
side yard not more than two (2) feet from the roof
overhang shall be permitted with written consent
from the adjacent property owner.
Greater than
100 feet
Placement of the unit in the rear one-third of the
side yard not more than two (2) feet from the roof
overhang shall be permitted
2) No Adjacent Windows: Where the side yard is located adjacent to an
adjacent dwelling wall with no windows (other than basement windows), the
following separation distance between the adjacent residence and the unit
shall be provided:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 400
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.31 PLACEMENT OF AIR CONDITIONING
CONDENSER UNITS & SIMILAR ACCESSORIES
DISTANCE BETWEEN
UNIT AND ADJACENT
DWELLING
LOCATION
0 – 100 feet
Placement of the unit in the rear one-third of the
side yard not more than two (2) feet from the roof
overhang nor less than ten (10) feet from the side
lot line shall be permitted with written consent
from the adjacent property owner.
Greater than
100 feet
Placement of the unit in the rear one-third of the
side yard not more than two (2) feet from the roof
overhang may be permitted.
Non-residential Development Placement: For purposes of this Ordinance, mechanical
equipment including air conditioning units, transformers, and generators, including the
slab upon which the equipment is mounted shall be located in accordance with the
following:
(a) Front Yards. Equipment shall not be located in the front yard area. The Planning
Commission may permit equipment to be located in the front yard upon finding
that such location will meet the spirit and intent of the zoning district in which the
building is located provided such equipment is not located closer than twenty (20)
feet from an adjacent residential dwelling or district.
(b) Side and Rear Yards. Equipment shall be permitted in a side or rear yard provided
such equipment is not located closer than twenty (20) feet from an adjacent
residential dwelling or district.
(d) Equipment shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjacent uses by
evergreen trees or shrubs, walls, or a berm. Alterative methods of screening may
be approved by the Planning Commission.
(e) Equipment shall not have measurable noise levels beyond the property line,
except in compliance with the Charter Township of Plymouth Noise Control
Ordinance (Chapter 34).
(f) The Planning Commission shall have the authority to waive or modify the above
requirements upon the determination that such waiver or modifications meets the
spirit and intent of the District in which the equipment is located.
2. Screening and Buffering
Each unit shall be screened by evergreen shrubs or trees placed in a manner that will reduce the
noise output of the unit, and screen the unit from the public right-of-way and the adjacent
residence. All planting shall be rooted in the ground, and portable planters shall not be
acceptable.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 401
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.32 RESERVED
SEC. 28.33 DANGEROUS OR OBNOXIOUS ANIMALS
OR INSECTS
SEC. 28.34 STORAGE OF DISABLED VEHICLES
SEC. 28.35-SEC.28.39 RESERVED
SEC. 28.40 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
SEC. 28.32 RESERVED
SEC. 28.33 DANGEROUS OR OBNOXIOUS ANIMALS OR INSECTS
The keeping, breeding or boarding of any animal that is considered dangerous, has caused injury
or is obnoxious because of noise or odor shall be prohibited. The keeping, breeding or boarding
of any animal or insect in any manner that results in a dangerous, injurious, obnoxious or other
nuisance condition because of noise or odor, the number being kept, bred or boarded or their
location in relationship to neighboring dwellings or other uses shall be prohibited.
SEC. 28.34 STORAGE OF DISABLED VEHICLES
The storage or parking of automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers or similar vehicles, equipment or
machinery that are wrecked, disabled, abandoned, worn out, unlicensed, or otherwise incapable
of movement under their own power, outside of a completely enclosed garage, barn or other such
structure is prohibited, and shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
SEC. 28.35 – 28.39 RESERVED
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
SEC. 28.40 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
Manufactured homes, portable buildings and similar temporary facilities used during
construction of subdivisions or other developments shall permitted, subject to the following:
1. The applicant shall obtain a permit from the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement. The permit application shall describe the size, location and use of the
temporary facility in sufficient detail to to determine compliance with the applicable
provisions of this Ordinance, and shall be accompanied by the application fee prescribed
by the Township Board.
2. The applicant shall post a bond in the amount of $500.00 to guarantee the removal of the
temporary facility. All temporary facilities shall be removed from the development site
within forty-eight (48) hours of completion of the final unit in the subdivision or
development.
3. There shall not be more than one (1) temporary facility for each builder in the
development.
4. All temporary facilities shall be parked off the paved portion of the subdivision or
development streets.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 402
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.40 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
SEC. 28.41 CARNIVALS, FAIRS, BLOCK PARTIES AND
SIMILAR USES
SEC. 28.42 TENT SALES OR SIMILAR USES
5. Outside storage of tools and small equipment is prohibited. All such items shall be stored
off site or inside the temporary facility.
6. Placement shall be subject to review and approval of the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement. Temporary facilities shall only be parked on lots that are vacant or
under construction, and as far from occupied houses as possible.
7. Installation of utilities and service for the temporary facilities shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement. To
provide for adequate safety, such utilities shall be secured during non-working hours.
SEC. 28.41 CARNIVALS, FAIRS, BLOCK PARTIES AND SIMILAR USES
Fairs, carnivals, block parties, and similar uses shall be allowed in any district where permitted
only upon administrative approval by the Chief Building Official and Township Supervisor,
subject to the following:
1. Such uses shall be sponsored by schools, churches, fraternal societies and similar
nonprofit organizations as an accessory use for the sole purpose of fundraising to support
their primary functions or objectives.
2. Such use and occupancy shall be temporary and/or seasonal.
3. Such use and occupancy shall not be detrimental to adjacent surrounding property.
4. Such use and occupancy shall not be disturbing to the public peace and tranquility.
5. Such use and occupancy shall not create undue traffic hazard and congestion.
6. Such use shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the
community as a whole or surrounding land uses.
7. Permit for such use may be granted for periods not to exceed eight (8) consecutive days,
and may be renewable for a maximum of eight (8) additional days.
SEC. 28.42 TENT SALES OR SIMILAR USES
Tent sales or similar uses may be allowed in the C-1, C-2, ARC, IND and TAR Districts only
upon administrative approval by the Chief Building Official and Township Supervisor. Such
approval shall be contingent upon the following:
1. Such use and occupancy shall be temporary. Permit for such use may be granted for
periods not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days, plus one (1) renewal, upon written
request, for not more than ten (10) additional days. Such permits shall not be issued more
than two (2) times per calendar year for any one (1) business, parcel or lot.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 403
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.42 TENT SALES OR SIMILAR USES
SEC. 28.43 GRAND OPENINGS, SPECIAL SALES OR
SPECIAL EVENTS
SEC. 28.44 SALE OF CHRISTMAS TREES
2. Such use and occupancy shall not impact adjacent and surrounding properties.
3. Such use and occupancy shall not disturb public peace and tranquility.
4. Such use and occupancy shall not create a traffic hazard and congestion.
5. Such use shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the
surrounding neighborhood or community as a whole.
SEC. 28.43 GRAND OPENINGS, SPECIAL SALES OR SPECIAL EVENTS
Grand openings, special sales or special events may be permitted in a C-1, C-2, ARC, IND, OR
or TAR District or for any special land use in a Residential District only upon approval of the
Chief Building Official and Township Supervisor provided the following conditions shall apply:
1. Such use shall be temporary. Permit for such use may be granted upon written request for
periods not to exceed ten (10) days. Such permit shall not be issued more than two (2)
times per calendar year for any one (1) business, parcel or lot.
2. All merchandise offered for sale shall be a product(s) normally offered or sold by the
principal business or occupant of the subject business, parcel or lot.
3. Such use shall not impact adjacent or surrounding properties.
4. Such use shall not be disturbing to the public peace and tranquility.
5. Such uses shall not create a traffic hazard and congestion or exceed any height
restrictions within airport influence zones.
6. Such use shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the
community as a whole or surrounding lands.
7. Signs and lighting beyond the limits of this ordinance may be approved. Signs and
lighting of a flashing, blinking, alternating or intermittent type shall be prohibited. Signs
and lighting shall not be glaring or intrusive to neighbors.
8. Time limitations regarding hours of operation shall be placed on lighting, including the
use of searchlights, lasers or similar high-intensity light sources for advertising purposes.
At a minimum, such lighting shall be prohibited between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and
7:00 A.M.
Sec. 28.44 SALE OF CHRISTMAS TREES
Christmas trees may be sold without the use of a building in the C-1, C-2, ARC or IND Districts,
subject to obtaining an appropriate permit from the Township Clerk. Christmas trees may be
displayed and sold by churches, schools, or other non-profit organizations on property owned by
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 404
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.44 SALE OF CHRISTMAS TREES
SEC. 28.45 TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
SEC. 28.46 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING
such institution or organization in any district. All trees, parts of trees, signs and any other refuse
or debris resulting from this use shall be removed from the property not later than the 28th day of
December of the year the property is so used.
SEC. 28.45 TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
The Planning Commission may permit the owner of any premises in commercial or industrial
districts to erect a temporary pre-constructed building or prefabricated structure or a building
having the appearance of being temporary in nature, subject to the following:
1. The building or structure shall not be objectionable because of design, material or
workmanship, or out of character with adjoining properties.
2. The Commission shall condition any permit on a specific time limitation and shall require
a cash bond to be posted to guarantee the removal of the structure at the expiration of the
permit.
3. The Commission may permit an extension of the time limit when applied for in writing
prior to the expiration date of the approval, provided that the Commission finds the
circumstance involved in the original approval to still be valid and that the spirit and
intent of this Ordinance would not be impaired by such extension.
SEC. 28.46 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING
1. Parking of recreational vehicles, campers, motor homes, snowmobiles, boats, accessory
trailers or other recreational apparatus, is permitted in the rear yard of single family
residences, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) The recreational vehicle or apparatus must be owned or leased by the persons
occupying the principal residence of the and where the vehicle or apparatus will
be parked. Persons other than the owners or leasers of the land where the vehicle
or apparatus will be parked may obtain a permit from the Department of Building
and Code Enforcement to park the vehicle or apparatus for a period not to exceed
two (2) weeks, or up to twenty-four (24) hours without a permit.
(b) The recreational vehicle or apparatus must be parked wholly within the rear yard,
within the side building lines extended and a minimum of twenty feet (20’) from
the rear property line. Where parked on a corner lot, a landscape screen shall be
provided in the side yard abutting the street. Said screen shall consist of evergreen
trees and deciduous or evergreen shrubs sufficient in height and quantity to
provide an immediate and continuing separation between the storage area and the
public right-of- way, without adversely impacting the visibility of vehicular traffic
flow on the street right-of-way or adjacent properties.
(c) Parking of manufactured homes on a single family residential lot is specifically
prohibited.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 405
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.46 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING
SEC. 28.47 VOTING PLACES
SEC. 28.48-SEC. 28.50 RESERVED
SEC. 28.60 ESSENTIAL SERVICES
SEC. 28.61 WIND ENERGY
2. Notwithstanding the requirements above, temporary parking of recreational vehicles,
campers, motor homes or other recreation apparatus, such as snowmobiles, boats and
trailers is permitted in the driveway of a single family residence prior to or after a trip for
the purposes of loading, unloading or cleaning provided the following conditions are met:
(a) The item(s) must be safely parked wholly within the driveway of the single family
residence of the person owning or leasing the parked item(s).
(b) Parking of the vehicle or other recreational equipment shall not encroach on, over
or above any sidewalk or other vehicular or pedestrian way.
(c) Temporary parking of the recreation vehicle or recreation apparatus as defined
above shall be limited to a maximum of three (3) parking occurrences within a
seven (7) day period. In addition, the combined number of hours the recreation
vehicle or recreation apparatus may be temporarily parked during the same seven
(7) day period shall not exceed 48 hours. A parking occurrence shall be defined as
any time the recreation vehicle or recreation apparatus is brought on to the
driveway from off site and parked.
SEC. 28.47 VOTING PLACE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be construed to interfere with the temporary use of
any property as a voting place in connection with a Township, school or other public election.
SEC. 28.48 – 28.59 RESERVED
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
SEC. 28.60 ESSENTIAL SERVICES
Essential services, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by
franchise, law or ordinance of the Charter Township of Plymouth. It is the intent of this Section
that all essential service structures and uses shall conform with the requirements of this
Ordinance wherever practicable and not in conflict with the specific requirements of the
applicable franchise, law or ordinance. Where such conflict exists, such essential services shall
be exempt from the conflicting provision(s) of this Ordinance. Wireless communication
facilities, as defined in this Ordinance, shall not be classified as essential services.
SEC. 28.61 WIND ENERGY (Added 10/16/11)
It is the purpose of this Section to promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of wind energy
systems to reduce or replace on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity. It is further the
purpose of this Section to standardize and streamline the review and permitting process for small
wind energy systems.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 405a
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.61 WIND ENERGY
Wind energy is a renewable and nonpolluting energy resource and that its conversion to
electricity will reduce dependence on non-renewable energy resources and decrease air and water
pollution that results from the use of conventional fossil-fuel inputs. Wind energy systems will
also enhance the reliability and power quality of the power grid, reduce peak power demands,
and help diversify the Township’s energy supply portfolio.
1. Definitions
The terms used in this section have the following meanings:
HEIGHT: For purposes of this section, height shall mean
the vertical distance from grade level adjacent to the base
of the structure to the center of the hub for a horizontal axis
wind turbine or the highest point of a vertical-axis wind
turbine.
ROOF-MOUNTED ENERGY SYSTEM: A type of
small wind energy conversion system that is mounted on a
roof with a height not greater than 15 feet above the
ridgeline of a pitched roof or parapet of a flat roof.
SHADOW FLICKER: Alternating changes in light
intensity caused by the moving blade of a Wind Energy System casing shadows on the
ground and stationary objects.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a
wind turbine, tower or axis, blades or blade system, and associated control or conversion
electronics primarily intended to reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
TOWER MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system
that is mounted on a freestanding or guyed tower attached to the ground, and not attached
to any other permanent or temporary structure.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: Any wind energy conversion device including all
associated control or conversion electronics.
2. Where Permitted
A tower-mounted Small Wind Energy System may be permitted as an accessory use in
the PL, TAR and IND districts, subject to special land use approval and the requirements
of this Section.
A roof-mounted Small Wind Energy System may be permitted as an accessory use in the
PL, TAR, IND, ARC, C-2 and MR districts subject to special land use approval and the
requirements of this section.
3. Review Procedures and Standards
Horizontal and Vertical Axis Systems
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 405b
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.61 WIND ENERGY
(a) Small Wind Energy Systems. The review process for any Small Wind Energy
System shall follow the special land use review process set forth in Section 2.7
SPECIAL LAND USES. One system may be permitted per site.
(b) General Standards. The following requirements are applicable to all wind energy
systems.
1) Noise. A wind energy system shall not generate a noise level of 55 dB(A),
measured at the property line, for more than three minutes in any hour of
the day. EXCEPTION: if the constant ambient sound pressure level
exceeds 55 dB(A), measured at the base of the wind energy system, a
decibel level of the ambient dB(A) plus 5 dB(A) shall not be exceeded for
more than three minutes in any hour of the day.
2) Shadow Flicker. The application for a wind energy system shall include a
shadow flicker analysis demonstrating locations where shadow flicker will
occur at sunrise and sunset, along with measures the applicant will take to
eliminate or mitigate the effects of shadow flicker on adjacent or nearby
affected properties.
3) Lighting. No wind energy system shall be artificially lighted unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
4) Appearance, Color, and Finish. The wind energy system shall be
maintained in the color or finish that was originally applied by the
manufacturer, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
All wind energy systems shall be finished in a non-reflective matte
finished color.
5) Signs. All signs other than the manufacturer or installer’s identification,
appropriate warning signs, or owner identification signs are prohibited. No
signs shall be permitted on the blades of a wind turbine.
6) Electrical Wires. All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system
other than wire necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower
wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and grounding
wires shall be located underground.
7) Compliance with Electrical Code. Building permit applications for wind
energy systems shall be accompanied by line drawings of the electrical
components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the
manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code.
8) System Access. The tower shall be designed and installed such that step
bolts, ladders, or other means of access readily accessible to the public are
located at least 8 feet above grade level.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 405c
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.61 WIND ENERGY
9) Sufficient Wind Resources. An application for installation shall require
documentation that the wind resources at the site are sufficient for the
operation of the proposed wind turbine. A one year study of sufficient
wind resources shall be included with the application
10) Safety. A wind energy system shall have automatic braking, governing, or
a feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or over speeding. All
wind towers shall have lighting protection.
11) Minimum Ground Clearance. The lowest point of the arc created by
rotating wind blades or other exposed moving component of a wind
energy system shall be at least 20 feet above ground (the highest point of
the natural grade within 30 feet of the base of the tower.
12) Type of Tower. Each stand alone small energy wind systems shall be a
monopole or monopole style of construction and shall not utilize guy lines.
13) Building Mounted Wind Energy Systems. Building mounted wind energy
systems shall be limited to roof mounting and shall not be mounted on any
other building wall or surface.
4. Standards Specific to the Type of Wind Energy System.
(a) Tower-Mounted Small Wind Energy Systems. The following standards are
applicable to tower-mounted small wind energy systems:
1) No minimum lot area
2) The maximum height is one foot of height for each 2.5 feet of setback
from the base of the tower to the nearest residential zoning district, or 125
feet; whichever is lower.
3) The minimum setback from any property line shall be the height of the
wind energy system plus 5 feet.
4) The minimum setback from any road or overhead utility right-of-way or
easement shall be equal to 1½ times the height of the wind energy system.
5) Tower-mounted wind energy systems may not be located in the front yard
of any lot.
6) Wind Energy Systems shall not be permitted in the area bounded by Joy
Road, Lilley Road, Ann Arbor Road, and Haggerty Road due to the
proximity of the Mettetal Airport.
(b) Roof-Mounted Small Wind Energy Systems. The following standards are
applicable to roof-mounted small wind energy systems:
1) No minimum parcel area.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 406
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.61 WIND ENERGY
SEC. 28.62 RESERVED
SEC. 28.63 LARGE SCALE INSTITUTIONAL USES,
INCLUDING LARGE SCALE CHURCHES
2) The maximum height is 15 feet above the top of roof elevation of the
building for any building located within 250 feet of a residentially zoned
district, or 150% of the building height, whichever is lower.
3) Roof-mounted wind energy systems shall be set back a minimum of 20
feet from the property line, or the height of the system above the top of
roof elevation multiplied by 1.25, whichever is greater.
4) May not be attached to the front of the building.
5. Site Reclamation.
Inoperable. A wind turbine shall be declared inoperable if it has not generated power for six (6)
months and shall be promptly dismantled and removed from the property.
(a) Unsafe. Any wind turbine that is found to present an imminent physical threat to
life or property shall be immediately shut down and repaired or otherwise made
safe and certified by a qualified engineer prior to resumption of operation.
(b) Removal and Site Restoration. The owner/operator shall remove all equipment,
above and below ground, and restore the site to its original condition when the
wind energy system is considered inoperable or unsafe.
6. Certificate of Insurance.
The owner/operator shall maintain liability and other insurances for the duration of the use
including decommissioning and reclamation of the property for any non-residential wind energy
system. The insurance carrier shall be instructed to notify all applicable governmental authorities
of any delinquency in payment of premiums. Failure to provide such insurance shall be
considered abandonment and full and sufficient grounds for termination of the special use
approval and disposal of the equipment as stated herein.
SEC. 28.62 RESERVED
SEC. 28.63 LARGE SCALE INSTITUTIONAL USES, INCLUDING LARGE SCALE
CHURCHES
Large scale institutional uses and large scale churches (as defined in Section 36.2) have negative
impacts on single family residential areas because of the scale of buildings, parking, traffic and
frequency of use, which are different from similar smaller uses and smaller churches that have
traditionally been compatible with single family areas. Because of these impacts, large scale
institutional uses and large scale churches are more compatible with non-residential districts,
subject to conditions which minimize these impacts. Large scale institutional uses, and large
scale churches are permitted as special land uses in zoning districts, in accordance with the
following schedule and conditions:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 407
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.63 LARGE SCALE INSTITUTIONAL USES,
INCLUDING LARGE SCALE CHURCHES
Each large scale use permitted as a special land use shall meet the following conditions in
addition to all other provisions of this Ordinance. These standards are intended to restrict large
scale uses to suitable locations, and to mitigate any adverse impacts of the uses on the
community.
1. The site shall have at least one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a major thoroughfare
with an existing or planned right-of-way of not less than one hundred twenty feet (120). All
ingress and egress to the site shall be directly onto such major thoroughfares.
2. The site shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile of interchange access to M-14 or
1-275, as measured along major thoroughfares.
3. All buildings, structures, and parking and loading areas shall be set back a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from any abutting residential zoning district. Such setback area shall be
heavily landscaped so as to create a complete visual and physical separation between the two
unlike land uses, forming an effective screen in compliance with the provisions of Article 26
of this Ordinance.
4. Traffic from events (including church worship services) and other large assemblies shall be
controlled by the institution or church, or by its agents, so as to not create congestion or
unreasonable delays on the public street. A schedule of expected frequency of events
(including church worship services) and assemblies, a description of the method(s) of
traffic control and a traffic impact study shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval after review and comment on the plan by the Township Police Department.
5. Associated uses on the site such as recreation centers, retreat facilities, conference
centers, schools (if not the primary use), convents, and others shall meet all requirements
of this Ordinance for such uses.
LARGE SCALE
USE
ZONING DISTRICT
PL AG R-1-E
R-1-H,
R-1-S,
R-1, RM
R-2 R-2-A OS
OSARC,
PUD,
OSARC
C-1 C-2
ARC,
PUD,
ARC
MR
VP,
OR
TAR IND
Other
PUD
Church S S S S S
School S S S S S S
Library S S S S S S
Community
Building
S S S S S S
Hospital S S S S
Convalescent
Home
S S S S
Mortuary S S S S
Municipal
Facilities
S S S S S S S S
S = Special Land Use
[Blank] = Not Permitted
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 408
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.63 LARGE SCALE INSTITUTIONAL USES,
INCLUDING LARGE SCALE CHURCHES
SEC. 28.64 STATE LICENSED CHILD AND ADULT CARE
FACILITIES
6. All parking spaces and aisles shall be screened from off-site view by any one (1) or a
combination of the following, in accordance with Section 26.11, Methods of Screening:
(a) Screening mound or berm.
(b) Dense evergreen screen.
(c) Solid wall with planting strip.
(d) Changes in grade through the use of retaining walls, or topographic features.
7. There shall be no outside loudspeakers or amplified sound outside of a totally enclosed
building.
8. Storage of buses, trucks, and maintenance equipment shall be entirely within a totally
enclosed building.
SEC. 28.64 STATE LICENSED CHILD AND ADULT CARE FACILITIES
State licensed residential facilities, and child and adult day care facilities (as defined in Section
36.2 and as licensed by the State of Michigan) shall be permitted in zoning districts in
accordance with the following table and development standards:
TYPE OF FACILITY
DISTRICTS
AG,
PL
R-1-E, R-1-H,
R-1-S, R-1, RM
R-2
R-2-A
OS,OS-ARC,
ARC, C-1, C-2,
OR, TAR
MR IND
Adult foster care family home P P P
Adult foster care small group home S S S
Adult foster care large group home S S
Foster family home P P P
Foster family group home P P P
Family day care home P P P
Group day care home S S
Child care centers S S S S S
P = Principal Permitted Use
S = Special Land Use
[Blank] = Not Permitted
1. Development Standards for Child Care Facilities With More Than Six (6) Children, as
Licensed by the State of Michigan:
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 409
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.64 STATE LICENSED CHILD AND ADULT
CARE FACILITIES
(a) A fenced, outdoor play area shall be provided and maintained, with a total area
equal to a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of per child at the
maximum licensed capacity of the facility. Fencing shall be decorative, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
(b) All child care facilities shall be registered with or licensed by the State of
Michigan where required, and shall comply with the minimum state standards for
such facilities, in addition to those standards specified in this Ordinance. Proof of
compliance shall be provided to the Township upon request.
(c) Child care centers located in a residential district shall be located on the exterior
of the district. The site shall abut non-residential zoning on at least one (1) side of
the lot. No such facility shall be permitted in the interior of a residential block.
(d) Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall be provided. Vehicles must be able
to easily circulate within and through the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off
area without impeding circulation on the site or traffic on nearby roads. Adequate
stacking space for the pick-up/drop-off area shall be provided. Parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with Article 24, Parking Requirements, Layout,
Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading.
(e) Group day care homes shall not exceed sixteen (16) hours of operation during a
24-hour period. The Township may place limits on the operation of a group daycare
home between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
(f) Such facilities shall be located at least fifteen hundred (1,500) feet from any other
state-licensed residential facilities or child or adult care facilities, as measured
from the nearest lot boundaries. The Planning Commission may permit a smaller
separation upon determining that such action will not result in an excessive
concentration of such facilities in the neighborhood.
2. Development Standards for Adult Care Facilities With More Than Six (6) Adults, as
Licensed by the State of Michigan:
(a) All adult care facilities shall be certified by the Michigan Association of Day Care
Providers (or other agency with jurisdiction) to ensure the safety and quality of
the care provided. Each facility shall comply with the operating standards outlined
by the Michigan Office of Services to the Aging, Michigan Association of Day
Care Providers, or other agency with jurisdiction. Proof of compliance shall be
provided to the Township upon request.
(b) Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall be provided. Vehicles must be able
to easily circulate within and through the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off
area without impeding circulation on the site or traffic on nearby roads. Adequate
stacking space for the pick-up/drop-off area shall be provided. Parking spaces
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 410
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.64 STATE LICENSED CHILD AND ADULT
CARE FACILITIES
SEC. 28.65 ELDERLY HOUSING
shall be provided in accordance with Article 24, Parking Requirements, Layout,
Standards, and Off-Street Loading and Unloading.
(c) Each facility shall provide adequate recreational facilities, including a usable
outdoor recreation area equal to a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet per
person at the maximum licensed capacity of the facility.
(d) Any fencing provided shall be decorative, subject to Planning Commission
approval.
(e) Maintenance of the facility and property must be consistent with the visible
characteristics of the neighborhood.
(f) Such facilities shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with the
requirements of Section 26.12.
(g) Such facilities shall be located at least fifteen hundred (1,500) feet from any other
state-licensed residential facilities or child or adult care facilities, as measured
from the nearest lot boundaries. The Planning Commission may permit a smaller
separation upon determining that such action will not result in an excessive
concentration of such facilities in the neighborhood.
SEC. 28.65 ELDERLY HOUSING
All types of elderly housing (as defined in Section 36.2) shall comply with the following:
1. Common outdoor recreation space for residents shall be provided, subject to the
following:
(a) The total area shall equal or exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of all
buildings in the project.
(b) Recreation space shall include areas for both passive and active recreation.
(c) If developed in phases, the recreation space improvements shall be completed in
proportion to the gross floor area constructed in each phase.
(d) Off-street parking areas, street rights-of-way or street setback areas, access drives,
perimeter yard setbacks and submerged land areas of a pond, lake, river or stream
shall not be counted as recreation space.
2. Private outdoor living space shall be provided for each independent or congregate
dwelling unit. Such space shall be located adjacent to the unit with direct access, and the
total area shall equal or exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the unit.
Assisted living elderly housing shall not require private outdoor living space.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 411
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.65 ELDERLY HOUSING
3. No housing for the elderly shall be converted to any other use without complying with all
provisions of this Ordinance in effect at the time of conversion.
4. All vehicular access to the site shall be from a paved collector or primary road classified
in the Township Master Plan. The Planning Commission may allow secondary access
from local streets. Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall be provided. Vehicles
must be able to easily circulate within and through the site to a designated pick-up/dropoff
area without impeding circulation on the site or traffic on nearby roads.
5. Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building entrance(s) to sidewalks along
adjacent public or private streets.
6. Minimum Building Separation
Where dwelling units change direction in a building grouping and such units are
connected or tied together by a gate opening or similar structure not more than six (6) feet
in width, such units shall be considered together as one (1) building. Separation distance
between buildings shall be subject to the following:
7. Independent Elderly Housing
The following additional standards shall apply to independent elderly housing (as defined
in Section 36.2):
(a) All dwelling units shall meet the following minimum floor area requirements:
UNIT TYPE MINIMUM FLOOR AREA
Studio or Efficiency 400 square feet
1 bedroom 600 square feet
2 or more bedrooms 800 square feet
(b) Meeting and activity facilities, laundry rooms and similar accessory facilities for
occupants and their guests shall be permitted.
BUILDING RELATIONSHIP MINIMUM BUILDING SEPARATION
Front to Front 70.0 feet
Front to Side 50.0 feet
Side to Side 20.0 feet
Side to Rear 50.0 feet
Front to Rear 70.0 feet
Rear to Rear 70.0 feet
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 412
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.65 ELDERLY HOUSING
SEC. 28.66 – 28.69 RESERVED
SEC. 28.67 HOME OCCUPATIONS
(c) The maximum density of the dwelling units shall not exceed the density permitted
in the zoning district.
8. Dependent Elderly Housing
The following additional standards shall apply to dependent elderly housing (as defined
in Section 36.2):
(a) All dwelling units shall meet the following minimum floor area requirements:
UNIT TYPE MINIMUM FLOOR AREA
Studio or Efficiency 350 square feet
1 bedroom 500 square feet
2 or more bedrooms 600 square feet
(b) Meeting and activity facilities, dining room facilities, beauty or barber shops
exclusively for facility residents, laundry rooms and similar accessory facilities
for occupants and their guests shall be permitted.
(c) The dependent housing dwelling unit density shall be based upon the maximum
density permitted in the zoning district and the following:
TYPE OF
DEPENDENT
HOUSING
RATIO OF
PERMITTED DEPENDENT ELDERLY HOUSING UNITS
TO MAXIMUM PERMITTED UNITS IN THE DISTRICT
Assisted Living 2 units : 1 unit
Congregate Care 1 unit : 1 unit
SEC. 28.66 – 28.69 RESERVED
SEC. 28.70 HOME OCCUPATIONS
1. Permitted Home Occupations
The following home occupations shall be permitted in any residential dwelling, subject to
the standards of this Section:
a) Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring.
b) Painting, sculpturing, writing or other fine art.
c) Telephone answering or telemarketing.
d) Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, and lapidary work.
e) Tutoring, music lessons and dance lessons, limited to not more than four students
at a time.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 413
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.70 HOME OCCUPATIONS
f) Computer program development.
g) Salesperson's office or home office of a professional person, provided that no
sales or direct customer contact is permitted on the premises.
h) Repair of small instruments and appliances (such as clocks, computers,
VCR/CD/DVD players, stereo equipment, lamps, microwave ovens and similar
items) that do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor or
electrical interference.
(i) Similar home occupations, as determined by the Administrative Review
Committee.
2. Standards
(a) Home occupations shall not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the gross
floor area of the principal dwelling, and shall not be located in an accessory
structure.
(b) There shall be no visible change to the outside appearance of the dwelling.
(c) Traffic, parking, sewage, trash or garbage storage and removal or water use shall
not be noticeably different from typical homes in the neighborhood.
(d) The use shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes, toxic substance, odors or
electrical interference at levels greater than normally associated with a single
family home.
(e) Outside storage or display related to the home occupation is prohibited.
(f) Signs shall be subject to the requirements of Article 25, Sign Regulations.
(g) Only residents of the dwelling may be employed or involved in the home
occupation. No person living outside of the residence shall participate in the home
occupation.
(h) All shipping/receiving, deliveries, and other activities visible or audible from
adjacent properties or the street setback shall occur only between 8:00 A.M. and
6:00 P.M. The number of deliveries or other activities associated with the home
occupation should not exceed the number of deliveries normally associated with a
single family residences.
(i) No home occupation shall cause interior or exterior alterations of the dwelling
from its residential appearance, or the use of any equipment, machinery, supplies
or other materials that would change the fire rating of the structure.
3. Prohibited Home Occupations
(a) Private clubs, restaurants and similar eating or drinking establishments.
(b) Hospitals and other medical and dental clinics.
(c) Automobile, truck, recreation vehicle, boat machinery or small engine repair
maintenance, painting or storage, or similar activities that may create a nuisance
due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 414
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.70 HOME OCCUPATIONS
SEC. 28.71 BED-AND-BREAKFAST INNS
SEC. 28.72 VETERINARY CLINICS OR ANIMAL
HOSPITALS
(d) Stables, kennels, veterinary clinics or animal hospitals.
(e) Bed and breakfast operations, except as may otherwise be permitted in the district.
(f) Beauty parlors and barber shops.
(g) Retail sale of merchandise, except produce grown on the premises.
(h) Undertaking and funeral homes.
(i) Adult uses and sexually-oriented businesses.
(j) Gun or other weapon sales.
SEC. 28.71 BED-AND-BREAKFAST INNS
All bed-and-breakfast facilities (as defined in Section 36.2) shall be subject to the following:
1. The use shall be limited to the principal dwelling, and shall be prohibited from operating
within any permitted accessory structure, except for incidental storage.
2. The use shall be operated by the persons who own and occupy the premises, and be
incidental and subordinate to the principal single-family residential dwelling use.
3. The use shall not involve alteration or construction not customarily found in a residential
dwelling, or have any exterior evidence (other than a permitted sign) to indicate that the
residence is being utilized for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
4. The use shall not create a nuisance to adjoining residents by reason of noise, smoke, odor,
electrical disturbance, exterior lighting or creation of excessive traffic in the
neighborhood.
5. Rental sleeping rooms shall occupy a maximum of twenty five (25) percent of the gross
floor area of the dwelling.
6. Guests shall be limited to a maximum stay of fourteen (14) consecutive days, or thirty
(30) days in any one (1) calendar year. A guest register shall be maintained with all
guests legibly registered.
7. The use shall comply with all applicable state and local laws and regulations.
8. No parking shall be permitted within any required setback area, other than on an
approved driveway or within an accessory garage.
9. Cooking facilities and food service shall be limited to dwelling residents and guests.
SEC. 28.72 VETERINARY CLINICS OR ANIMAL HOSPITALS
Veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals shall be subject to the following:
1. Any building designed or constructed for such uses shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing medical care for household pets, and shall not be constructed or used as a
boarding establishment for household pets.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 415
Article 28: Special Provisions
SEC. 28.72 VETERINARY CLINICS OR ANIMAL
HOSPITALS
SEC. 28.73 KENNELS
SEC. 28.74-SEC. 28.99 RESERVED
2. If animals eligible for treatment at such establishment are kept overnight on the premises
for a period longer than regular professional business hours, then a full-time, duly
qualified attendant shall be stationed in charge of said premises.
3. Open or outdoor runs, kennels or pens shall be prohibited.
4. Rubbish and litter disposal areas and methods shall be designed to prevent obnoxious or
offensive conditions. In no case shall there be any harboring of vermin or decaying
matter on the premise.
5. The building and ventilation system shall be constructed to prevent any noise and odors
emanating from the area used for treatment and temporary keeping of household pets
from reaching the building exterior.
6. No building shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
7. No building for such uses shall be located on any parcel(s) or lot(s) adjacent to or across
a public roadway from any single family residential district.
SEC. 28.73 KENNELS
Kennels (as defined in Section 36.2) for the breeding and/or boarding (keeping) of animals shall
be subject to the following:
1. Kennels for the boarding (keeping) of animals shall have a minimum lot area of one (1)
acre. Kennels that provide animal breeding services shall have a minimum lot area of
five (5) acres.
2. Structures and outdoor areas where animals are kept, outdoor runs and exercise areas
shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent property line,
shall be screened in accordance with Section 26.11, and shall have impervious surfaces
and a system for runoff, waste collection and disposal approved by the Planning
Commission, Health Department approval shall be required for animal waste collection
and disposal facilities and procedures.
3. All structures and ventilation systems used for kennel purposes shall be constructed to
prevent noise and odors from reaching the building exterior.
4. Kennels shall meet the requirements of the Township Dog Ordinance, and all permit and
operational requirements established by regulatory agencies with jurisdiction.
5. Kennels shall be kept clean, and waste shall be treated and handled in such a manner as to
control odor and flies.
SEC. 28.74 - 28.99 RESERVED
END OF ARTICLE 28.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 28: Special Provisions
Amendments
Page 1 of 7
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXVIII (28)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 28: Special Provisions
Amendments
Page 2 of 7
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXVIII (28)
The following language was amended on 03/22/15
SEC. 28.3 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
2. Dimensional Standards
Such dwelling units shall comply with the minimum standards listed in Article 20 for the
zoning district in which it is located, including minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
minimum floor area, required setbacks, and maximum building height, except as
provided in Section 27.1 for nonconforming lots or parcels of record in the R-1 District.
SEC. 28.4 DWELLING LOCATIONS
3. Lot Width
Every single family dwelling shall be located on a lot, parcel or tract of land having a
width of not less than sixty (60) feet at the front or rear building line, whichever is less,
except as provided in Section 27.1 for nonconforming lots or parcels of record in the R-1
District.
The following language was amended on 10/16/11
28.32 RESERVED
28.33 DANGEROUS OR OBNOXIOUS ANIMALS OR INSECTS
28.34 STORAGE OF DISABLED VEHICLES
28.35-28.39 RESERVED
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
28.40 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
28.41 CARNIVALS, FAIRS, BLOCK PARTIES AND SIMILAR USES
28.42 TENT SALES OR SIMILAR USES
28.43 GRAND OPENINGS, SPECIAL SALES OR SPECIAL EVENTS
28.44 SALE OF CHRISTMAS TREES
28.45 TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
28.46 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OR CAMPER PARKING
28.47 VOTING PLACE
28.48-28.59 RESERVED
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
28.60 ESSENTIAL SERVICES
28.61 RESERVED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 28: Special Provisions
Amendments
Page 3 of 7
28.62 RESERVED
28.63 LARGE SCALE INSTITUTIONAL USES, INCLUDING LARGE SCALE CHURCHES
28.64 STATE LICENSED CHILD AND ADULT CARE FACILITIES
28.65 ELDERLY HOUSING
28.66 RESERVED
28.67 RESERVED
28.68 RESERVED
28.69 RESERVED
28.70 HOME OCCUPATIONS
28.71 BED-AND-BREAKFAST INNS
28.72 VETERINARY CLINICS OR ANIMAL HOSPITALS
28.73 KENNELS
28.74 RESERVED
28.75 RESERVED
28.76 RESERVED
28.77 RESERVED
28.78 RESERVED
28.79-28.99 RESERVED
SEC. 28.61 – 28.62 RESERVED
The following language was amended on 4/09/09
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
DEVELOPMENT RELATED PROVISIONS
28.1 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
28.2 DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND
28.3 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
28.4 DWELLING LOCATIONS
28.5 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
28.6 LANDFILL, GRADING AND EXCAVATION
28.7 WATER SUPPLY AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
28.8 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
28.9 WASTE RECEPTACLES
28.10 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
28.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND SERVICES
28.12 NATURAL GAS, OIL AND OTHER PETROLEUM RELATED FACILITIES
28.13 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION OPTION
28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 28: Special Provisions
Amendments
Page 4 of 7
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
28.15 YARD GRADING AND DRAINAGE
28.16 SIDEWALKS
28.17 - 28.19 RESERVED
DIMENSIONAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
28.20 BUILDING PROJECTIONS AND YARD AREA ENCROACHMENTS
28.21 FRONT YARD EXCEPTIONS
28.22 STREET SETBACK AND RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS
28.23 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS
28.24 LOTS ADJOINING ALLEYS
28.25 CORNER VISIBILITY AND CLEAR VISION ZONES
28.26 ESTABLISHED SINGLE FAMILY PATTERN PRESERVATION
28.27 RESIDENTIAL NONCONFORMING LOT HEIGHT LIMIT
28.28 –28.29 RESERVED
GENERAL PROVISIONS
28.30
ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS
28.31
PLACEMENT OF AIR CONDITIONING CONDENSER UNITS AND SIMILAR
ACCESSORIES
28.32 RESERVED
SEC. 28.17 - 28.19 RESERVED
DIMENSIONAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
2) Public Hearing: Any condominium subdivision plan submitted to the Township shall
contain the name and address of the applicant or his authorized representative to whom
notice of a public hearing shall be sent and no plan shall be acted on by the Commission
without affording a hearing thereon. On request of the Commission, notice shall be
published in a newspaper which circulates in the township, and sent by mail or personal
delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons
to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in
question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. The notice shall be given
not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will
be considered. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a
structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial
area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations,
one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single
structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas
owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations,
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 28: Special Provisions
Amendments
Page 5 of 7
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to
post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
1. Purpose
The purpose of Open Space Preservation Development is to preserve undeveloped land.
The regulations in this Section are intended to accomplish this purpose by providing for
grouping of homes onto the most buildable portions of a site, so that the remainder of the
site can be preserved in an undeveloped state.
As used in this subsection, the term “undeveloped state” shall have the meaning given to
it in Section 40, subsection (o), of the Township Zoning Act, Michigan Public Act 184 of
1943, as amended, which is a natural state intended to preserve natural resources, natural
features, or scenic or wooded conditions; agricultural uses; open space; or a similar use or
condition. Land in an undeveloped state shall not include a golf course but may include a
recreational trail, picnic area, children’s play area, greenway, or linear park. Land in an
undeveloped state may be privately held or dedicated to the use of the public.
The following language was amended on 5/12/16
SEC. 28.14 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Purpose and Construction
The purpose of this Article is to establish a consistent set of standards for the design and
appearance of non-single-family residential structures, which includes buildings, canopies, or
gateway structures, within each zoning district of the Township, in order to improve and
enhance the overall visual character of the community. These standards are also intended to
encourage architectural variety within the context of creating a high-quality and harmonious
aesthetic environment. This Article shall apply to new construction as well as additions or
alterations to existing non-single- family residential structures. All new construction, and/or
all additions or alterations to existing non-single-family residential structures that require site
plan and/or administrative review shall conform to the requirements of this Section. This
Article shall be construed consistently with the design and development requirements set
forth in other Articles; however, to the extent that there is a conflict between a provision of
another Article and this Article, the requirements of this Article shall control.
2. Building Massing and Form
(a) All buildings shall incorporate architectural features, including, but not limited to:
arches, arcades, porticos, cornices, peaked rooflines, or towers.
(b) Building walls over 100 feet in length shall be broken up by varying rooflines,
projections, recesses, wall insets, arcades, windows or faux windows, architectural
accents, and other details to create rhythm and interest in building facades. Repeating
patterns of changes in color, texture, and materials are encouraged.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 28: Special Provisions
Amendments
Page 6 of 7
3. Facade Materials
(a) A minimum of 75% of all building facades, excluding the roof and windows, shall
consist of masonry products, such as: brick, cut stone, integral colored split face
block, cast stone, limestone, granite, or an equivalent material, as determined by the
Planning Commission or the Administrative Review Committee. The use of
aluminum metal panel systems may be permitted for buildings located within the
Industrial District or an industrial area of a nonresidential district, or for buildings of
a high-technology or industrial nature. Aluminum metal panel systems may also be
permitted for automobile dealerships. The Planning Commission or Administrative
Review Committee may modify the 75% exterior finish requirement, if the proposed
project is found to meet the objectives of this Article.
(b) The remaining maximum 25% of the building facade may utilize other materials such
as: fiberglass-reinforced concrete, cement board siding, stucco, polymer plastic
(Fypon), or EIFS, provided that such materials do not constitute the base of the
building.
(c) The facade materials for any screening structure, which may be used to screen
elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment, vents, ducts,
pipes, or other similar apparatus, shall complement the facade materials of the
principal building.
4. Color and Texture
(a) Variations in color shall be kept to a minimum.
(b) Building colors shall be in harmony with the surrounding area. Traditional colors,
such as: red, subtle earth tones, or neutral colors shall be used for the building facade
material. Roof colors shall complement the color of the building facade. The use of
high-intensity, metallic, or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
(c) Accent colors may be permitted if considered by the Planning Commission, or the
Administrative Review Committee, to be part of the overall architectural theme for
the project.
(d) Awnings located above windows and doors shall consist of a solid color and shall not
incorporate stripes or patterns. Dark colors, such as: dark brown, navy blue, black,
maroon, dark green, or dark red, are encouraged. Backlit or underlit awnings are
prohibited.
(e) Simple and uniform texture patterns within the building facade materials are
encouraged.
5. Roof Design
(a) Variations in the roofline are required to reduce the scale of the structure and add
visual interest.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 28: Special Provisions
Amendments
Page 7 of 7
(b) Rooftop equipment shall be screened from view by parapet walls or other
architectural elements which complement the overall building design.
6. Canopies
Overhead canopies for gasoline service stations or other uses shall be designed to be
compatible with the architectural characteristics and color of the principal building.
Canopies shall incorporate peaked, hipped, or gabled roofs with shingles, support structures
which match or simulate the materials of the principal building, and fully recessed lighting
fixtures.
7. Alterations or Additions to Existing Buildings
(a) For an alteration proposed to an existing building facade, the entire façade shall be
subject to this Article. However, the Planning Commission or the Administrative
Review Committee may limit compliance with this Article to only the portion of the
building affected by the proposed alteration, provided that the materials and colors of
the altered portion of the building complement the materials and colors of the existing
unaltered portion of the building.
(b) For an addition proposed to an existing building, the materials of the existing portion
of the building may be utilized for the proposed addition, provided that the following
conditions are met:
1) The addition does not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the existing
building floor area.
2) The facade of the existing portion of the building does not consist of materials
or colors that would be prohibited under Section 3 or 4 of this Article.
3) All new facades substantially constitute a continuation of the existing facades
relative to color, texture, size, height, and location of materials.
4) The visual effect is to make the addition appear as part of the existing
building.
(c) If the alteration or addition is proposed for an existing building located within the
Ann Arbor Road Corridor (ARC) District, then the entire building shall be brought
into full compliance with this Article. The Planning Commission or the
Administrative Review Committee may modify this requirement if the proposed
project is found to meet the objectives of the ARC District.
8. Façade Modification
The Planning Commission or the Administrative Review Committee may approve
alternatives to the exterior building design or materials, provided that the proposed project is
found to be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Article.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 416
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXIX
SITE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
SEC. 29.1 PURPOSE?
1. The purpose of site plan and development approval is to determine compliance with this
Ordinance and Township standards and specifications, to ensure the orderly development
of the Township, proper pedestrian and vehicle ingress and egress for all sites, adequate
screening of certain uses, sufficient highway, street and parking capacity, to prevent the
impairment or depreciation of land values, investments or the general welfare, to afford
protection to related or adjoining uses, especially residential properties, and to prohibit
the establishment or maintenance of uses or the erection or alteration of structures or
other site improvements without proper attention to their location, arrangement,
appearance and functionality, and their relationship to adjacent properties, the
surrounding neighborhood and the Township as a whole.
2. It is the intent of this Ordinance that any control of architectural design exercised be the
minimum necessary to achieve the overall objectives of the Ordinance without
suppressing individual initiative and design creativity. Good architectural character is
based upon the appropriate use of sound materials and the principles of harmony and
proportion in coordinating the building elements.
3. It is also the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate the development of unsubdivided or
unplatted properties, multiple residences, and office, business, commercial, shopping
center, manufacturing, industrial and other sites and uses in a manner suitable for the
intended site and use. It is the further purpose of this Article to ensure that the design,
construction, engineering, and installation of such uses, structures and site improvements
would preserve and protect the needs of public safety, health and welfare, adjacent
properties and the surrounding neighborhood, and would be in correct and proper
proportion to the availability of municipal services, including fire and police protection,
surface water and sanitary sewerage drainage, water supply, traffic control and
maintenance services as furnished or may be required by the Township, and to preserve
and protect property rights.
SEC. 29.2 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES?
In carrying out the purpose of this Article, the following principles shall be given primary
consideration:
1. Site Design
The siting of all structures and all elements of the site design shall be harmoniously and
efficiently organized in relation to topography, parcel configuration, adjacent properties,
traffic operations, adjacent streets and driveways, pedestrian access, and the type and size
of buildings. The site design shall ensure that adequate light and air are preserved so as
not to be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the Township.
? SEC. 29.1 PURPOSE
? SEC. 29.2 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 417
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
2. Site Appearance and Coordination
Site elements and the relationship between the various uses on the site shall be designed
and located so that the proposed development is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious
with adjacent existing and prospective development of contiguous properties and the
general planning area. All site features, including vehicle and pedestrian circulation,
building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities, recreation facilities, and open space
shall be designed to coordinate with adjacent properties and uses.
3. Preservation of Site Features
The site design shall, to the extent feasible, conserve natural, cultural, historical and
architectural site features, including but not limited to architecturally or historically
significant buildings, archeological sites, wetlands, topography and wooded areas.
4. Impact upon Public Services
Utility services, including sanitary, water and storm runoff, shall not exceed the existing
or planned capacity of such services, and shall be developed in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare of the community. The proposed development shall be
designed and located so that public services, including streets and sidewalks, police and
fire protection, and public schools have sufficient capacity to properly serve the
development, and so that such services will not be adversely affected by the proposed
development.
5. Vehicular Access and Circulation?
The vehicular circulation system planned for the proposed development shall be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare in regards to on site circulation, onsite
parking, the overall circulation of the neighborhood and community, egress/ingress to
the site, vehicular turning movements related to parking areas, loading areas, street
intersections, street gradient, site distance and potential hazards to the normal flow of
traffic both on and off site.
6. Pedestrian Access and Circulation
The pedestrian circulation system planned for the proposed development shall be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare in regards to on site circulation and
the overall pedestrian circulation of the neighborhood and community.
7. Emergency Access and Vulnerability to Hazards
All sites and buildings shall be designed to allow convenient and direct emergency
access, and the emergency response needs of the proposed use(s) shall not exceed the
Township’s emergency response capabilities. ?
? SEC. 29.2 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 418
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
8. Landscaping, Screening and Buffering
Proposed landscaping, screening and buffer areas shall be appropriate and of such size,
location, height and quantity to insure that the proposed development will not be
objectionable to nearby development or properties by reason of noise, fumes, flash of
lights from automobiles or other lighting, interference with an adequate supply of light
and air, an increase in the danger of fire, or other public safety hazard. Screening shall be
provided in a manner that adequately buffers adjacent land uses and screens off-street
parking, mechanical appurtenances, loading and unloading areas and storage areas from
adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way.
9. Parking and Loading
The parking pattern proposed shall be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare in regards to size, layout and quantity, and the location of parking and loading
facilities will not be detrimental to nearby developments, properties or public streets.
10. Building Design and Architecture
Building design and architecture shall relate to and be harmonious with the surrounding
neighborhood in terms of texture, scale, mass, proportion, materials and color.
11. Exterior Lighting
All exterior lighting fixtures shall be designed, arranged and shielded to minimize glare
and light pollution, prevent night blindness and vision impairments, and maximize
security.
12. Adequacy of Information and Compliance with Ordinance Requirements
Site plans shall include all required information in a complete and understandable form
that provides an accurate description of the proposed uses, structures and site
improvements.
SEC. 29.3 SURVEYS AND PLANS?
Where the Planning Commission is empowered to approve or recommend approval of site plans
for the development, improvement or use of certain premises and sites under the provisions of
this Ordinance, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or additional information as may
be reasonably required by said Commission for the proper evaluation and consideration of the
matter. Additional information may include traffic studies to assess the off-site impact of
proposed plans on public roads, or studies to determine the environmental impact of the project
on natural resources.
SEC. 29.2 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES ?
SEC. 29.3 SURVEYS AND PLANS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 419
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
SEC. 29.4 APPROVAL REQUIRED?
1. Site plan and development approval shall be required for all uses in all zoning districts
except for one (1), single-family residence constructed on one (1) individual parcel or lot,
and for residential subdivisions subject to the Subdivision Control Act and the Township
Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Administrative Review: When the proposed development involves only minor exterior
changes or additions to an existing building, minor changes to an existing, previouslydeveloped
site, or re-occupancy of a vacant building, or is specified as a use subject to
administrative site plan approval in this Ordinance, the site plan review procedure may be
modified to allow the Administrative Review Committee to administratively review and
approve a proposed site plan. The site plan shall be accompanied by a review fee as
established by the Township Board. The proposed development shall comply with all
requirements of this Ordinance except where, in the determination of the Administrative
Review Committee, strict adherence to the requirements of this Ordinance would place
an undue hardship on the property owner because of existing conditions or the necessary
improvements would be far beyond the scope of the project proposed. The
Administrative Review Committee shall verify that the proposed development complies
with all requirements of this Ordinance, consistent with its determination.
The Administrative Review Committee shall have the authority to administratively
approve a site plan that would bring the site into substantial conformity with the spirit
and intent of the Zoning Ordinance requirements.
Where a mutual agreement cannot be reached, or where, in the opinion of the
Administrative Review Committee, the proposed development warrants a more intensive
review, the Administrative Review Committee shall require formal application for site
plan review by the Planning Commission.
SEC. 29.5 INFORMAL REVIEW OF CONCEPTUAL PLANS?
Applicants may meet with the Township Planner for informal review of conceptual site plans.
The purpose of this informal review is to discuss applicable standards and technical issues,
comment on the project’s compliance with the standards of this Ordinance, and determine the
appropriate type of review process. The applicant may also request input from the Chief
Building Official and other Township officials, agents and employees. Conceptual plans should,
at minimum, include the proposed use, building footprint, existing conditions, general site layout
and conceptual grading. Conceptual plan review comments are non-binding, and should be
considered by the applicant to be suggestions and recommendations only. A review fee may be
required for conceptual plan review, as determined by Township Board resolution.
? SEC. 29.4 APPROVAL REQUIRED
? SEC. 29.5 INFORMAL REVIEW OF CONCEPTUAL PLANS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 420
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
SEC. 29.6 APPLICATION?
Application for site plan approval shall be made by the title holder for the property, or the title
holder’s designated agent, on a form prescribed for this purpose by the Township Board. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee, as indicated in the schedule of fees adopted by the
Township Board of Trustees.
SEC. 29.7 APPLICATION INFORMATION?
All tentative and final site plans submitted to the Planning Commission shall contain such
information as required in the site plan and engineering check lists adopted by the Planning
Commission, and as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to make appropriate
determinations concerning conformance with the Purpose and Statement of Principles of this
Article and the requirements of this Ordinance.
SEC. 29.8 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION?
The Planning Commission shall have the duty and power to approve site plans, subject to
compliance with such modifications or conditions as it may deem necessary to carry out the
purpose of these regulations. The site plan review process shall be as follows:
1. Tentative Site Plan Approval
The Planning Commission shall review all site plan submissions to insure compliance
with the provisions and requirements of this Article and Ordinance. Tentative site plan
approval shall confer approval of the proposed layout and general landscape areas, and
shall establish any conditions necessary for granting final site plan approval.
(a) Technical Review. Prior to Planning Commission consideration, the site plan and
application shall be distributed to appropriate Township officials, agents, and
employees for review and comment.
(b) Planning Commission Consideration of the Tentative Site Plan. The Planning
Commission shall review the application for site plan approval, together with any
reports and recommendations and any public comments. The Planning
Commission shall then make a determination based on the requirements of this
Ordinance and the Purpose and Statement of Principles of this Article. The
Planning Commission is authorized to postpone action on the site plan, or
approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the site plan as follows:
(1) Postponement: Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a
site plan is not sufficiently complete for approval or denial, or upon a
request by the applicant, the Planning Commission may postpone
consideration until a later meeting.
? SEC. 29.6 APPLICATION
? SEC. 29.7 APPLICATION INFORMATION
? SEC. 29.8 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 421
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
(2) Denial: Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with the
standards and regulations set forth in this Ordinance, or would require
extensive revisions to comply with said standards and regulations, the site
plan shall be denied. If a site plan is denied, the meeting minutes shall list
the reasons for such denial. The site plan may be denied by the Planning
Commission upon failure of the applicant, or the applicant’s designated
representative, to attend two or more meetings.
(3) Approval: Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and other applicable Township codes and
ordinances, the site plan shall be approved.
(4) Approval Subject to Conditions: The Planning Commission may approve
a site plan subject to one or more conditions necessary to address minor
modifications to the site plan, ensure that public services and facilities can
accommodate the proposed use, protect significant natural features, ensure
compatibility with adjacent land uses, or otherwise meet the intent and
purpose of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include the need to
obtain variances or approvals from other agencies. ?
(c) Recording of Tentative Site Plan Action. Planning Commission action on the
tentative site plan shall be recorded in the Commission meeting minutes,
including any conditions or grounds for the Commission’s action.
2. Final Site Plan Approval
Final site plan approval shall be granted when all of the requirements of this Article and
Ordinance are met, and all conditions of tentative approval have been addressed. The
Planning Commission shall require and review all pertinent final plans, drawings and
written approvals and recommendations from any authorities having jurisdiction (Wayne
County Department of Public Services, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality,
Michigan Department of Transportation, etc.) to:
(a) Ensure that all conditions of the tentative approval have been met.
(b) Receive recommendation for approval from the Township Engineer for the
proposed water, storm and sanitary system and proposed grading and paving for
the project.
(c) Receive recommendation for approval from the Township Office of Fire
Prevention for the proposed fire protection systems and compliance with the
Township Fire Prevention Ordinance.
(d) Verify that the planning and construction of streets, roads and alleys, structures,
drainage, curbs, gutters, fences, screening walls, landscaping, walks and other site
improvements comply with the requirements and specifications of this Ordinance
and the Engineering Design Standards adopted by the Township Board.
? SEC. 29.8 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 422
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
(e) Verify that the use and site design shown on the final site plan are consistent with
the approved tentative site plan, except for changes that address any conditions of
approval or do not materially alter the approved site design.
(f) Verify that all applicable Ordinance requirements that apply to the site or
proposed use have been satisfied, and all necessary Township and all necessary
outside agency permits or approvals have been obtained by the applicant.
SEC. 29.9 REVISIONS TO APPROVED SITE PLANS?
1. Minor Revisions
Minor revisions to an approved site plan may be administratively reviewed and approved
by the Administrative Review Committee, provided that such changes do not materially
alter the approved site design, intensity of use or demand for public services. For
purposes of interpretation, the following shall be used as guidelines by the Administrative
Review Committee to determine of a minor change:
(a) The size of structures may be generally reduced, or increased by up to five (5)
percent provided the overall density of units does not increase.
(b) Movement of a building or buildings by generally no more than ten (10) feet.
(c) Plantings approved in the landscape plan may be replaced by similar types and
sizes of landscaping which provides a similar screening effect on a one-to-one or
greater basis.
(d) Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use.
(e) Slight modification of sign placement.
(f) Changes required or requested by the Township, County, State or Federal agency
for safety reasons.
(g) Other situations similar to those identified above.
2. Major Revisions
Major revisions to an approved site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
as an amended site plan.
SEC. 29.10 SITE PLAN APPEALS, RESUBMISSION AND REVOCATION
1. Appeals
The determination of the Planning Commission with respect to site plan and development
approval shall be final, and shall not be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
? SEC. 29.9 REVISIONS TO APPROVED SITE PLANS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 423
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
2. Resubmission
A site plan that has been denied may be revised by the applicant to address the reasons
for the denial and then filed as a new application for further consideration. The revised
and resubmitted site plan shall be subject to the same requirements and review
procedures as a new site plan submitted in accordance with this Article.
3. Rescinding Site Plan Approval
Approval of a final site plan may be rescinded by the Planning Commission upon
determination that the site has not been improved, constructed or maintained in
compliance with approved permits, site plans or any conditions of approval. Such action
shall be subject to the following:
(a) Public Hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been
held by the Planning Commission, at which time the applicant for site plan
approval, property owner or other designated agent shall be given an opportunity
to present evidence in opposition to rescission.
(b) Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the Commission with
regard to the rescission shall be made and written notification provided to said
applicant, property owner or other designated agent.
SEC. 29.11 EXPIRATION OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL?
Tentative and final site plan approval for any project shall each be effective for a period of three
hundred sixty five (365) days from the date of the approval. The Planning Commission may,
upon written request from the title holder, or his authorized agent received before the expiration
date, grant one (1) extension of tentative site plan approval and one (1) extension of final site
plan approval for any project for up to three hundred sixty five (365) days, provided that site
conditions have not changed in a way that would affect the character, design or use of the site,
and that the approved site plan remains in conformance with all applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
If construction has not commenced in conjunction with the issuance of a valid building permit by
the Department of Building and Code Enforcement within three hundred sixty five (365) days
from the date of final site plan approval, the site plan shall automatically expire, and any permits
issued shall be revoked by the Chief Building Official. Written notice shall be given to the
persons affected by the site plan expiration and permit revocation(s).
SEC. 29.12 DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH AN
APPROVED FINAL SITE PLAN?
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property for which final site plan approval has
been granted to develop, improve and maintain the site, including the use, buildings and all site
elements in accordance with the approved final site plan and all conditions of approval until the
? SEC. 29.11 EXPIRATION OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL
? SEC. 29.12 DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE
IN ACCORDANCE WITH AN APPROVED
FINAL SITE PLAN
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 424
Article 29: Site Plan and Development Approval
Amendments:
property is razed, or until a new site plan is approved. Failure to comply with the provisions of
this Article shall be a violation of the use provisions of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the
same penalties appropriate for a use violation. Noncompliance with the requirements and
conditions of the approved final site plan shall constitute grounds for the Planning Commission
to rescind site plan approval.
SEC. 29.13 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE?
To insure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and any conditions imposed there under, the
Township Planning Commission may recommend to the Township Board that a cash deposit,
certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit acceptable to the Township be deposited with
the Clerk of the Township to insure faithful completion of the improvements. For the purpose of
this Ordinance, improvements shall mean those features and actions associated with a project
which are considered by the Township Planning Commission to protect natural resources, or the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township and future users or inhabitants of the
proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, landscaping,
screening and drainage. Such improvements shall not include the project as a whole. The
performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of issuance of the permit authorizing the
activity or project. In a case where a performance guarantee is required, the Township shall
establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits will be made as work progresses in
reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements.
? SEC. 29.13 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 425
Article 30: Administration
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXX
ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 30.1 ENFORCEMENT?
The standards and requirements found in this Ordinance reflect obligations to the community at
large. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the authorized
officials, agents and employees of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement, except
where otherwise specified in this Ordinance.
1. Authorized officials, agents and employees of the Department of Building and Code
Enforcement shall have the authority to issue building permits, and certificates of
occupancy, inspect buildings, premises, and sites for compliance with approved final site
plans and any conditions of approval, and to perform such other functions necessarily
incidental to the enforcement and administration of this Ordinance.
2. Officials, agents and employees of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement
authorized to enforce this Ordinance shall, upon determining that any provision of this
Ordinance has been violated, take any actions authorized by this Ordinance necessary to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Officials, agents and employees of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement
authorized to enforce this Ordinance shall have the authority to order the discontinuance
of illegal uses of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings, structures,
additions, alterations, or structural changes; and discontinuance of any illegal work being
done.
4. Officials, agents and employees of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement
authorized to enforce this Ordinance shall not modify or vary the terms of this Ordinance,
nor grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order or regulation contained in
this Ordinance.
SEC. 30.2 ENFORCEMENT OF SUBDIVISION OR DEED RESTRICTIONS ?
Subdivisions and other developments may subject individual property owners within the
development to private covenants, restrictions, limitations or standards commonly referred to as
deed or subdivision restrictions, these are separate obligations of parties to a private contract, of
which the Township is not a party.
The Township shall not be responsible for the enforcement of private contracts, such as
subdivision or deed restrictions. If all conditions established by Township Ordinances are met,
the Township, through its Building and Code Enforcement Department, shall issue appropriate
permits for construction and other permitted activities. The Township shall not be responsible
for review and enforcement of subdivision or deed restrictions as part of this process.
? SEC. 30.1 ENFORCEMENT
? SEC. 30.2 ENFORCEMENT OF SUBDIVISION
OR DEED RESTRICTIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 426
Article 30: Administration
Amendments:
SEC. 30.3 DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH AN
APPROVED FINAL SITE PLAN?
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property for which final site plan approval has
been granted to obtain required permits and to develop, improve and maintain the site, including
the use, buildings and all site elements in accordance with the approved final site plan and all
conditions of approval until the property is razed, or until a new site plan is approved. Failure to
comply with the provisions of this Article shall be a violation of the use provisions of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use violation.
Noncompliance with the requirements and conditions of the approved final site plan shall
constitute grounds for the Planning Commission to rescind site plan approval.
SEC. 30.4 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY?
No land, building or part thereof, shall be occupied by any use until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued for such use by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
1. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any land, building or part thereof, which is
not in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. It shall be unlawful to change, expand or extend the use or occupancy of any land,
building or part thereof, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for such intended
use or occupancy.
3. It shall be unlawful to begin mass grading, excavation, construction, or the moving,
alteration, or repair (except ordinary and minor repairs) of any building or part thereof
(including accessory structures) valued at more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in area until a building permit has been issued.
4. A certificate of occupancy shall be required in addition to any other permit, certificate or
license required under the provisions of this or any other Ordinance. The certificate of
occupancy required by the State Construction Code enforced by the Township for new
buildings, changes of use, or alterations to existing buildings shall also constitute a
certificate of occupancy as required by this Ordinance.
5. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for existing lands, buildings or parts thereof if,
after inspection, the authorized official, agent or employee of the Department of Building
and Code Enforcement determines that the land, building or parts thereof, and the
occupation or use thereof, are in conformity with all Township Ordinances.
6. An accessory building, shown on the same application and erected at the same time as the
principal building, shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy.
? SEC. 30.3 DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH AN APPROVED
FINAL SITE PLAN
? SEC. 30.4 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 427
Article 30: Administration
Amendments:
SEC. 30.5 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY?
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for lands, buildings or parts thereof,
provided that the intended use or occupancy of the land, building or part thereof, is in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance. Whenever the plans for the land, building, or part thereof,
as set forth on the application, are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall be
the duty of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement, and its officials, agents and
employees, to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy within ten (10) days after the receipt of
an application. An official of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement shall place his
stamp or approval on the plans submitted to the Department, with the date of approval indicated
thereon. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the applicant and the second copy shall be
placed on file in the office of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
A temporary certificate of occupancy shall not remain in force for a period in excess of one
hundred eighty (180) days after the date set forth on the face thereof, and five (5) days after the
building or part thereof is fully completed and ready for occupancy. No temporary certificate of
occupancy shall vest any rights in the holder, successors, heirs or assigns. The temporary
certificate of occupancy shall immediately expire upon determination by the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement that the intended use or occupancy has ceased to be in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SEC. 30.6 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY?
An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made to the Department of Building and
Code Enforcement. The Chief Building Official may require applications for a certificate of
occupancy to be accompanied by a written statement and scaled plans or plats showing the
following in sufficient detail to enable the Department of Building and Code Enforcement to
determine whether the proposed or existing use or occupancy is in conformance with the
provisions of this Ordinance:
1. The shape, location and dimensions of the land; and sufficient survey data to locate the
land on the ground.
2. The area, size, height, shape, and location of all buildings, structures or parts thereof
existing, erected or altered on the land, or to be moved to the land.
3. The property lines of all lots or parcels constituting the land to which the certificate of
occupancy is to apply.
4. The right-of-way and pavement width and alignment of all abutting streets, alleys,
sidewalks, access easements and public places.
6. Scaled plans for any proposed structures not already on the land.
? SEC. 30.5 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATES
OF OCCUPANCY
? SEC. 30.6 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATES
OF OCCUPANCY
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 428
Article 30: Administration
Amendments:
7. The existing and intended use of the land and of all buildings, structures and parts
thereof.
8. Other information deemed necessary by an authorized official, agent or employee of the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement for the proper enforcement of this
Ordinance.
SEC. 30.7 SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY?
Before any certificate of occupancy shall be issued, an inspection fee shall be paid by the
applicant in an amount fixed by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees. Before reissuing
a second permit, the Department of Building and Code Enforcement may require the payment of
a second fee for inspection.
SEC. 30.8 INSPECTION OF BUILDING OR LAND USE ?
It shall be the duty of the applicant for any certificate of occupancy to notify the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement in writing of the time when the land, building, structure or part
thereof will be ready for inspection. Two (2) inspections shall be required on all buildings,
structures or parts thereof that are proposed for or under construction, or are altered, repaired or
to be moved to the land. The first of such inspections shall coincide with the first inspection
required under the State Construction Code enforced by the Township. Upon completion of
construction, moving, alteration or repair, or a change in the use of lands, buildings, structures or
parts thereof, an inspection shall be required when such land use or building has been completed.
Failure to notify the Department of Building and Code Enforcement of the time for such
inspections may result in the revocation of any permits or certificates of occupancy.
SEC. 30.9 BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE ?
Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued and the construction of the
whole or a part of which has been entered into pursuant to a building permit issued prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance may be completed and used in accordance with the plans and
applications on which said building permit was granted.
SEC. 30.10 BUILDING TO BE MOVED ?
Any building or structure, which has been wholly or partially erected on any premises, located
either within or outside of the Township, shall not be moved to and be placed upon any other
premises in this Township until a permit to use such building or structure, after being moved,
shall have been secured. Any such building or structure shall fully conform to all the provisions
of this Ordinance in the same manner as a new building or structure.
? SEC. 30.7 SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR CERTIFICATES
OF OCCUPANCY
? SEC. 30.8 INSPECTION OF BUILDING OR LAND USE
? SEC. 30.9 BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED
PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE
? SEC. 30.10 BUILDING TO BE MOVED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 429
Article 30: Administration
Amendments:
Before a permit may be issued for moving a building or structure, a building official of the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement shall inspect same and shall determine if it is in a
safe condition to be moved, whether it may be reconditioned to comply with the State
Construction Code and other Township requirements for the use and occupancy for which it is to
be used, and whether it will be of similar character with the buildings in the area where it is to be
moved. Providing these conditions can be complied with and suitable bond posted, a permit may
be issued for the moving of said building or structure. ?
? ? SEC. 30.10 BUILDING TO BE MOVED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 430
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXI
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SEC. 31.1 MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, REMOVALS?
There shall be a Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Board of Appeals which shall have five
(5) members appointed by the Township Board, subject to the following:
1. Membership
One (1) member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall also be a member of the Charter
Township of Plymouth Planning Commission. One (1) member may also be a member
of the Township Board. The remaining members shall be selected from among electors
residing in the Charter Township of Plymouth. An elected officer of the Township shall
not serve as Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals. An employee or contractor of the
Township Board shall not serve as a member or an employee of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
2. Removal
Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the Township Board for
nonperformance of duty or misconduct in office after written charges have been filed
with the Township Clerk, and after public hearing has been held on the charges by the
Township Board. Failure of a member to disqualify himself/herself from deliberations
and action on any questions, interpretations, appeals or other requests for action in which
he/she has a conflict of interest shall constitute misconduct in office.
3. Term
The term of each member shall be for three (3) years, except that of the members first
appointed, two (2) shall serve for two (2) years and the remaining members for three (3)
years. A successor shall be appointed not more than one (1) month after the term of the
preceding member has expired. All vacancies for un-expired terms shall be filled for the
remainder of the term.
4. Alternates (as amended 9/30/07)
Up to (2) alternate members may be appointed to serve on the Zoning Board of Appeals
in the same manner as appointments of regular members. An alternate may be called on
a rotating basis to serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals, with the same
voting rights as a regular member, in the absence of a regular member if the regular
member will be unable to attend one (1) or more meetings, or for the purpose of reaching
a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of
interest. Whenever an alternate serves as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals on a
case, the alternate member shall continue to serve in the case until a final decision is
made.
? SEC. 31.1 MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, REMOVALS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 431
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
SEC. 31.2 OFFICERS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE ?
The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall annually elect a Chair, Vice-Chair and
Secretary. The member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is a member of the Board of
Trustees shall not serve as Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
1. Rules of Procedure
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall annually fix and adopt rules and regulations to govern
its procedures.
2. Quorum
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals are present.
SEC. 31.3 MEETINGS ?
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chair, and at such other
times as the Zoning Board of Appeals may specify in its rules of procedure. The Chair, or (in the
absence of the Chair) the Vice-Chair, shall conduct the meeting, and may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. A record of the
proceedings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be a public record made by the Secretary and
filed and maintained in the office of the Township Clerk.
SEC. 31.4 DUTIES ?(as amended 9/30/07)
In accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall act
upon all questions as they may arise in the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, including
interpretation of the Zoning Map. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and take action upon
requests for variances from the strict provisions of this Ordinance, appeal of any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement charged with enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance, and all
other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
SEC. 31.5 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS?
The submittal of a complete and accurate application for appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative official from which the appeal
is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property by reason of facts stated in the certificate. Upon acceptance of the administrative
official’s certificate by the Zoning Board of Appeals, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by
a restraining order granted by the Circuit Court.
? SEC. 31.2 OFFICERS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE
? SEC. 31.3 MEETINGS
? SEC. 31.4 DUTIES
? SEC. 31.5 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 432
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
SEC. 31.6 FEES FOR APPEALS?
The Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Plymouth shall by resolution from time to
time determine fees applicable to proceedings before the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SEC. 31.7 RIGHTS AND REMEDIES CUMULATIVE?
The rights and remedies provided in this Ordinance are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies provided by law.
SEC. 31.8 REVIEW PROCEDURE?
Variance requests, use decisions permitted requiring approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals,
requests for interpretation of provisions of this Ordinance, including district boundaries or other
elements shown on the official Zoning Map, and appeals from the order, requirement, decision or
determination of an administrative official of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement
concerning the administering and enforcing of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance may be
taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Township,
County or State, to the Zoning Board of Appeals, in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Scope
The appellant shall file with the Department of Building and Code Enforcement and the
Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, within such
time as shall be prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals by general rule, but in no
event later than fifteen (15) days after the date of the order, requirement, decision or
determination from which the appeal is taken. The administrative official of the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
2. Public Hearing Requirement (as amended 9/30/07)
(a) Public Hearing Requirement for Variances (Use and Non-use)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent
or by attorney. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper which
circulates in the Township and sent by first-class mail or personal delivery to the
owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to
whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary
of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures within three
hundred (300) feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant
is located in the zoning jurisdiction. If the name of the occupant is not known, the
? SEC. 31.6 FEE FOR APPEALS
? SEC. 31.7 RIGHTS AND REMEDIES CUMULATIVE
? SEC. 31.8 REVIEW PROCEDURE
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 433
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
term “occupant” may be used in making notification. The notice shall be given
not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the appeal will be considered. The
notice shall:
1. Describe the nature of the appeal.
2. Indicate the property which is the subject of the appeal. The notice shall
include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street
addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses
currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other
means of identification may be used.
3. State when and where the appeal will be considered.
4. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning
the appeal.
(b) Public Hearing Requirements for Appeals Interpretations
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal or interpretation, give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the
appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or by attorney. A notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent by first-class mail or
personal delivery to the person requesting the interpretation or appeal. If the
request for interpretation or appeal involves a specific parcel, written notice shall
by sent by first-class mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom real
property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the
property in question and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred
(300) feet of the boundary of the property in question. If the name of the
occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification.
The notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the
interpretation or appeal will be considered. The notice shall:
1. State the nature of the request.
2. State the time, date, and place of the public hearing.
3. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning
the appeal or interpretation.
SEC. 31.8 REVIEW PROCEDURE
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 433a
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
3. Determinations ?(as Amended 9/30/07)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make no determination in any specific case until it
shall have conducted a public hearing. The concurring vote of a majority of the total
regular membership (not less than three (3) of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to act on any appeal, interpretation, non-use variance request or other matter
referred to it or upon which it is required to pass by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance. A concurring vote of a 2/3 majority of the total regular membership (not less
than four (4) members) of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be required to grant a use
variance. The grounds of every determination shall be stated, and the decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final.
(a) Appeal decisions shall be in accordance with Section 31.9, Appeals of
Administrative Decisions.
(b) Interpretation decisions shall be in accordance with Section 31.10, Interpretations.
(c) Variance decisions shall be in accordance with Section 31.11, Variances or
Section 31.12, Use Variances, as appropriate.
(d) Decisions regarding uses subject to Zoning Board of Appeals approval shall be in
accordance with the standards of Section 2.8, Uses Permitted Requiring Approval
of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(e) Rear yard setback reductions in single family residential districts shall be in
accordance with Section 20.2(bb).
SEC. 31.9 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS?
The Zoning Board of Appeals may take any of the following actions regarding an appeal from an
administrative decision of the Department of Building and Code Enforcement concerning the
administering and enforcing of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. To that end, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall have the same authority as the administrative official from whom the
appeal was taken, and may direct or deny the issuance of a permit:
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals may affirm the administrative order, requirement, decision
or determination.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify the administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Zoning Ordinance, so that the spirit of the
Zoning Ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse the administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination only after determining that it was arbitrary or capricious, was
based upon an erroneous finding of a material fact, constituted an abuse of discretion, or
was based upon an erroneous interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance.
? SEC. 31.8 REVIEW PROCEDURE
? SEC. 31.9 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 434
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
SEC. 31.10 INTERPRETATIONS?
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the provisions of this Ordinance in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the Township Master Plan. In the
interpretation and application of the provisions of this Ordinance, the minimum requirements for
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare shall be held to be adopted as and for said
provisions. This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing provision of law, other than those portions of or applications of
conflicting ordinances hereby repealed. In such instances when this Ordinance imposes a greater
restriction than is otherwise provided by law or by existing ordinances, rules, regulations or
permits, the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply and control.
The Board shall interpret the boundaries of the zoning districts, as shown upon the official
Township Zoning Map made a part of this Ordinance, in those cases where the street layout or
other physical features on the ground that are used as reference points for district boundaries
vary from the layout as shown on the official Zoning Map.
SEC. 31.11 VARIANCES ?(as amended on 9/30/07)
In accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have
the authority to vary or adapt the strict application of any of the requirements of this Ordinance,
where strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship due to the
conditions peculiar to the land, so that the land cannot be used or developed within the terms of
the Ordinance. Consideration of variance requests shall be in accordance with the following:
1. The appellant shall have the burden of proof to provide sufficient justification and/or
evidence to find that the request meets the criteria for granting variances, as specified in
Section 31.11.3.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals may determine that the granting of a lesser variance than
requested would provide substantial relief to the appellant and be more consistent with
the criteria for granting variances, as specified in Section 31.11.3.
3. No variance from the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance shall be authorized
unless the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the following facts and conditions
exist:
(a) Practical Difficulties. Compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions
governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or other dimensional
provisions would create practical difficulties, unreasonably prevent the use of the
property for a permitted purpose, or render conformity with such restrictions
unnecessarily burdensome. The showing of mere inconvenience is insufficient to
justify a variance.
SEC. 31.10 INTERPRETATIONS
SEC. 31.11 VARIANCES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 435
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
(b) Substantial Justice. Granting of a requested variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that
possessed by other properties in the same district and in the same vicinity, and
would provide substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property
owners in the district.
(c) Public Safety and Welfare. The variance will not endanger public safety or create
a public nuisance, be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, or materially
impair the intent and purpose of this Ordinance or the public interest.
(d) Exceptional Circumstances. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances
or conditions applying to the property in question, as or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties or other similar uses in
the same zoning district.
(e) Not a General or Recurrent Nature. The condition, situation or intended use of
the specific piece of property for which the variance is sought is not of so general
or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of general
regulations for such conditions or situations.
(f) The conditions resulting in a variance request are not self-created.
(g) The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed
sufficient to warrant a variance.
SEC. 31.12 USE VARIANCES?
Granting a use variance is a serious matter that if used improperly, could undermine the integrity,
purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance. A use variance shall not be used as a substitute for
the amendment process, but only under very unique circumstances which create unnecessary
hardship. A use variance may, on the other hand, provide a resolution to an existing land use
problem which would be within the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance. The use variance
may also, provide stability to an area that would otherwise become unstable. Any request for a
use variance should be weighed very carefully to insure that there are no other solutions to
resolve the problem and that the criteria for unnecessary hardship are met. In almost all cases a
use variance request will include an existing building that was constructed as part of a special use
approval and the previous use is no longer viable. The type and size of the existing building is
not conducive to the permitted or special uses for the existing zoning district (Example: a vacant
school building in middle of single family residential neighborhood). In addition the net worth
of the building would not make it economically viable to purchase the site and tear down the
building to build something that would be compatible within the zoning ordinance.
? SEC. 31.11 VARIANCES
SEC. 31.12 USE VARIANCES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 436
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to grant a variance from the use provisions
of this Ordinance after fully and carefully considering all of the facts of the case and upon
finding that all of the following conditions are met:
1. Prior to considering any requested use variance, the application shall be forwarded to the
Planning Commission for its review and comment. The Planning Commission shall
review the application, and report its findings regarding the proposal’s impact on the
Master Plan, compatibility with existing or planned uses on surrounding properties, and
other factors it considers relevant to the request.
2. The property cannot reasonably be used for any principal permitted or special use in the
zoning district in which it is located. The variance granted shall be the minimum
necessary to permit a reasonable use of the land.
(as amended on 9/30/07)
3. The landowner’s plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to
general neighborhood conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals must find that
circumstances common to the larger neighborhood are not applicable to the property
itself. There must be a showing of unnecessary hardship.
4. The use variance, if granted, would not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
The Zoning Board of Appeals must consider whether the intent and purpose of the
Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning District in which the site is located will be preserved,
and whether the essential character of the neighborhood will be maintained or preserved.
5. The hardship is not a result of the applicant’s actions. The Zoning Board of Appeals
must determine that the hardship that led to the use variance request was not self-created
by the applicant.
6. The variance would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the Master Plan.
7. The variance would be compatible with the existing or planned uses on surrounding
properties, would be within the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance and would
provide stability to an area that would otherwise become unstable.
SEC. 31.13 LIMITS ON AUTHORITY (as amended 4/09/09)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to alter or change the zoning district
classification of any property. No variance shall be made in connection with a special land use
decision by the Planning Commission, or planned unit development, single-family cluster or
residential unit development option decision by the Township Board.?
SEC. 31.13 LIMITS OF AUTHORITY
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 436a
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
31.14 APPEAL OF DECISION (as amended on 9/30/07)
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal to the Wayne
County Circuit Court. The Circuit court shall review the record and decision to ensure that the
decision meets all of the following requirements:
1. Complies with the constitution and laws of the state.
2. Is based upon proper procedure.
3. Is supported by competent material, and substantial evidence on the record.
4. Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
If the court finds the record inadequate to make the required review or finds that additional
material evidence exists that with good reason was not presented, the court shall order further
proceedings on conditions that the court considers proper. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings or may affirm the original
decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the court. The court may
affirm, reverse, or modify the decision.
An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the Zoning Board of Appeals certifies its
decisions in writing or approves the minutes of its decision. The court shall have jurisdiction to
make such further orders as justice may require. An appeal may be had from the decision of any
circuit court to the court of appeals.
SEC. 31.15 PETITIONS PREVIOUSLY DENIED (as amended 4/9/09)
Where a prior petition for an appeal applying to a specific piece of property or a part of such
property was denied by the Zoning Board of Appeals, a new application for the same appeal
shall not be accepted by the Zoning Board of Appeals for consideration for a period of three
hundred sixty five (365) days, unless the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that one or more
of the following conditions has been met:
1. There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered
during review of the application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body’s
application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the
application.
SEC. 31.14 APPEAL OF DECISION
SEC. 31.15 PETITIONS PREVIOUSLY DENIED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 436b
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
2. New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review
that might reasonably affect the decision-making body’s application of the relevant
review standards to the development proposed.
3. The new application is materially different from the prior application.
END OF ARTICLE 31.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
SEC. 31.15 PETITIONS PREVIOUSLY DENIED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
Page 1 of 6
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXXI (31)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
Page 2 of 6
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXXI (31)
The following language was amended on 4/9/09
SEC. 31.13 LIMITS ON AUTHORITY
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to alter or change the zoning district
classification of any property. No variance shall be made in connection with a special land use
decision by the Planning Commission, or planned unit development, single-family cluster or
residential unit development option decision by the Township Board.? ?
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 31.1
4. Alternates
Up to two (2) alternate members may be appointed to serve on the Zoning Board of
Appeals in the same manner as appointments of regular members. An alternate may be
called on a rotating basis to serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals, with the
same voting rights as a regular member, in the absence of a regular member, or for the
purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for
reasons of conflict of interest. Whenever an alternate serves as a member of the Zoning
Board of Appeals on a case, the alternate member shall continue to serve in the case until
a final decision is made.
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 31.4 DUTIES ?
In accordance with Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall act
upon all questions as they may arise in the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, including
interpretation of the Zoning Map. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and take action upon
requests for variances from the strict provisions of this Ordinance, appeals of any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the Department of
Building and Code Enforcement charged with enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance, and all
other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
Page 3 of 6
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 31.8
2. Public Hearing Requirement
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and
give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same within a reasonable time.
Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. Notice of
the hearing shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent
by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being
considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300)
feet of the boundary of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures
within three hundred (300) feet. The notice shall be given not less than five (5) nor more
than fifteen (15) days before the date the appeal will be considered. If the name of the
occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification.
Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if
a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased, by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each
unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more
than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the
manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary
entrance to the structure. The notice shall:
(a) Describe the nature of the appeal.
(b) Indicate the property which is the subject of the appeal.
(c) State when and where the appeal will be considered.
(d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the
appeal.
3. Determinations ?
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make no determination in any specific case until it
shall have conducted a public hearing. The concurring vote of a majority of the total
regular membership (not less than three (3)) of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to act on any appeal, interpretation, variance request or other matter referred to
it or upon which it is required to pass by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. The
grounds of every determination shall be stated, and the decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be final.
(a) Appeal decisions shall be in accordance with Section 31.9, Appeals of
Administrative Decisions.
(b) Interpretation decisions shall be in accordance with Section 31.10, Interpretations.
(c) Variance decisions shall be in accordance with Section 31.11, Variances or
Section 31.12, Use Variances, as appropriate.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
Page 4 of 6
(d) Decisions regarding uses subject to Zoning Board of Appeals approval shall be in
accordance with the standards of Section 2.8, Uses Permitted Requiring Approval
of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(e) Rear yard setback reductions in single family residential districts shall be in
accordance with Section 20.2.(bb).
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 31.11 VARIANCES ?
In accordance with Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have
the authority to vary or adapt the strict application of any of the requirements of this Ordinance,
where strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship due to the
conditions peculiar to the land, so that the land cannot be used or developed within the terms of
the Ordinance. Consideration of variance requests shall be in accordance with the following:
The appellant shall have the burden of proof to provide sufficient justification and/or evidence to
find that the request meets the criteria for granting variances, as specified in Section 31.11.3.
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals may determine that the granting of a lesser variance than
requested would provide substantial relief to the appellant and be more consistent with
the criteria for granting variances, as specified in Section 31.11.3.
3. No variance from the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance shall be authorized
unless the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the following facts and conditions
exist:
(a) Practical Difficulties. Compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions
governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or other dimensional
provisions would create practical difficulties, unreasonably prevent the use of the
property for a permitted purpose, or render conformity with such restrictions
unnecessarily burdensome. The showing of mere inconvenience is insufficient to
justify a variance.
(b) Substantial Justice. Granting of a requested variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that
possessed by other properties in the same district and in the same vicinity, and
would provide substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property
owners in the district.
(c) Public Safety and Welfare. The variance will not endanger public safety or create
a public nuisance, be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, or materially
impair the intent and purpose of this Ordinance or the public interest.
(d) Exceptional Circumstances. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances
or conditions applying to the property in question, as or to the intended use of the
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
Page 5 of 6
property that do not apply generally to other properties or other similar uses in the
same zoning district.
(e) Not of a General or Recurrent Nature. The condition, situation or intended use of
the specific piece of property for which the variance is sought is not of so general
or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of general
regulations for such conditions or situations.
(f) The conditions resulting in a variance request are not self-created.
(g) The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed
sufficient to warrant a variance.
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 31.12
3. The landowner’s plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to
general neighborhood conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals must find that
circumstances common to the larger neighborhood are not applicable to the property
itself.
The following language was added on 9/30/07
31.14 APPEAL OF DECISION
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal to the Wayne
County Circuit Court. The Circuit court shall review the record and decision to ensure that the
decision meets all of the following requirements:
1. Complies with the constitution and laws of the state.
2. Is based upon proper procedure.
3. Is supported by competent material, and substantial evidence on the record.
4. Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
If the court finds the record inadequate to make the required review or finds that additional
material evidence exists that with good reason was not presented, the court shall order further
proceedings on conditions that the court considers proper. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings or may affirm the original
decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the court. The court may
affirm, reverse, or modify the decision.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 31: Zoning Board of Appeals
Amendments:
Page 6 of 6
An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the Zoning Board of Appeals certifies its
decisions in writing or approves the minutes of its decision. The court shall have jurisdiction to
make such further orders as justice may require. An appeal may be had from the decision of any
circuit court to the court of appeals.
The following language was amended on 08/29/04
SEC. 31.8 REVIEW PROCEDURE?
2. Public Hearing Requirement
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and
give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same within a reasonable time.
Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. Notice of
the hearing shall be published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township and sent
by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being
considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300)
feet of the boundary of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures
within three hundred (300) feet. The notice shall be given not less than five (5) nor more
than fifteen (15) days before the date the appeal will be considered. If the name of the
occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification.
Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if
a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased, by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each
unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more
than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the
manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary
entrance to the structure. The notice shall:
(a) Describe the nature of the appeal.
(b) Indicate the property which is the subject of the appeal.
(c) State when and where the appeal will be considered.
(d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the
appeal.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 437
Article 32: Planning Commission
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXII
PLANNING COMMISSION
SEC. 32.1 COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENTS?
The Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members representing (to the extent possible)
different professions or occupations, who shall be appointed by the Township Supervisor, subject
to the approval of the Township Board. Commission members may be compensated at a rate
determined by resolution of the Township Board. One (1) commissioner shall be a member of
the Township Board, and one (1) may also be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
term of each member shall be three (3) years.
SEC. 32.2 REMOVAL (as amended 9/30/07)
Members of the Planning Commission may be removed by the Township Supervisor for neglect
of duty, or misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office, including failure of a member
with a conflict of interest to abstain from deliberations or voting on the matter, upon written
charges and after a public hearing held by the Township Board, and subject to the approval of the
Township Board.
SEC. 32.3 ORGANIZATION?
The Planning Commission shall elect a Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary from among the
appointed members, and shall create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. The
term of such officers shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. The Commission shall
adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations, which shall be a public record.
SEC. 32.4 POWERS AND DUTIES? (as amended 09/30/07)
1. The Township Planning Commission is hereby designated the Commission as specified
in Section 2, Act 285 P.A. of 1931, as amended, and shall perform the duties of said
Commission as provided in the Ordinance.
2. The Plymouth Township Planning Commission is hereby constituted and designated as
the Planning Commission to which reference is made in Public Act 168 of 1959, as
amended, and the Zoning Board to which reference is made in Public Act 110 of 2006, as
amended. The Planning Commission shall perform the duties of said commission or
board provided in these Acts, together with the powers and duties enumerated in this
Ordinance.
3. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to prepare, adopt and amend the
Township Master Plan, prepare and recommend adoption or amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance or subdivision regulations, and other such rights, powers, duties and
? SEC. 32.1 COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT
SEC. 32.2 REMOVAL
SEC. 32.3 ORGANIZATION
SEC. 32.4 POWERS AND DUTIES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 437a
Article 32: Planning Commission
Amendments:
responsibilities as are provided for in this Ordinance, the Township Subdivision
Regulations or other Township ordinances.
4. The Planning Commission shall at least once per year prepare for the Township Board a
report on the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance and
recommendations for amendments or supplements to the Ordinance.
END OF ARTICLE 32.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
? SEC. 32.4 POWERS AND DUTIES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 32: Planning Commission
Amendments:
Page 1 of 2
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXXII (32)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 32: Planning Commission
Amendments:
Page 2 of 2
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXXII(32)
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 32.2 REMOVAL
Members of the Planning Commission may be removed by the Township Supervisor for neglect
of duty or malfeasance in office, including failure of a member with a conflict of interest to
abstain from deliberations or voting on the matter, after a public hearing held by the Township
Board, and subject to the approval of the Township Board.
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 32.4 POWERS AND DUTIES?
1. The Township Planning Commission is hereby designated the Commission as specified
in Section 2, Act 285 P.A. of 1931, as amended, and shall perform the duties of said
Commission as provided in the Ordinance.
2. The Plymouth Township Planning Commission is hereby constituted and designated as
the planning commission to which reference is made in Public Act 168 of 1959, as
amended, and the zoning board to which reference is made in Public Act 184 of 1943, as
amended. The Planning Commission shall perform the duties of said commission or
board provided in these Acts, together with the powers and duties enumerated in this
Ordinance.
3. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to prepare, adopt and amend the
Township Master Plan, prepare and recommend adoption or amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance or subdivision regulations, and other such rights, powers, duties and
responsibilities as are provided for in this Ordinance, the Township Subdivision
Regulations or other Township ordinances.?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 438
Article 33: Amendments
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXIII
AMENDMENTS
SEC. 33.1 TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS (as amended 09/30/07)
The Township Board may, from time to time, on recommendation from the Township Planning
Commission, on its own motion, or on petition amend, supplement, modify or change the
regulations of this Ordinance, including the district boundaries or other elements of the Official
Zoning Map, in accordance with the Authority of Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended. Such
actions shall be subject to the following procedure:
1. Initiation of Amendment
Amendments to the provisions of this Ordinance may be initiated by the Township Board
or Planning Commission, or by petition from one (1) or more titleholders of property in
the Township. An amendment to the zoning district boundaries contained on the official
Zoning Map may be initiated by the Township Board or Planning Commission, or by the
titleholder(s) of property subject to the proposed amendment.
2. Application
An amendment to this Ordinance, except those initiated by the Township Board or
Planning Commission, shall be initiated by submission of a completed application form
to the Township. In the case of an amendment to the official Zoning Map, the following
information shall accompany the application form and fee:
(a) A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a
survey and location map identifying the subject property in relation to
surrounding properties.
(b) The name and address of the titleholder(s) of the subject property, and a statement
of the applicant’s interest in the subject property, if not the owner in fee simple
title.
(c) The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject property.
3. Amendment Review Procedure ?
The amendment and application materials shall be reviewed in accordance with the
following procedure:
(a) Technical Review. Prior to Planning Commission consideration, if deemed
necessary the proposed amendment and application materials shall be distributed
to appropriate Township officials and staff for review and comment. If deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission, the proposed amendment and application
? SEC. 33.1 TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 439
Article 33: Amendments
Amendments:
materials shall also be distributed to applicable outside agencies and designated
Township consultants for review.
(b) Public Hearing. (as amended 9/30/07) At least one (1) Public Hearing shall be
held by the Planning Commission on a proposed amendment in order to acquaint
the public and adjoining property owners with the proposal, and any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney. Notice of the Public Hearing shall be
published in a newspaper which circulates in the Township for the initial
adoption of a Zoning Ordinance. Notice of subsequent text or map amendments
shall take place in the following manner:
1) If an individual property or ten (10) or fewer adjacent properties are
proposed for rezoning, the Planning Commission shall publish a notice of
the rezoning in a newspaper which circulates in the Township, and sent by
mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is
being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within
300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants
of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the
property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. The notice shall
be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will
be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term
“occupant” may be used in making notification. The notice shall:
a) Describe the nature of the rezoning request.
b) Indicate the property that is the subject of the rezoning request.
The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses
within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and
listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If
there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be
used.
c) State when and where the rezoning request will be considered.
d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
e) Include the places and times at which the proposed text and any
maps of the zoning ordinance may be examined.
2) If eleven (11) or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the
Planning Commission shall publish a notice of the rezoning in a
newspaper which circulates in the Township. The notice shall be given
not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be
considered. The notice shall:
a) Describe the nature of the rezoning request.
? SEC. 33.1 TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 440
Article 33: Amendments
Amendments:
b) Indicate the property that is the subject of the rezoning request.
c) State when and where the rezoning request will be considered.
d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
e) Include the places and times at which the proposed text and any
maps of the zoning ordinance may be examined.
3) Notice of the time and place of the Public Hearing shall also be given by
mail to each electric, gas, and pipeline public utility company, each
telecommunication service provider, each railroad operating within the
district or zone affected, and the airport manager of each airport, that
registers its name and mailing address with the clerk of the Charter
Township of Plymouth for the purpose of receiving the notice of Public
Hearing. The notice shall include the places and time at which the
proposed text and any maps of the zoning ordinance may be examined.
(c) Planning Commission Recommendation. Subsequent to the hearing, the Planning
Commission shall review the proposed amendment, together with any reports and
recommendations from staff, consultants, other reviewing agencies and any public
comments. The Planning Commission shall identify and evaluate all factors
relevant to the amendment, and shall forward its findings and recommendations to
the Township Board, including any recommendations for modifications to the
proposed amendment.
(d) Township Board Action. Upon receipt of the report and recommendations from
the Planning Commission, the Township Board shall consider the proposed
amendment. The Township Board may approve or deny the amendment, or may
make changes and refer the amendment back to the Planning Commission for
further consideration.
SEC. 33.2 PETITIONS PREVIOUSLY DENIED ?
Where a prior petition for a change or amendment applying to a specific piece of property or a
part of such property was denied by the Township Board, a new application for the same
amendment shall not be accepted by the Planning Commission for consideration for a period of
three hundred sixty five (365) days, unless the Planning Commission determines that one or
more of the following conditions has been met:
1. There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered
during review of the application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body’s
application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the
application.
? SEC. 33.2 PETITIONS PREVIOUSLY DENIED
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 440a
Article 33: Amendments
Amendments:
2. New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review
that might reasonably affect the decision-making body’s application of the relevant
review standards to the development proposed.
3. The new application is materially different from the prior application.
SEC. 33.3 FEES ?
A fee as shall be determined by resolution of the Township Board shall be paid with each
petition presented for a change or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. Said fee shall cover the
cost of preparing the amendment, review costs, notice of public hearing and advertising and
printing.
END OF ARTICLE 33.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004
? SEC. 33.3 FEES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 33: Amendments
Amendments:
Page 1 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXXIII (33)
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 33: Amendments
Amendments:
Page 2 of 3
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXXIII (33)
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
SEC. 33.1 TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS
The Township Board may, from time to time, on recommendation from the Township Planning
Commission, on its own motion, or on petition amend, supplement, modify or change the
regulations of this Ordinance, including the district boundaries or other elements of the official
Zoning Map, in accordance with the authority of Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended. Such
actions shall be subject to the following procedure:
The following language was amended on 9/30/07
(b) Public Hearing. A Public Hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on a
proposed amendment in order to acquaint the public and adjoining property
owners with the proposal, and any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
1) Notice of the hearing shall be given by two (2) publications in a
newspaper which circulates in the Township; the first to be printed not
more than thirty (30) days nor less than twenty (20) days before the
hearing date; and the second not more than eight (8) days before the
hearing date.
2) If an individual property or several adjacent properties are proposed for
rezoning, notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the
owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons
to whom real property is assessed within a minimum of three hundred
(300) feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the
occupants of all single- and two-family dwellings within three hundred
(300) feet. The notice shall be given not less than eight (8) days before the
date the amendment will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not
known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification.
Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a
dwelling, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling
unit or spatial area owned or leased, by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area
shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than
four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may
be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested
to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 33: Amendments
Amendments:
Page 3 of 3
3) The notice shall: ??
a) Describe the purpose of the hearing and nature of the proposed
amendment.
b) Indicate the property which is the subject of any rezoning request.
c) State when and where the amendment will be considered.
d) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the amendment.
??
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 441
Article 34: Violations and Penalties
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXIV
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SEC. 34.1 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION ?
Any person, persons, firm or corporation or anyone acting in behalf of the same, who shall
violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) plus the costs of prosecution, by ninety (90) days imprisonment, or by any
combination thereof at the discretion of the court.
SEC. 34.2 EACH DAY A SEPARATE OFFENSE?
Each day that a violation is committed or permitted to exist or continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
SEC. 34.3 PUBLIC NUISANCE PER SE?
Any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per
se. The court shall order such nuisance abated, and the person, persons, firm or corporation
violating said provisions, or anyone acting in behalf of the same, shall be adjudged guilty of
maintaining a nuisance per se.
SEC. 34.4 RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY ?
Charter Township of Plymouth officials, representatives, employees, boards, commissions and
agents shall not be personally liable while acting for the Township, and are hereby relieved from
all personal liability from any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
? SEC. 34.1 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
? SEC. 34.2 EACH DAY A SEPARATE OFFENSE
? SEC. 34.3 PUBLIC NUISANCE PER SE
? SEC. 34.4 RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 442
Article 35: Severance, Vested Right
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXV
SEVERANCE, VESTED RIGHT
SEC. 35.1 SEVERANCE?
If any portion of this Ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall
be found invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portion or application,
or validity of this Ordinance as a whole, provided such remaining portions are not determined by
the court to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this Ordinance would
have been adopted, had such invalid provision not been included.
SEC. 35.2 VESTED RIGHT?
Nothing in this Ordinance should be interpreted or construed to grant, endorse or extend any
permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or
any permissible activities therein. Any of the same may be amended by the Township when
reasonable to the preservation of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
? SEC. 35.1 SEVERANCE
? SEC. 35.2 VESTED RIGHT
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 443
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXVI
DEFINITIONS
SEC. 36.1 ?CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
The following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this Ordinance:
1. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and
approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such, as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
2. The particular shall control the general.
3. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance
and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
4. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may" is
permissive.
5. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular
number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly
indicates the contrary.
6. The word "building" includes the word "structure." A "building" or "structure" includes
any part thereof.
7. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," maintained
for," or "occupied for."
8. The word "person" includes any individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
association, or any other similar entity.
9. The word "dwelling" includes the word "residence," and the word "lot" includes the
words “plot" or "parcel".
10. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more
items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either
... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(a) "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events
shall apply.
(b) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may
apply singly or in any combination.
? SEC. 36.1 CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 444
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(c) "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events
shall apply singly but not in combination.
11. Every word importing the singular number only may extend to and embrace the plural
number, and every word importing the plural number may be applied and limited to the
singular number. Every word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be
applied to females as well as males.
12. The words "written" and "in writing" may be construed to include printing, engraving and
lithographing; except that in all cases where the written signature of any person is
required, it shall always be the proper handwriting of such person; or in case he is unable
to write, his proper mark.
13. Whenever a reference is made to several sections and the section numbers are connected
by the word "to," the reference includes both sections whose numbers are given and all
intervening sections. ?
14. The words “include” or “including” shall mean “including, but not limited to.”
15. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If
the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended
to include the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
16. The word “Commission” shall refer to the Charter Township of Plymouth Planning
Commission.
SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
1. ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure, or portion of a
main building, on the same lot as the main building(s) and use(s), the use of which is
incidental to, customarily associated with, and subordinate to that of the main building
and use, but not including dwellings, residential or lodging facilities or sleeping quarters
for human beings, except for a caretaker’s residence permitted as an accessory use to a
mortuary under Sections 5.2 and 6.2.
2. ACCESSORY USE: A use which is located on the same lot and clearly serving a
purpose incidental to, customarily associated with, and subordinate to the principal use to
which it is related, but not including dwellings, residential or lodging facilities or
sleeping quarters for human beings, except for a caretaker’s residence where permitted as
an accessory use.
3. ACHROMATIC: Colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The term includes but is not
limited to grays, tans and light earth tones. The term does not include white, black or any
bold coloration that attracts attention.
? ? SEC. 36.1 CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 445
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
4. ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COMMITTEE: A group of five (5) persons,
consisting of the Chief Building Official, Community Development Director, Chairman
of the Planning Commission, Planning Consultant, and Engineering Consultant which
shall conduct administrative reviews, as specifically permitted by provisions of this
Ordinance. Approval of no fewer than three (3) members of the Committee shall be
required to take action.
5. ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIY: A residential structure licensed by the State of
Michigan to provide room, board and supervised care, but not continuous nursing care,
for unrelated adults (18 years or older), in accordance with the Adult Foster Care Facility
Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended, and the Adult Foster Care
Administrative Rules. The following four (4) types of adult foster care facilities are
provided for by these rules:
(a) ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME: Private residence for six (6) or
fewer unrelated adults. Licensee must live in the home, and local zoning approval
is not required prior to issuance of a license.
(b) ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME: Residence for twelve
(12) or fewer unrelated adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local
zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license only if seven (7) or more
residents will live in the home.
(c) ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME: Residence for thirteen
(13) to twenty (20) unrelated adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home.
Local zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license.
(d) ADULT FOSTER CARE CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY: Residences
for more than twenty (20) unrelated adults. Local zoning approval is required
prior to issuance of a license.
6. ADULT DAY CARE: A facility which provides care for over twelve (12) adults for less
than twenty-four (24) hours.?
7. AGRICULTURE: Agriculture shall mean the use of land for agricultural purposes,
including farming, dairying, pasturage, raising of fowl, rabbits, livestock or large
domesticated animals, nurseries, orchards, poultry farms and bona fide greenhouses
operated on contiguous, neighboring or associated land as a single unit carried on by the
owner-operator, manager or tenant farmer by his own labor or with assistance of
members or his household or hired employees; provided, however, that land to be
considered a farm hereunder shall include a continuous parcel of five (5) acres or more in
area. ?
8. ALLEY: Is any way dedicated to the public which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property, and which is not intended for general traffic circulation.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 446
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
9. ALTERATIONS:
(a) Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any
change in the structural members of a building, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders.
(b) Any substantial change in the roof or in the interior walls or any changes in size
or location of any window or door.
(c) Any change, enlargement or modification to any part of a sign, including the sign
copy area, unless designed and approved by the Township as a changeable copy
sign.
10. APARTMENT: A suite of rooms or a room arranged and intended for a place of
residence for a single family commonly located in a multiple-family dwelling or
accessory to another use as may be permitted by this Ordinance, and which is typically
rented rather than owned by the occupant(s).
11. APARTMENT, EFFICIENCY: A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room
in addition to a kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities
?12. AUTOMOBILE: Any motorized vehicle intended to be driven on roads or trails, such
as cars, trucks, vans and motorcycles. An automobile shall not include commercial
vehicles as defined herein. ?
13. AUTOMOBILE COMMERCIAL GARAGE (ROUTINE MAINTENANCE AND
MINOR REPAIR): A building or premises used primarily to provide general
maintenance on automobiles such as oil change and lubrication; servicing and repair of
spark plugs, batteries, pumps, belts, hoses, air filters, windshield wipers and distributors;
mufflers and exhaust replacement, brakes and shock absorbers; radiator cleaning and
flushing; sale and installation of automobile accessories such as tires, radios and air
conditioners; wheel alignment, balancing and undercoating, excluding tire recapping or
grooving or any major mechanical repairs, collision work or painting. An automobile
maintenance/service establishment may also sell gasoline, but is distinct from an
automobile service station.
14. AUTOMOBILE MAJOR REPAIR OR BODY SHOP: A building or enclosed
structure where the following services may be carried out: general repair and refinishing,
engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such
as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, overall painting and undercoating of
automobiles, major overhauling of engines requiring the removal of engine cylinder head
or crankcase pan; repairs to radiators requiring the removal thereof; or complete
recapping or retreading of tires.
? ?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 447
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
15. AUTOMOBILE WASH: Any building or premises or portion thereof either as a
principal or accessory use containing facilities for washing motor vehicles using
production line methods with a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other
mechanical washing devices; and may also include coin and attendant operated drivethrough,
automatic self-serve, track mounted units and similar high volume washing
establishments, including hand washing operations and detailing shops.
16. BAR, LOUNGE OR NIGHTCLUB: An establishment licensed by the State of
Michigan to sell at retail and serve alcoholic beverages on the premises. Such
establishment is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although
the sale of prepared food and snacks may also be permitted.
17. BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is wholly or partly below the average
grade of the ground level adjoining the building is a basement when the height from the
grade up to the first floor tier of floor beams or joists is less than the height from the
grade level down to the floor, provided, however, that if the height from the grade level
to the floor beams or joists is five (5) feet or more, such basement shall be considered a
story. A basement shall not be counted as a story and a basement shall not be used in
computing the minimum required floor area (also see Story).?
18. BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN: A single family dwelling which is owner occupied in
which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for
compensation, often including provisions for a meal only for overnight guests.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 448
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
19. BERM: A man-made formed earth mound of definite height and width used for
obscuring or aesthetic purposes.
20. BLOCK: A block shall include the property having frontage on the side of a street and
lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest
?intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way. In case of a cul-de-sac street,
a block shall include the property on one side of the street lying between the one
intersecting street and the extension of the center line of the cul-de-sac street through the
property facing the turnaround at the closed end of the street.
21. BOARD: The Township Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Plymouth.
22. BUILDING: A structure
having a roof supported by
columns or walls for shelter,
support or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or personal
property. When any portion
thereof is completely separated
from every other part thereof by
masonry or fire wall from the
ground up, and without
openings, each portion of such
structure shall be deemed a
separate building.
23. BUILDING ALTERATIONS:
Any change to the supporting
members of a building such as
bearing walls, columns or
girders, any alteration or
relocation of a building and any
change in use.?
24. BUILDING HEIGHT: The
height of a building is the
vertical distance measured from
the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line
for a mansard roof, to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for hip, gabled
and gambrel roofs.
25. BUILDING LINE: A line formed by the face of the principal building, and for the
purposes of this Ordinance a building line is the same as the front setback line.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 449
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
26. BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot upon which the building is situated.
27. BUILDING OFFICIAL, CHIEF: The designated head of the Department of Building
and Code Enforcement Township, or his or her authorized representative.
28. BUILDING PERMIT: The written authority issued by the Chief Building Official
permitting the construction, removal, moving, alteration or use of a building in
conformity with the State Construction Code.?
29. CARETAKER’S RESIDENCE: An independent residential dwelling unit designed for
and occupied by no more than one family, where at least one person is employed to look
after goods, buildings, or property on the parcel on which the living quarters are located.
30. CARPORT: A partially open shelter for housing of vehicles. Such structure shall
comply with all yard requirements applicable to private garages.
31. CEMETERY: Land used, dedicated or intended for the burial of human remains,
including columbariums and mausoleums.
32. CHILD CARE FACILITIES: A location and organization designed for the temporary
care of children under eighteen (18) years of age, as licensed and regulated by the State
of Michigan under the Child Care Organizations Act, Public Act 116 of 1973, as
amended, and the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, as
amended. Such organizations shall be further defined as follows:
(a) CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER: A non-residential facility
designed to provide temporary day care for one or more preschool or school age
children for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, and where the
parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a
facility which provides care for not less that two (2) consecutive weeks,
regardless of the number of hours of care per day. This facility is also described
as a nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, or drop-in center, but does not
include a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for
during short periods of time while persons responsible for such children are
attending religious services.
(b) FAMILY FOSTER CARE HOME: A private residence, as licensed by the State
of Michigan, in which one (1) but not more than four (4) minor children, who are
not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption,
are given care and supervision for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or
more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent
or legal guardian.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 450
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(c) GROUP FOSTER CARE OR FAMILY GROUP HOME: A private residence
licensed by the State of Michigan to care for more than four (4) but less than
seven (7) children not related to an adult member of the household by blood,
marriage, or adoption and unattended by a parent or legal guardian, for periods of
two (2) or more consecutive weeks, twenty-four (24) hours per day and four (4) or
more days per week.
(d) FAMILY CHILD DAY CARE HOME: A private residence licensed by the
State of Michigan to provide temporary day care for up to six (6) minor children
for ?periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or
legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood,
marriage or adoption. Licensee must live in the residence.
(e) GROUP CHILD DAY CARE HOME: A private residence licensed by the State
of Michigan to provide temporary day care for up to twelve (12) children for
periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood,
marriage or adoption. Licensee must live in the residence.
33. CHURCHES, TEMPLES AND SIMILAR PLACES OF WORSHIP: A building for
the sole purpose of holding religious services. A site used for the regular assembly of
persons, for the conducting of religious services, and for accessory uses therewith. Such
accessory uses may include rectories, living quarters for church ministry and other
members of the religious order who carry out their duties primarily on the site, religious
education classes, day care, outdoor recreation facilities (unlighted), religious office
space youth centers and others. Rescue missions, tent revivals and other temporary
assemblies are not included in this definition.
34. CHURCH, LARGE SCALE: A religious institution with a seating capacity of one
thousand five hundred (1,500) people or more in its sanctuary or main area of assembly.
A large scale church may also be characterized by any one (1) or more of the following
features:
(a) Region-serving accessory facilities, such as high schools, colleges and seminaries;
(b) Parking for five hundred (500) passenger vehicles or more;
(c) One (1) or more buildings with 100,000 square feet or more of gross floor area; or
(d) Other features, such as: large size of assemblies and resultant traffic surges, large
off-street parking lots, retreat and conference centers or a major institutional
character.
35. CLEAR CUTTING: The clearance of all or a substantial portion of the trees and other
woody vegetation from a site.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 451
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
36. CLINIC: A public or proprietary medical or dental institution or laboratory providing
diagnostic, therapeutic or preventive treatment of ambulatory patients on an out-patient
basis.
37. COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle bearing, or required to bear,
commercial license plates such as a truck tractor, a semi-trailer, flat beds, stake beds, rolloff
containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures;
vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the delivery, hauling or construction
oriented contractors; tow trucks; vehicle repair service trucks; snow plowing trucks and
any other vehicle with a commercial license plate having a gross vehicle weight in excess
of 10,000 pounds or a total length in excess of 22 feet.
38. COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the
Charter Township of Plymouth.
39. COMMUNITY CENTER: A building and/or grounds created to provide common
recreation, meeting or other space for residents of the neighborhood or community.?
40. COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan including graphics and written
proposals indicating the general development standards and general location of streets,
parks, schools, and all physical development of the Township and includes any unit or
part of such plan and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof, also called a Master
Plan. Such plan or amendment is adopted by the Planning Commission and/or Board.
?41. CONDOMINIUM TERMINOLOGY:
(a) COMMON ELEMENT, GENERAL: The common elements other than the
limited common elements intended for the common use of all co-owners.
(b) COMMON ELEMENT, LIMITED: A portion of the common elements
reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners.
(c) CONDOMINIUM: A condominium is a system of separate ownership of
individual units and/or multiple-unit projects according to Public Act 59 of 1978,
as amended.
(d) CONDOMINIUM ACT: State of Michigan Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended.
(e) ?CONDOMINIUM MASTER DEED: The condominium document recording
the condominium project including attached exhibits and incorporating by
reference the approved by-laws for the project and the approved condominium
subdivision plan for the project.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
? ?
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 452
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(f) CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN: Drawings and information which
show the size, location, area, and boundaries of each condominium unit, building
locations, the nature, location, and approximate size of common elements, and
other information required by Section 66 of Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended.
(g) CONDOMINIUM UNIT: The portion of the condominium project designed and
intended for separate ownership as described in the Master Deed, regardless of
whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, use
as a time-share unit, or any other type of use.
(h) CONDOMINIUM LOT: That portion of a site condominium project designed
and intended to function similar to a platted subdivision lot for purposes of
determining minimum yard setback requirements and other requirements set forth
in this ordinance.?
(i) SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A condominium project designed to
function in a similar manner, or as an alternative, to a platted subdivision. A
residential site condominium project shall be considered as equivalent to a platted
subdivision for purposes of regulation in this Ordinance.
42. CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: A nursing care facility, but excluding a
hospital or a facility created by Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1985, as amended,
being Sections 36.1 to 36.12 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, which provides organized
nursing care and medical treatment to seven or more unrelated individuals suffering or
recovering from illness, injury or infirmity.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 453
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
43. COURT: A court is an open unoccupied space other than a yard, and bounded on at
least two sides by a building. A COURT extending to the front lot line or front yard, or
to a rear lot line or rear yard, is an OUTER COURT. Any other court is an INNER
COURT.
44. CUL-DE-SAC: A dead-end public or private street which terminates in a circular or
semicircular section of street which allows for vehicle turnaround.
45. CURB CUT: An opening from the public street to a private driveway or public drive
serving an individual site or group of sites.
46. DEALERSHIP: A building or premises used primarily for the sale or rental of new and
used automobiles, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles and other motor vehicles, and
which may include accessory repair facilities and outside storage and display areas.
47. DEVELOPMENT: The construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning
lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land
for a new use.
48. DISTRICT: Any section of the unincorporated parts of the Charter Township of
Plymouth for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the
height and area of buildings are uniform.
49. DOMESTIC EMPLOYEES: Shall mean only those persons hired by the householder
for the purpose of performing domestic services and maintenance of the household.
50. DRIVE-IN BUSINESS/RESTAURANT: A business or restaurant establishment so
developed to serve patrons while within the motor vehicle rather than within a building or
structure. A drive-in restaurant is distinct from a drive-through restaurant in that the
majority of drive-in patrons consume food and beverages while in the vehicle and parked
on the premises.?
51. DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS/RESTAURANT: A business or restaurant
establishment so developed to serve patrons from a drive-through window. A drivethrough
restaurant may or may not also have indoor seating and is distinct from a drive-in
business.
52. DRIVEWAY: A private hard surfaced area that provides access to a house, garage, or
other building from a street.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 454
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
53. DWELLING: A dwelling is any house or building or portion thereof which is occupied
wholly as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, either
permanently or transiently. In case of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in
part as a dwelling, with a commercial or other use, the part so occupied as a dwelling
shall be deemed a dwelling for the purpose of this Ordinance and shall comply with the
provisions thereof relative to dwellings. Garage space, whether in an attached or detached
garage, shall not be deemed a part of livable floor area. Automobile trailers or similar
portable dwellings, tourist cabins or tents, shall not be considered dwellings under this
definition.
54. DWELLING, ONE FAMILY: A dwelling occupied by one (1) family and so designed
and arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations and sanitary facilities
for one (1) family only.
55. DWELLING, ONE FAMILY CLUSTER: A group of two (2) or more detached one
family dwellings located on a common parcel of land held in one ownership and having
any yard or court in common, or in condominium ownership pursuant to the
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended.
56. DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: A building used or intended to be used as a
dwelling by three (3) or more families, living independently and so designed and
arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations and sanitary facilities for
three (3) or more families.
57. DWELLING, STACKED FLATS: A building occupied by three (3) or more families,
where dwellings are divided by party walls in the horizontal plane and floor-ceiling
assemblies in the vertical plane in an appropriate manner for multiple-family uses. Each
dwelling unit is capable of individual use and maintenance without trespassing upon
adjoining properties, and utilities and service facilities are independent for each property.
58. DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A building or structure occupied by three (3) or more
families, where each dwelling unit is divided from the one adjacent to it by a party wall
extending the full height of the building. Each dwelling unit is capable of individual use
and maintenance without trespassing upon adjoining properties, and utilities and service
facilities are independent for each property. ?
59. DWELLING, TWO FAMILY or DUPLEX: A dwelling occupied by not more than
two (2) families, and so designed and arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen
accommodations and sanitary facilities for two (2) families.
60. DWELLING, UNIT: Dwelling unit shall mean one (1) or more main rooms designed
for or used by one (1) family for living and sleeping purposes and having a kitchen or
kitchenette, plus a separate bathroom.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 455
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
61. DWELLING UNIT, MANUFACTURED: Is any residential building, transportable in
one (1) or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in the structure. Manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
62. DWELLING UNIT, MODULAR: Is a dwelling unit which is partially constructed off
the premises upon which it is intended to be located, and is delivered to the premises in
sections for assembly and finishing. ?
63. DWELLING UNIT, SITE BUILT: Is a dwelling unit that is substantially built,
constructed, assembled, and finished on the premises which is intended to serve as its
final location. Site built dwelling units shall include dwelling units constructed of pre-cut
materials, and panelized wall, roof and floor sections when such sections require
substantial assembly and finishing on the premises which-are intended to serve as its final
location.
64. EASEMENT: A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by a property owner to
and/or for use by the public, or another person or entity.
65. ELDERLY HOUSING: An institution other than a hospital or hotel, which provides
housing or room and board to non-transient persons primarily sixty (60) years of age or
older. Housing for the elderly may include:
(a) ELDERLY HOUSING – INDEPENDENT: Is a multiple-family housing form
with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual dwelling unit.
(b) ELDERLY HOUSING – DEPENDENT: Is a multiple-family housing form
with central dining facilities provided as a basic service to each dwelling unit.
Each dwelling unit may not contain cooking facilities, but must contain sanitary
facilities.
(c) CONGREGATE CARE: A dependent elderly housing facility with cooking
facilities within the unit, but the a central dining service option. Limited medical
care is available.
(d) ASSISTED LIVING: A dependent elderly housing facility without cooking
facilities and only central dining service. Limited medical care is available.
(e) SENIOR APARTMENTS: Multiple-family dwelling units for independent
living.
66. ERECTED: Erected shall mean built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon,
or any physical operations on the premises which are required for the construction.
Excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 456
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
67. ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The phrase "essential services" means the erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance of public utilities or municipal departments or
commissions, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, communications, steam or
water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
towers and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith (but not
including buildings) reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such
public utilities or municipal departments or commissions for the public health, safety or
general welfare.
68. EXCAVATION: Excavation shall mean any breaking of ground, except common
household gardening and ground care.
69. FAMILY:
(a) ?An individual or group of two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, such as a man and wife or a father or a mother and their children, the
parents of either or both, together with foster children or servants of the principal
occupants, with not more than two (2) additional unrelated persons, who are
domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
(b) A functional equivalent of the domestic family which is collective number of
individuals domiciled together in one (1) dwelling unit whose relationship is of a
continuous, non-transient, domestic character and who are cooking and living as a
single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society,
club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization or group of
students or other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or
seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or terms of
other similar determinable periods.
70. FENCE, DECORATIVE: A structure intended primarily for ornamental purposes. A
decorative fence shall be any fence which, by definition, is not to be considered a
protective or security fence or a privacy fence.
71. FENCE, DOG RUNS AND OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS: A structure intended to
contain an animal permitted within a single family area or to screen an outdoor service
area.
72. FENCE, PRIVACY SCREEN: A structure intended to form a visual screen or windbreak
for a patio or outdoor living area located in the rear yard only.
73. FENCE, PROTECTIVE OR SECURITY: Protective or security fencing shall be
considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous lands either in
whole or part serving the purpose of preventing intrusion onto or across a lot of record or
any parcel or tract of unplatted land from without or straying from within.
74. FILL: To deposit or dump any matter on to or into the ground, except common
household gardening and ground care.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 457
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
75. FLOOR AREA:?
(a) FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or
from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The “floor area” of a
?building, which is what this normally is referred to as, includes the basement
floor area if its ceiling is over five (5) feet above the average established grade.
Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in floor
area. Areas of basements, utility rooms, breezeways, unfinished attics, porches
(enclosed or unenclosed) or attached garages are not included.
(b) FLOOR AREA, USABLE: That portion of the floor area, measured from the
interior face of the exterior walls, used for or intended to be used for services to
the public or to customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied
by fixtures or equipment used for the display or sale of goods or merchandise, but
not including areas used or intended to be used for the storage of merchandise,
utility or mechanical equipment rooms or sanitary facilities. In the case of a half
story, the usable floor area shall be considered to be only that portion having a
clear height above it of four (4) feet or more. Where the usable floor area of a
building is unknown, eighty (80) percent of the gross floor area shall be used for
calculating required parking.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 458
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
76. GARAGE, COMMUNITY: A community garage is a structure, or a series of
structures, for the storage of motor vehicles, having no public sales or repair shop or
services in connection therewith, and separated into compartments or sections with
separate vehicular entrances, for the use of two or more owners or occupants of property
in the vicinity.
77. GARAGE, PRIVATE: A private garage is a structure for the storage principally of
non-commercial vehicles, having no public sales or shop services in connection
therewith.
78. GASOLINE SERVICE STATION WITH OR WITHOUT THE SALE OF
CONVENIENCE GOODS: (as amended 5/24/09)
An establishment that includes buildings and premises for the primary purpose of retail
gasoline sales. An automobile convenience/gasoline service station may also include an
area devoted to sales of automotive items and convenience goods primarily sold to
patrons purchasing gasoline. A service station is not an automobile repair or body shop.
The retail sale of foods, drinks and other convenience goods may be included in addition
to the sale of fuel, however, the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
79. GRADE: A ground elevation establishment for the purpose of regulating the number of
stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground
adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade-is level. If the ground is not
entirely level the grade shall be determined by computing the average elevation of the
ground for each foot of the building and taking the average of the several averages.
80. GREENBELT: For the purpose of complying with the requirements of this Ordinance a
greenbelt shall consist of planting of deciduous and/or evergreen trees and shrubs spaced
to comply with the density requirements of Article 26 related to opacity.
81. HAZARDOUS USES: All uses which involve the storage, sale, manufacture or
processing of materials which are dangerous, risky and combustible and are likely to burn
with moderate rapidity and with a considerable volume of smoke, but from which neither
poisonous fumes nor explosions are to be anticipated in the event of fire. A hobby shall
not be considered a home occupation.?
82. HOBBY: An accessory use carried on by the occupant of the premises in a shop, studio
or other workroom, purely for personal enjoyment, amusement or recreation; provided
that the articles produced or constructed in said shop, studio, or workroom are not sold
either on or off the premises, and provided such use will not be obnoxious or offensive by
reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or fumes.
83. HOME OCCUPATION: Any business, occupation, or activity undertaken for
compensation within a dwelling unit that is incidental and secondary to the use of the
structure as a dwelling unit. A hobby shall not be considered a home occupation.?
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 459
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
84. HOME OFFICE: An accessory use within a dwelling unit that is incidental and
secondary to the use of the structure as dwelling unit, in which work for compensation is
undertaken, including, but not limited to: receiving or initiating correspondence, such as
telephone calls, mail, facsimiles, or electronic-mail; preparing or maintaining business
records; word or data processing; and telephone, mail order, and off-premise sales.
85. HOSPITAL: A building, structure or institution, licensed by the Health Department of
the State of Michigan, in which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical
treatment.
86. HOTEL: A business that provides temporary abiding overnight accommodations for
transient individuals with or without meals in rooms occupied for hire, not to exceed
thirty (30) days continuous occupancy, and which provides customary maid service,
furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, use and
upkeep of furniture, concierge services, and a dining room and general kitchen.
87. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
88. INDUSTRIAL PARK: An area under common ownership subdivided for cohesive
industrial development, usually having shared facilities, such as storm water retention
and drainage, and covenants restricting appearance, signage and uses. ?
89. INSTITUTIONAL USES, LARGE SCALE: Public, parochial and private schools
including nursery schools, churches, libraries, community buildings, hospitals,
convalescent Homes, municipal facilities or mortuaries, which have either one or both of
the following characteristics:
(a) Five hundred (500) or more parking spaces are required based on the parking
requirements in the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) The seating capacity of the main area of assembly is one thousand five hundred
(1,500) or more.
90. KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, cats or other small and
medium domesticated pets (excluding horses and other large domesticated animals), fur
bearing animals or animals for medical experimentation are trained, kept, permanently or
temporarily boarded, or used for breeding purposes.
91. LANDSCAPING: Improvements to a site, usually consisting of trees and other
vegetation, but also including other structural elements such as earth forms, decorative
walls, seating, lighting fountains, ground cover, natural areas, wetlands, bodies of water
and other enhancements intended to improve the appearance and environmental quality
of a site.
92. LIVESTOCK: Animals, such as cattle, sheep, ostrich and bison, kept for commercial
purposes.
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 460
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
93. LOADING SPACE: Loading space shall mean an off-street space on the same lot with
a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle
while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
94. LOT (OR ZONING LOT OR PARCEL): A piece of land under one ownership
described and control, occupied or to be occupied by a building, structure, or use, or by
other activity permitted thereon and including the open spaces required under this
Ordinance.
(a) CORNER LOT: A lot of which at least-two adjacent sides abut for their full
length upon a street at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
(b) DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: Any interior lot having frontage on two streets as
distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all
sides of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards
shall be provided as required.
(c) ?INTERIOR LOT: Any lot other than a corner lot.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 461
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
95. LOT AREA: For the purpose of this Ordinance in determining minimum lot area
requirements the lot area shall be the total horizontal area within the lot lines exclusive of
all right-of-way, private road easement, and the area located within the street setback.
96. LOT COVERAGE: That part or percentage of the lot occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory building or structures.?
97. LOT DEPTH: Is the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines as
measured along the median between the side lot lines.
(a) FRONT LOT LINE: In the case of a lot abutting upon one street, the front lot
line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of any other lot one
such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this Ordinance,
provided it is so designated in the building plans filed for approval with the
Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
(b) REAR LOT LINE: The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot
line shall be that assumed line parallel to the front line, not less than ten (10) feet
long, lying most distant from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
(c) SIDE LOT LINE: A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a
rear-lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior lot line.
98. LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
document or maps on file with the Wayne County Register of Deeds, and which actually
exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a recorded ownership separate from
that of the remainder thereof, whether platted or described by metes and bounds.
99. LOT WIDTH: Is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two
points where the required minimum front yard setback line (set forth in the Schedule of
Regulations) intersects the side lot lines. Said front lot line shall in every instance abut a
public or private street by being contiguous with the public street right-of-way line or the
private street easement line.
100. MAIN BUILDING: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon
which it is situated.
101. MAIN USE: The principal purpose for which the premises, land or building(s) may be
occupied, or are arranged, designed or intended.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 462
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
102. MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large
volume traffic-way for both the immediate area and the region beyond, and may be
designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, express- way or equivalent term
to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. Any street with a
width, existing or proposed, of one hundred twenty (120) feet shall be considered a major
thoroughfare.
103. MANUFACTURED HOME: (See Manufactured Dwelling Unit)
104. MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK (MOBILE HOME PARK): A parcel or tract
of land under the control of a person or entity upon which manufactured homes are
located on a continual non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that
purpose regardless of whether a change is made, therefore, together with any building,
structure enclosure, street, equipment or facility used or intended for use incidental to the
occupancy of a manufactured home and which is not intended for use as a temporary
recreational vehicle park.
105. MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK LOT (MOBILE HOME LOT): An area
within a manufactured housing park which is designated for the exclusive use of a
specific manufactured home.?
106. MASSAGE: The manipulation of body muscle or tissue, by rubbing, stroking, kneading,
tapping or vibrating, through the use of a physical, mechanical or other device, of the
body of another for a fee.
(a) MASSAGE THERAPIST: An individual specifically trained and licensed or
certified in therapeutic massage by the American Massage and Therapy
Association, International Myomassethics Federation or successor organizations.
(b) THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE: A method by which a person utilizes his or her
hands, feet or an instrument for treating the superficial parts of a customer’s body
for medical, hygienic, relaxation or therapeutic purposes by rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating.
107. MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Shall mean any electronic or mechanical
machine, device or contrivance which is operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token,
plate, disc or the payment of a fee and is operated by the public generally for amusement
only, and does not dispense any form of payoff, prize or reward. A mechanical
amusement device which only provides a free-game upon accumulation of a required
score shall be deemed to be for amusement purposes and not prohibited herein.
108. MEZZANINE: An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any
story with an aggregate floor area of not more than one-half (½) of the floor area of the
story in which the level or levels are located.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 463
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
109. MINI- OR SELF-STORAGE WAREHOUSE: A building or group of buildings in a
that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls
or lockers for the storage of customer’s goods or wares.
110. MOTEL: A a business comprised of a group of dwelling units without a dining room or
kitchen facilities, so arranged as to furnish overnight accommodations for transient
guests, not to exceed thirty (30) days continuous occupancy. ?
111. NATURAL GAS OR OIL FACILITY OR EQUIPMENT: Any building, structure,
machinery, and/or equipment used for or in connection with the production, processing or
transmitting of natural gas, oil or allied products or substances, which includes but is not
limited to any pipeline, storage wells, sweetening plants or similar treatment facilities,
bulk storage plants, hydrogen sulfide removal facilities, dehydration facilities,
compressor stations, pigging stations, metering facilities or any other facility
distinguished from mere pipes, fittings and valves, oil and gas mud pits or brine disposal
pits, devices, and auxiliary components, including pollution control equipment, flares,
stacks, etc. Processing or related oil and gas facility may also be referred to as any type of
on-site or off-site “separating facilities” or “sweetening facilities” intended or designed to
remove hydrogen sulfide.
112. NONCONFORMITIES: A lot, structure, or use of land, structure or combination of
both that lawfully existed prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, and which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms and
provisions of this Ordinance.
(a) CLASS A NONCONFORMING DESIGNATION: A nonconforming structure
or use of land that has been designated by the Planning Commission to be allowed
to be perpetuated and improved in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and any conditions of approval of the designation.
(b) CLASS B NONCONFORMING STATUS: Nonconforming structures or uses,
other than those designated as Class A, are classified as Class B and are allowed
to continue within the restricted provisions of this Ordinance.
(c) NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD: A platted or unplatted parcel of
land lawfully existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance that does not conform to Ordinance provisions for the district in which
it is located.
(d) NONCONFORMING SIGN: See SIGNS.
(e) NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto that does
not conform to Ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located, but is
otherwise in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, county and
Township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 464
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(f) NONCONFORMING USE: A use that lawfully occupied a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land or structure and land in combination at the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to the use regulations of
the district in which it is located, or does not have special approval where
provisions of this Ordinance require such approval, but is otherwise in compliance
with all other applicable federal, state, county and Township laws, ordinances,
regulations and codes.
113. OCCUPANCY LOAD: The number of individuals normally occupying the building or
part thereof, or for which the existing facilities have been designed.
114. OCCUPIED: Used in any manner at the time in question.
115. OFF-STREET PARKING LOT: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along
with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and
exit for the parking of more than two (2) vehicles.
116. OIL AND/OR GAS WELL: An exploratory or production well subject to or authorized
under the authority of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality – Supervisor
of Wells as provided by law, or other federal or state regulatory agency as provided by
law.
117. OIL OR PETROLEUM REFINERY: A facility that takes in crude oil and transforms
it into gasoline and/or other petroleum related products.
118. OPEN AIR BUSINESS USES: “Open air business uses” include, but are not limited to,
the following:?
(a) The retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seeds, topsoil, humus,
fertilizers, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other home garden
supplies and equipment;
(b) The retail sale of fruit and vegetables;
(c) Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard courts, horseshoe courts, miniature
golf, golf driving ranges, children’s amusement parks and/or similar recreation
uses;
(d) Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicle, boat or home equipment sale, rental
or repair services; and
(e) The outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, playscapes, motor
homes, mobile homes, snowmobiles, farm implements and similar products.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 465
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
119. OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Shall mean open space or recreational use set aside for the
use of the owners of lots participating in a unit development of residential lots. Such
space may include private recreational facilities such as golf courses or swimming pools,
historic building sites, parks, parkway areas, ornamental parks, extensive areas with tree
cover, low land along streams or areas of rough terrain which have natural features
worthy of scenic preservation.
120. OUTDOOR STORAGE: The storage of any goods, materials or waste, including goods
and materials offered for sale in an unenclosed or partially enclosed space. The storage
of new or used vehicles in inventory shall be included as outdoor storage, however, the
parking of fleet vehicles when not in use that associated with an otherwise permitted use
shall not be included as outside storage.
121. PARCEL: A contiguous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for
in Public Acts 288 of 1967, as amended.
122. PARKING SPACE: Is an area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive
of drives, aisles, or entrances giving access thereto and shall be fully accessible for the
parking of the permitted vehicles.
123. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A form of land development and
comprehensively planned as an entity via a site plan which permits flexibility in building,
siting, usable open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features, which
may ?contain a mixture of housing units and nonresidential uses, if allowed by the
specific provisions of the ordinance.
124. PLANTING STRIP: A planting strip for the purpose of this Ordinance shall consist of
a combination of "natural" plant materials such as ground cover, deciduous and/or
evergreen shrubs, deciduous and/or evergreen trees, and/or deciduous small ornamental
trees.
125. PLANT NURSERY: A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the
storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including
products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning
of this Ordinance does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of
fruits, vegetables, or christmas trees otherwise regulated by this ordinance.
126. PORCH, ENCLOSED: A covered entrance to a building or structure which is totally
enclosed, which projects out from the main wall of such building or structure and which
has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it
is attached.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 466
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
127. PORCH, OPEN: A covered entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed,
except for columns supporting the porch roof, which projects out from the main wall of
such building or structure and which has a separate roof or an integral roof with the
principal building or structure to which it is attached.
128. PREMISES: Any lot or parcel of land, or building or site as otherwise used in this
Ordinance; a unit of contiguous real property under common ownership.
129. PRINCIPAL USE: The principal purpose for which the premises, land or building(s)
may be occupied, or are arranged, designed or intended.
130. PUBLIC UTILITY: A person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly
authorized to furnish, and furnishing to the public, under federal, state or municipal
regulations, electricity, gas, steam, communication, telegraph, transportation or water.
131. PUBLIC USE: A use operated by a public body, said use having the purpose of serving
the public health, safety, or general welfare and including uses such as public schools,
parks, playgrounds, hospitals and administrative and service facilities.
132. RAILROAD CLASSIFICATION YARD: A railroad yard area used solely for
classifying railroad freight cars into train loads, to be delivered to distant railroad centers
for disbursement, or the receiving of train loads for disbursements to local centers.
133. RECREATION VEHICLE: A vehicle primarily designed and used as temporary living
quarters or for recreational, camping or travel purposes, including a vehicle having its
own motor power or a vehicle mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Recreational
Vehicles shall include the following:?
(a) TRAVEL TRAILER: A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed to be
used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and
which may be identified as a “travel trailer” by the manufacturer. Travel trailers
generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
(b) PICKUP CAMPER: A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck
chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary
dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
(c) MOTOR HOME: A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human
habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and
capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. Motor homes
generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
(d) FOLDING TENT TRAILER or POP-UP TRAILER: A folding structure,
mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 467
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(e) BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS: “Boats” and “boat trailers” shall include
boats, floats, personal watercraft, rafts, canoes, plus the normal equipment to
transport them on the highway.
(f) OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT: Other recreational equipment
includes snowmobiles, all terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus
normal equipment to transport them on the highway.
134. RECYCLING CENTER: A facility at which used material is separated and processed
prior to shipment to others who will use the materials to manufacture new products. This
use is distinct from a junkyard or a salvage yard.
135. RECYCLING COLLECTION STATION: A facility for the collection and temporary
storage of recoverable resources, prior to shipment to a recycling center for processing.
136. RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale
of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and
whose design or method of operation includes both of the following characteristics:
(a) Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible containers, or in
paper, plastic or other disposable containers.?
(b) The consumption of foods, frozen desserts or beverages within the restaurant
building, within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises or at other facilities in
the premises outside the restaurant building is posted as being prohibited, and
such prohibition is strictly enforced by the restauranteur.
137. RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN or DRIVE-THROUGH: (See Drive-In and Drive-
Through Business/Restaurant).
138. RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale
of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out with consumption off
the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation includes both the
following characteristics:
(a) Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible containers, or in
paper, plastic or other disposable containers.
(b) The consumption of foods, frozen desserts or beverages within a motor vehicle
parked upon the premises or at other facilities on the premises outside the
restaurant building is posted as being prohibited, and such prohibition is strictly
enforced by the restaurateur.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 468
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
139. RESTAURANT, STANDARD OR “SIT-DOWN”: Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of food, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-toconsume
state, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one or both of
the following characteristics:
(a) Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods,
frozen desserts or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter
at which such items are consumed usually while being seated; or
(b) A cafeteria-type operation where foods, frozen desserts or beverages generally are
consumed within the restaurant building.
140. RETAINING WALL: A permanent solid barrier of brick, stone, or other material
intended to support the ground along the line of a change of elevation or to enclose an
area.?
141. ROADSIDE STAND, PERMANENT: A structure operated for the purpose of selling
only fresh produce, which shall be of temporary construction and shall not be more than
one (1) story in height and shall be capable of being completely enclosed when not in
use.
142. ROADSIDE STAND, TEMPORARY: A structure operated for the purpose of selling
only fresh produce, which shall be of temporary construction and shall be removed and
stored from view during the period when the stand is not in use.
143. SALVAGE YARDS or JUNK YARDS: An open area where waste, used, discarded or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled
or stored, including, but not limited to scrap iron, and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
tires and bottles, and including automobile wrecking yards-and any area of more than two
hundred (200) square feet for storage keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not
include uses established entirely in an enclosed building.
144. SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is
solid, open mesh, or bar configured, and is in the shape of a shallow dish, parabola, cone
or horn used to transmit and/or receive television, radio, or other electromagnetic
communication signals between terrestrially and/or extraterrestrially based sources. This
definition includes, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth
stations, television reception only satellite antennas (TVRO), and satellite microwave
antennas.
145. SCHOOL:
(a) CHARTER SCHOOL (PUBLIC SCHOOL ACADEMY): A charter school or
public school academy is a public school and a school district, and is subject to
the leadership and general supervision of the Michigan State Board of Education.
A public school academy is authorized by the executive action of an authorizing
body with jurisdiction.
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 469
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(b) PRIVATE SCHOOL: Any school other than a public school giving instruction
to children below the age of sixteen (16) years and not under the exclusive
supervision and control of the officials having charge of the public schools of the
state. Nonpublic schools include private, denominational, and parochial schools.
(c) ?PUBLIC SCHOOL: An elementary or secondary educational entity or agency
that has as its primary mission the teaching and learning of academic and
vocational-technical skills and knowledge, and is operated by a school district,
local act school district, special act school district, intermediate school district,
public school academy corporation, public state university, or department or state
board with jurisdiction.
146. SETBACK, STREET: Is the distance as measured from the centerline of the road to
establish the front, rear and/or side lot line and lot area for the purpose of establishing
yard and/or other requirements of this Ordinance.
147. SETBACK, YARD: Is the distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard
open space as required by this Ordinance.
148. SHOPPING CENTER: A grouping of individual retail businesses and service uses not
owned or operated in common, but located on a single site with common parking
facilities.
149. SOIL REMOVAL: The removal of any kind of soil or earth matter, including topsoil,
sand, gravel, clay, or rock to a depth greater than twelve (12) inches.
150. SOUND LEVEL: Sound level, indicated in decibels, is defined as the sound pressure
level above the reference level of 0.0002 microbar which would be read on any sound
level meter set to the "c" or "Flat" weighting network meeting the latest standards of the
American Standards Association.
151. SPECIAL LAND USE: Shall mean a use of land for which special land use approval
and permit is required. (See Section 2.7)
152. STABLE, PRIVATE: A stable for the keeping, breeding, boarding or training of
horses, donkeys, mules, ponies, llamas or similar large domesticated animals which are
owned by the residents of the principal use for private use.
153. STABLE, RIDING: A stable other than a private stable for the keeping, breeding,
boarding, selling, training or renting of horses, ponies, or similar large domesticated
animals, with a capacity of more than two (2) animals. ?
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
? ?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 470
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
154. STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above, or if there should be no floor above, then the space
between such floor and the ceiling next above. A basement may be considered a story if
its ceiling is over five (5) feet above the average established grade.
155. STORY-HALF: A half story is an uppermost story lying between the uppermost floor
and the roof, the useable floor area of which does not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the
floor area of the story immediately below it and which contains not less than one hundred
sixty (160) square feet of livable floor area with a clear ceiling height of not less than
seven feet four inches (7'4").
156. STREET:
(a) PUBLIC STREET: A thoroughfare or way, other than an alley, dedicated to the
use of the public and/or open to public travel.
(b) PRIVATE STREET: A street not dedicated to the use of the public and/or open
to public travel, or any street approved as a private road by the Township or
designated as private street upon a recorded plat.
157. STRUCTURE: Structure shall mean any construction, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground. ?
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 471
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
158. TEMPORARY BUILDING OR USE: A temporary building or use shall mean a
building or use permitted to exist during periods of construction of the principal building
or use, or for special events.
159. TOWNSHIP: Means the Charter Township of Plymouth, Wayne County, Michigan.
160. TOWNSHIP ENGINEER: The person(s) or entity designated by the Township Board
of Trustees to provide professional engineering services for the Charter Township of
Plymouth.
161. TOWNSHIP PLANNER: The person(s) or entity designated by the Township Board of
Trustees to provide professional community planning services for the Charter Township
of Plymouth.
162. TRUCK TERMINAL: A structure to which goods, materials, equipment or other
products are delivered for immediate distribution to other parts of the Township or
region; amalgamation for delivery in larger units to intrastate, interstate or international
destinations or distribution or amalgamation involving transfer to other modes of
transportation.
163. ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: The street line as established in the
Thoroughfare Plan of the Township and as established by the Inter-County Highway Plan
and right-of-way requirements for southeastern Michigan Wayne County segment,
Plymouth portion.
164. UTILITY ROOM: A utility room, or space, is a room, or space, located other than in
the basement, specifically designed and constructed primarily to house any home utilities
such as the heating unit and laundry facilities.
165. USE: The purpose for which land or buildings thereon are designed, arranged, or
intended to be occupied or used, or for which they are occupied or maintained.
(a) CHANGE OF USE: A discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution of
a use of a similar or different kind or class, or, the expansion of a use.
166. USE, SPECIAL LAND: A use that may be permitted within a zoning district but only
in specific locations, under specific conditions and when developed in accordance with
sound planning and site plan principles. ?
167. VARIANCE: A permitted modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
granted when strict enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would cause practical
difficulties or undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property
on which the variance is granted. ?
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
?
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 472
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
168. VETERINARY CLINIC OR HOSPITAL: An office of a duly licensed veterinary
professional for diagnosis, treatment, surgery and other veterinary care of domestic
animals, horses, livestock and other animals.
169. WALL: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in
carrying out the requirements of the Ordinance.
170. WAREHOUSE: A building or part of a building used or intended to be used primarily
for the storage of goods or chattels that are to be sold retail or wholesale from other
premises or sold wholesale from the same premises; for the storage of goods or chattels
to be shipped on mail order; for the storage of equipment or materials to be used or
installed at other premises by the owner or operator of the warehouse; or for similar
storage purposes.
171. WETLAND: Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water
table is usually at or near the land surface or the land is saturated with or covered by
water. Some wetland areas are more commonly referred to as bogs, swamps, or
marshlands. Wetlands shall also have one (1) or more of the following attributes:
(a) At least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes.
(b) The substrate is predominantly un-drained hydric soil.
(c) The substrate is saturated with water, or covered by shallow water at some time
during the growing season of each year.
172. WETLAND, REGULATED: Certain wetlands as regulated by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) under the provisions of Public Act 203 of
1979, as amended, that have any of the following characteristics:
(a) Contiguous to an inland lake, pond, river or stream;
(b) ?Not contiguous to an inland lake, pond, river or stream, and more than five (5)
acres in size;
(c) Other wetlands where the MDEQ determines, with notification to the property
owner, that protection is essential to preserve natural resources of the state from
pollution, impairment or destruction.
173. WHOLESALE SALES: The sales of goods generally in large quantities and primarily
to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 473
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
174. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION: Use of the radio frequency spectrum for the
purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. Structures used in wireless
communication may include, but are not limited to, radio and television towers, telephone
devices and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment
buildings and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this
definition are citizen band radio facilities, short-wave facilities, ham and amateur radio
facilities, television reception antennas, satellite dishes and governmental facilities that
are subject to state and federal law or regulations that preempt municipal regulatory
authority. Wireless communication shall not be included under the definition of
“essential services”.
(a) ABANDONED OR UNUSED: An antenna, equipment, facility or system
that has not been used for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days, or ninety
(90) days after new technology is available which permits the operation of the
system without the necessity of a wireless communication structure. Removal
of antennas or other equipment from the structure or cessation of reception or
transmission of radio signals shall be considered non-use.
(b) ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA: A wireless
communication device that is attached to an existing structure, such as a
building, steeple, utility pole, water tank, etc., for support, that does not
materially alter or materially change the appearance of the existing structure,
that is used to receive and transmit federally or state licensed communications
services via licensed segments of the radio frequency spectrum. The antenna
shall be small in scale and unobtrusive to the area in which it is located, such
as a single rod or a small box.
(c) CO-LOCATION: The use or attachment of two or more wireless
communication antennas or antenna arrays to one support structure, the
approval of which is intended to reduce the number of overall structures
required to support wireless communication antennas within the Township.
(d) ?COVERAGE AREA MAP: A map that identifies the location, height,
ownership and capacity details of all existing and known proposed wireless
communication antennas and facilities within Plymouth Township and all
areas within one-half mile of Plymouth Township’s boundaries. Capacity
details shall include the number of antennas and/or antenna arrays the support
structure can accommodate along with details related to any existing colocations,
and any modifications that would be needed to the proposed
equipment or service area to allow the provider to co-locate on an existing
support structure.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 474
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(e) FEATURE TOWER: A structure, designed to accommodate wireless
communication antennas and equipment, which has the appearance of a bell
tower, clock tower, tree, architectural element of a building, landmark feature,
or other structure which disguises its primary function as part of a wireless
communication system and that is compatible with the existing character of
the proposed site and general area, as approved by the Planning Commission.
Monopoles, lattice, or guy wired towers shall not be considered feature
towers.
(f) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT: All wires, bracing,
utility boxes and accessory buildings etc., that are used in conjunction with
wireless communication antennas and facilities.
(g) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A type of wireless
communication system that is visually apparent and may be accessory,
freestanding, or otherwise, that is used to enable wireless communication to
function. This shall include feature towers and monopoles along with any
antennas and required equipment. A lattice tower, guy-wired tower, or
wooden pole shall not be considered as a wireless communication facility. An
attached wireless communication antenna, as defined herein, is not a facility.
(h) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION MASTER PLAN: A map of the
Township that shows one provider’s existing and planned cell sites within the
Township boundaries, any existing and/or planned cell sites that would serve
the Township but are not located within the Township, and identification of
the geographical area each cell site would serve at the provider’s full
development. The anticipated activation date of each proposed cell site should
be noted. The Master Plan also includes a written description of the type of
consumer services and products that will be offered and of each type of
technology along with its’ radio frequencies that the provider anticipates using
over the next five years.
(i) ?WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any
structure erected or modified to support one or more wireless communication
antennas, either as a primary or as an ancillary function.
(j) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEM: Wireless communication
antennas and their support structures, facilities, and equipment that are used to
enable wireless communication to function.
175. YARD: An open space at grade line between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for certain architectural
features specified in this Ordinance equal to the minimum horizontal distance between a
lot line or street setback line and the nearest line of the main building.
? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 475
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
(a) YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
front lot line and the nearest line of a building.
(b) YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
rear lot line and the nearest line of a building.
(c) YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the
side lot line and the nearest line of a building. ?
(d) YARD, SIDE STREET: A yard extending from the side street lot line and the
nearest line of a building.
176. ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT: The written authority issued by the Chief
Building Official, or their designee, permitting the construction, removal, or alternation
of a building, structure, or fence in conformity with this Zoning Ordinance.?
END OF ARTICLE 36.
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION DOCUMENTS HISTORY OF REVISIONS TO
THIS ARTICLE SINCE ITS ADOPTION ON JUNE 7, 2004.
? ?
? ? SEC. 36.2 DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
ALL AMENDMENTS TO
ARTICLE XXXVI (36)
Page 1 of 2
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99
Article 36: Definitions
Amendments:
Page 2 of 2
ALL AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLE XXXVI (36)
The following language was amended on 5/24/09
78. GASOLINE SERVICE STATION WITH OR WITHOUT THE SALE OF
CONVENIENCE GOODS: An establishment that includes buildings and premises for
the primary purpose of retail gasoline sales. An automobile convenience/gasoline service
station may also include an area devoted to sales of automotive items and convenience
goods primarily sold to patrons purchasing gasoline. A service station is not an
automobile repair or body shop. The retail sale of foods, drinks and other convenience
goods may be included in addition to the sale of fuel.
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 476
Article: Conflicting Ordinances
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXVII
CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
SEC. 37.1 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES?
All previous zoning ordinances adopted by the Township of Plymouth, and all amendments
thereto, that were made effective prior to the date of adoption of this Ordinance are hereby
repealed as at the effective date of this Ordinance, together with all previous ordinances, or parts
thereof, that conflict or are inconsistent with this Ordinance. However, no act done, offense
committed, right, liability or restriction accruing, accrued or acquired, or penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be affected or impaired.
Any prosecution pending at the time this Ordinance becomes effective, or any prosecution which
may be started within one (1) year after the effective date of this Ordinance in consequence of
any violation of any ordinance repealed herein, which violation was committed previous to the
effective date of this Ordinance, shall be tried and determined exactly as if such ordinance has
not been repealed.
? SEC. 37.1 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Charter Township of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance No. 99 Page 477
Article 38: Effective Date
Amendments:
ARTICLE XXXVIII
EFFECTIVE DATE
SEC. 38.1 EFFECTIVE DATE?
This Ordinance is hereby declared to be effective on the 7th day of June, 2004.
SEC. 38.2 ADOPTION ?
This Ordinance was adopted by the Township Board of Trustees of the Township of Plymouth,
following compliance with all procedures required by the Township Zoning Act, at its regular
meeting duly held on the 25th day of May, 2004, and ordered to be given publication in the
manner prescribed by law.
? SEC. 38.1 EFFECTIVE DATE
? SEC. 38.2 ADOPTION
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF WAYNE
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH
HISTORIC DISTRICT ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1016
AMENDMENT #23
AN ORDINANCE TO CREATE THE PLYMOUTH HISTORIC DISTRICT
ORDINANCE; TO PROVIDE FOR TITLE, SCOPE, PURPOSE AND
INTENT; TO PROVIDE FOR DEFINITIONS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE
ESTABLISHING, MODIFYING, OR ELIMINATING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS; TO PROVIDE FOR THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
COMMISSION; TO PROVIDE FOR COMMISSION MEETINGS,
RECORDKEEPING, AND PROCEDURE; TO PROVIDE FOR HISTORIC
DISTRICT STUDY COMMITTEE AND STUDY COMMITTEE REPORT;
TO PROVIDE FOR PROCEDURE FOR CREATION OF HISTORIC
DISTRICTS; TO PROVIDE FOR PERMIT APPLICATIONS; TO
PROVIDE FOR ORDINARY MAINTENANCE; TO PROVIDE FOR
REVIEW BY THE COMMISSION; TO PROVIDE FOR APPEAL OF
COMMISSION DECISION; TO PROVIDE FOR REMEDIES FOR WORK
WITHOUT A PERMIT; TO PROVIDE FOR PROTECTION FROM
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT; TO PROVIDE FOR EMERGENCY
MORATORIUM; TO PROVIDE FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION; TO
PROVIDE FOR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRANTS; TO REPEAL
ALL ORDINANCES OR PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT
THEREWITH; TO PROVIDE FOR SEVERABILITY; TO PROVIDE FOR
SAVINGS CLAUSE; TO PROVIDE FOR PUBLICATION; AND TO
PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH ORDAINS:
Ordinance No. 1016, Amendment #23, the Historic District Ordinance, is
hereby adopted to read as follows
SECTION I: HISTORIC DISTRICT ORDINANCE
1
1. 1. Title
This Ordinance shall be known as the " Historic District Ordinance of the Charter
Township of Plymouth".
1. 2. Scope, purpose and intent.
The purpose of this ordinance is to foster the preservation of historic structures and places
within the Charter Township of Plymouth by enabling owners to voluntarily seek the creation of
historic districts for their properties under applicable laws of the State of Michigan. The purpose
is also to safeguard property rights by requiring approval of a proposed historic district from
each of the property owners within the proposed historic district.
Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public purpose and the Board of Trustees
of the Charter Township of Plymouth may hereby regulate, in compliance with this ordinance the
construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in
historic districts within the Township limits. The intent of this ordinance is to:
1. Safeguard the heritage of the Charter Township of Plymouth by preserving districts
which reflect elements of its history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture.
2. Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the surrounding areas.
3. Foster civic beauty.
4. Strengthen the local economy.
5. Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the
citizens of the Charter Township of Plymouth and of the State of Michigan.
The Board of Trustees may by ordinance establish one or more historic districts. All historic
districts shall be administered by the Historic District Commission pursuant to this Ordinance.
1. 3. Definitions.
1. " Alteration" means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic
size or shape.
2. " Certificate of Appropriateness" means the written approval of a permit application for
work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a resource.
3. " Commission" means the Historic District Commission of the Charter Township of
Plymouth.
4. " Committee" means the Commission acting as a historic district study committee under this
Ordinance.
5. " Demolition" means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part. of a resource and
includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
2
6. " Demolition by Neglect" means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that
results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of
the resource.
7. " Denial" means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and
that adversely affects a resource.
8. " Fire Alarm System" means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire
or by-products of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke alarms.
9. " Historic District" means an area, or group of areas, not necessarily having contiguous
boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.
10. " Historic Preservation" means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection
of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.
11. " Historic Resource" means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object,
feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture of the Charter Township of Plymouth, State of Michigan, or the United States.
12. " Notice to Proceed" means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under MCL 399.205( 6).
13. " Open Space" means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade
landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer between other resources.
14. " Ordinary Maintenance" means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition
through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition.
Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through
the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not
constitute work for the purposes of this Ordinance.
15. " Proposed Historic District" means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by the Historic
District Study Committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should
be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district.
16. " Repair" means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound condition by
any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for the
purposes of this Ordinance.
17. " Resource" means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic
buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic district.
3
18. " Smoke Alarm" means a single- station or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke and
not connected to a system. As used in this subdivision, " single- station alarm" means an assembly
incorporating a detector, the control equipment, and the alarm sounding device into a single unit,
operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation. " Multiplestation
alarm" means 2 or more single- station alarms that are capable of interconnection such
that actuation of 1 alarm causes all integrated separate audible alarms to operate.
19. " Work" means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition.
1. 4. Establishing, Modifying, or Eliminating Historic Districts.
1. The Board of Trustees may at any time, upon recommendation of the Commission, establish
by ordinance a historic district, including a proposed district previously considered and rejected,
may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic
district. Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, the Commission shall
act as a historic district study committee and shall follow the procedures as provided in this
Ordinance.
2. In considering elimination of a historic district, the Commission shall follow the procedures
set forth in Section 399.203( 1)-( 3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended, for the issuance of a
preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of
showing one or more of the following:
a. The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled the establishment of
the district.
b. The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined.
c. The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures.
1. 5. Historic District Commission.
The Historic District Commission of the Charter Township of Plymouth is hereby
established. Each member of the Commission shall reside within the Township limits. The
Commission shall consist of seven ( 7) members. Each member shall be appointed by the Board
of Trustees. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or
knowledge of historic preservation. Initial members shall be appointed within 6 months after the
ordinance establishing the commission is enacted. Members shall be appointed for a term of
three ( 3) years, except the initial appointments of three ( 3) members for a term of two (2) years
and two (2) members for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for three- year
terms. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event of a vacancy on the
Commission, interim appointments shall be made by the Board of Trustees within sixty( 60)
calendar days to complete the unexpired term of such position. Two (2) members shall be
appointed from a list submitted by duly organized local historic preservation organizations. If
such a person is available for appointment, one member shall be an architect who has two years
of architectural experience or who is duly registered in the State of Michigan.
4
The Board of Trustees may by resolution prescribe powers and duties of the Commission,
in addition to but not in violation of those prescribed in this Ordinance, that foster historic
preservation activities, projects, and programs in the Charter Township of Plymouth. The Board
of Trustees may provide procedures for terminating an appointment due to the acts or omissions
of the member.
1. 6. Commission Meetings, Recordkeeping, and Procedure.
1. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly, if there is business to be considered, or more
frequently at the call of the chairman of the Commission.
2. The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice of
the date, time, and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267.
A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application
to be reviewed or considered by the Commission.
3. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and actions. A writing prepared,
owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the Commission in the performance of an
official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of
Information, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended.
4. The commission shall adopt design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties
under this act.
1. 7. Historic District Study Committee and the Study Committee Report.
The Commission shall act as the Historic District Study Committee for purposes of this
Ordinance and the laws of the State of Michigan. The Study Committee shall do all of the
following:
1. Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district
following procedures established by the State Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan
Historical Center.
2. Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and historic resources located within
that district.
3. Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources within a proposed historic
district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of
historic resources, the Committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued
by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register
of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR part 60, and criteria established or approved by the
State Historic Preservation Office.
5
4. Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report that addresses at a minimum
all of the following:
a. The charge of the Committee.
b. The composition of Committee membership.
c. The historic district(s) studied.
d. The boundaries of each proposed historic district in writing and on maps.
e. The history of each proposed historic district.
f. The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual
resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to
the evaluation criteria.
5. The Committee shall transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the Planning Commission, the State Historic Preservation Office, the
Michigan Historical Commission, and the State Historic Preservation Review Board.
6. The Committee shall make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant to
MCL 399.203( 4).
7. Not less than sixty( 60) calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the
Committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended.
Public notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by
Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less
than fourteen ( 14) calendar days prior to the hearing to the owners of properties within the
proposed historic district, as listed on the most current tax rolls. The report shall be made
available to the public in compliance with the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, Public Act
442 of 1976, as amended.
8. After the date of the public hearing, the Committee and the Board of Trustees shall have not
more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees, to take the following
actions:
a. The Committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendations and the
recommendations, if any, to the Planning Commission, the State Historic Preservation Office,
the Michigan Historical Commission, the State Historic Preservation Review Board, and the
Board of Trustees as to the establishment of a historic district. If the recommendation is to
establish a historic district, the final report shall include a draft of the proposed ordinance.
b. After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district, the
Board of Trustees, at its discretion, may introduce and approve or reject an ordinance. If the
Board of"Trustees approves an ordinance establishing one or more historic districts, the Clerk
6
of the Charter Township of Plymouth shall file a copy of the ordinance, including a legal
description of the property or properties located within each historic district, with the Register
of Deeds. The Board of Trustees shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic
district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic
district, as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment of the
historic district pursuant to a written petition.
1. 8. Procedure for Creation of Historic Districts.
The procedure for the creation of a historic district in the Charter Township of Plymouth
shall be only as follows. The owner, or owners, of a property, structure, or place shall submit a
written application to the building department of the Charter Township of Plymouth for creation
of a historic district. The application shall be forwarded to the Committee within two business
days of its submission. The Committee shall, within ninety( 90) days, meet to consider the
application. In considering the application, the Committee shall follow the procedures set forth
in Section 1. 7.
1. 9. Permit Applications.
I. A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource is
performed within a historic district. The person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
organization, institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an
application for a permit with the building department of the Charter Township of Plymouth.
2. Upon receipt of a complete application, the building department shall immediately refer the
application, along with all required supporting materials that make the application complete, to
the Commission.
3. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the Commission has
acted on the application by issuing a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Notice to Proceed as
prescribed in this Ordinance. The Commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness
unless the applicant certifies in the application that the property where work will be undertaken
has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke
alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction
code act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125. 1501 to 125. 1531.
4. The Commission shall file Certificates of Appropriateness, Notices to Proceed, and Denials of
applications for permits with the building department. A permit shall not be issued until the
Commission has acted as prescribed by this Ordinance.
5. If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource, and the
Commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public
interest of the Charter Township of Plymouth, the State of Michigan, or the nation, the
Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible
plan for the preservation of the resource.
7
6. The failure of the Commission to act on an application within sixty (60) calendar days after
the date a complete application is filed, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the
applicant and the Commission shall be considered to constitute approval.
7. The Commission may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit application.
8. If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the building department and
the Charter Township of Plymouth. A Denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation by
the Commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be
re- submitted for Commission review when the suggested changes have been made. The Denial
shall also include the notification of the applicant's right to appeal to the State Historic
Preservation Review Board and thereafter, to the circuit court.
9. Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a Notice to Proceed
by the Commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be
demonstrated by a finding of the Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct
any of the following conditions:
a. The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants.
b. The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial
benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary
planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances.
c. Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a
governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the
hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include
offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site
within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner.
d. Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community.
1. 10. Ordinary Maintenance.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of
a resource within a historic district or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by
the building department or other duly delegated authority before the Ordinance was enacted.
1. 11. Review by the Commission.
1. The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a resource and shall not
review and act upon interior arrangements unless specifically requested to do so by the owner of
the resource or unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource.
2. The Commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in
MCL 399.205( 3).
3. In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C. F.R. part
8
67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic
districts administered by the Commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to
the Secretary of Interior' s Standards and guidelines and are established or approved by the State
Historic Preservation Office.
4. In reviewing plans, the Commission shall also consider all of the following:
a. The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to
the historic value of the surrounding area.
b. The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and
to the surrounding area.
c. The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be
used.
d. Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds relevant.
e. Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the property where the work will
be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm
system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett- Hale single
state construction code act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125. 1501 to 125. 1531.
1. 12. Appeal of a Commission Decision.
An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning a permit application
may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation Review Board. The appeal shall be filed
within sixty( 60) calendar days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The permit
applicant may submit all or part of the permit applicant' s evidence and arguments in written
form. The State Historic Preservation Review Board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly
scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the
State Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the circuit court for the
County of Wayne.
1. 13. Work Without a Permit.
When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the Commission finds
that the work does not qualify for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission may require
an owner to restore the resource to the condition that the resource was in before the inappropriate
work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness. If the owner
does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the
Commission may seek an order from the circuit court for the County of Wayne to require the
owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for
a Certificate of Appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order
of the court, the Commission may direct the building department to enter the property and
conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that
it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of
the work done shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied as a special assessment against
9
the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, the building department may
enter a property for purposes of this section.
1. 14. Demolition by Neglect.
Upon a finding by the Commission that a resource within a historic district is threatened
with Demolition by Neglect, the Commission may do either of the following:
1. Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition
by neglect.
2. If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the Commission may authorize
the building department to enter the property and make such repairs as necessary to prevent
Demolition by Neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied
as a special assessment against the property. The building department may enter the property for
purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court for the County of Wayne.
1. 15. Emergency Moratorium.
If the Board of Trustees determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to
resources located within a historic district, the Board of Trustees may by resolution declare an
emergency moratorium on all such work for a period not to exceed six ( 6) months. The Board of
Trustees may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six( 6)
months, upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to a resource or resources is still present.
Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may
be summarily denied.
1. 16. Penalties for Violations.
1. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of
government that violates this Ordinance is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not
more than $ 5, 000.00.
2. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of
government that violates this Ordinance may be ordered by the circuit court for the County of
Wayne to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to,
altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished.
1. 17. Acceptance of Gifts or Grants.
The Board of Trustees may accept state or federal grants for historic preservation
purposes; may participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation, and
may accept public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes. The Board of Trustees may
by resolution delegate to the Commission the administration of grants, gifts, and program
responsibilities.
10
SECTION II. REPEAL.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance.
except as herein provided. are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this
Ordinance full force and effect.
SECTION III. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion thereof.
SECTION IV. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
The repeal or amendment herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or act committed
or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending litigation or prosecution of any
right established or occurring prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION V. PUBLICATION.
The Clerk for the Charter Township of Plymouth shall cause this Ordinance to be
published in the manner required by law.
SECTION VI. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take full force and effect upon publication.
CERTIFICATION
The foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the Charter Township of Plymouth Board
of Trustees at its regular meeting called and held on the 23rd day of April, 2019 and was ordered
to be given publication in the manner required by law.
V07-4,---
Jer, orv;7/ Clerk
Introduced: April 9, 2019
Published: April 25. 2019
Adopted: April 23, 2019
Effective upon Publication: April 25. 2019
11
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF WAYNE
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH
Amendment 23
ENVIRONMENTAL LEADERSHIP COMMISSION
ORDINANCE NO. 1016
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH
PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF A CITIZEN COMMISSION TO ADDRESS LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL
EDUCATION, PROGRAMS, STEWARDSHIP, SUSTAINABILITY, OUTREACH AND SIMILAR ISSUES IN AND
FOR THE RESIDENTS AND GUESTS OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH; PROVIDING FOR
PENALTY; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION
AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH ORDAINS:
Ordinance No. 1016, the Environmental Leadership Commission, is hereby adopted to read as follows:
SECTION I: TITLE:
This Ordinance shall be known and may be referred to as the Charter Township of Plymouth
Environmental Leadership Ordinance. This Ordinance shall be placed in Chapter II of the Code of
Ordinances for the Charter Township of Plymouth.
SECTION II: ENVIRONMENTAL LEADERSHIP COMMISSION.
(a) Purpose.
The Plymouth Township Environmental Leadership Commission (hereafter "commission") exists to
enhance understanding and encourage practices that lead to a clean, sustainable, environmentally
responsible, and healthy community by:
(1) Educating residents, businesses and guests regarding environmental stewardship and
awareness, environmental policies, sustainability, and best practices.
(2) Partnering with individuals, government agencies, businesses, and allied environmental
organizations to promote community participation in local environmental protection, awareness,
education, and enhancement projects and initiatives.
(3) Serving as a resource for information to answer questions from residents of the Township
and others about environmental protection issues and policies.
(b) Established, appointment of members.
(1) There is hereby established a Plymouth Township Environmental Leadership Commission.
The commission shall have up to (9) members to be appointed by the Board of Trustees upon the
recommendation of the Supervisor for staggered terms of three (3) years. The Supervisor may
terminate the appointment of any member who has been absent from three (3) consecutive regularly
scheduled meetings of the commission without prior excuse.
(c) Duties and powers.
(1) To actively promote the purpose of the commission.
(2) To serve as a coordinating body for the purpose of educating Township residents,
businesses, and guests about environmental issues and policies impacting Township life.
(3) To work with the Township to identify and address conditions, policies, or practices that may
enhance or detract from a healthy, sustainable community.
(4) To work with the Township to create conditions, to establish policies and practices, and to
develop or adopt programs which will enhance understanding and encourage practices that lead to a
healthy, clean, and sustainable community.
(5) To render advice, and to monitor and evaluate Township policies, practices, and procedures
which affect the environmental quality and sustainability efforts within the Township.
(6) To assist the Township in its efforts to comply with environmental codes, ordinances,
regulations and statutes from local, county, state or federal authorities.
(7) To promote community participation in local environmental sustainability, cleanup,
restoration, and public education efforts.
(8) To monitor and promote public awareness of water quality issues in creeks, rivers, and
wetlands within the Township.
(9) To monitor and promote public awareness of recycling, waste management, best practices,
and similar sustainability efforts within the Township.
(10) To serve as a resource for information about environmental policies and practices. As part
of this, the commission may engage in public education projects, hold meetings, and conduct
workshops.
(d) Organization, meetings, rules and procedures.
(1) Members of the commission shall be residents of the Township who are eligible for
appointive office. All members of the commission shall be voting members of the commission.
(2) The commission shall annually elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary from
among its members. An elected officer or employee of the Township selected by the Supervisor may
serve as an administrative liaison to the commission as needed.
(3) The commission shall establish a regular time and place of meeting and shall hold one (1)
regular meeting at least annually. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson, or by a majority of
members of the commission upon written notice received by each member at least five (5) days prior to
such meeting.
(4) The commission shall make and amend rules and procedures governing its organization
(hereafter "bylaws") that are not inconsistent with the Charter, this chapter, this section, or any other
Township ordinance. The bylaws adopted by the commission shall not be effective until the bylaws are
approved by the Supervisor. Any amendment to the bylaws shall not be effective until the amendment
is approved by the Supervisor.
(5) The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions and shall submit an
annual report to the Township Board of Trustees.
(6) A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business for regular and/or special meetings. The concurring vote of a majority of a quorum of
commission members present at a meeting shall be necessary for the commission to take action.
(7) The commission shall comply with State law, including but not limited to the Michigan Open
Meetings Act and the Michigan Freedom of Information Act.
(8) All members of the commission shall serve without compensation.
SECTION III. VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any other provisions of this ordinance is responsible
for a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine not to exceed $100.00.
SECTION IV. REPEAL.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, except as herein
provided, are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
SECTION V. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion thereof.
SECTION VI. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
The repeal or amendment herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or act committed or done, or
any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending litigation or prosecution of any right established or
occurring prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION VII. PUBLICATION.
The Clerk for the Charter Township of Plymouth shall cause this Ordinance to be published in the
manner required by law.
SECTION VIII. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take full force and effect upon publication.
CERTIFICATION
The foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the Township Board Trustees of the Charter
Township of Plymouth at its regular meeting called and held on the _______ day of ____________,
2019, and was ordered to be given publication in the manner required by law.
Jerry Vorva, Clerk
Introduced: ______________________
Published: _______________________
Adopted: ________________________
Effective upon Publication: __________
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF WAYNE
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH
PROHIBITION OF MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1016
AMENDMENT #21
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE A TITLE FOR THE ORDINANCE; TO DEFINE
WORDS; TO PROHIBIT MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS WITHIN THE
BOUNDARIES OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH PURSUANT TO
INITIATED LAW 1 OF 2018, MCL 333.27951 ET SEQ., AS MAY BE AMENDED; TO
PROVIDE PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE; TO PROVIDE FOR
SEVERABILITY; TO REPEAL ALL ORDINANCES OR PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN
CONFLICT THEREWITH; AND TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH ORDAINS:
Ordinance No. 1016, Amendment# 21, the Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments
Ordinance, is hereby adopted to read as follows:
SECTION I. TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the Charter Township of Plymouth
Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments Ordinance.
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS
Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in Initiated Law 1 of 2018,
MCL 333. 27951 et seq., as may be amended.
SECTION III. NO MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
The Charter Township of Plymouth hereby prohibits all marihuana establishments within
the boundaries of the Township pursuant to Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL 333. 27951 et seq., as
may be amended.
SECTION IV. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
1. Any person who disobeys neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of
this ordinance or who causes allows or consents to any of the same shall be deemed to be
responsible for the violation of this ordinance. A violation of this ordinance is deemed to be a
nuisance per se.
2. A violation of this ordinance is a municipal civil infraction, for which the fines
shall not be less than $ 100 nor more than $ 500, in the discretion of the Court. The foregoing
sanctions shall be in addition to the rights of the Township to proceed at law or equity with
other appropriate and proper remedies. Additionally, the violator shall pay costs which may
include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the Township incurs in connection with the
municipal civil infraction.
3. Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
4. In addition, the Township may seek injunctive relief against persons alleged to
be in violation of this ordinance, and such other relief as may be provided by law.
5. This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer of the Township, by a peace officer, or by such other person(s) as
designated by the Township Board from time to time.
SECTION V. SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion thereof.
SECTION VI. SAVINGS CLAUSE
The repeal or amendment herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or act committed
or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending litigation or prosecution of any
right established or occurring prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION VI. PUBLICATION
The Clerk for the Charter Township of Plymouth shall cause this Ordinance to be
published in the manner required by law.
The remainder of this page is intentionally blank.]
SECTION VIII. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take full force and effect upon publication.
CERTIFICATION
The foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the Charter Township of Plymouth Board
Trustees at its regular meeting called and held on the 22nd day of January, 2019, and was
ordered to be given publication in the manner required by law.
Jerry VI a, Cle+l,
Introduced: January 8, 2019
Published: January 24, 2019
Adopted: January 22, 2019
Effective upon Publication: January 24, 2019
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF WAYNE
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH
CRIMINAL CODE SUPPLEMENTATION ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1016
AMENDMENT #22
AN ORDINANCE TO SUPPLEMENT THE TOWNSHIP CRIMINAL CODE; TO
PROVIDE FOR ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE
STATE PENAL CODE; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY STATE LAW MISDEMEANOR
VIOLATION IS A VIOLATION OF THE TOWNSHIP CRIMINAL CODE; TO
PROVIDE THAT POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PARAPHERNALIA
AND CHEMICAL AGENTS ARE UNLAWFUL; TO PROVIDE THAT
MISREPRESENTING ONE' S AGE TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IS
UNLAWFUL; TO PROVIDE THAT POSSESSION OR USE OF TOBACCO, VAPOR
PRODUCTS OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS IS UNLAWFUL; TO
PROVIDE THAT OPEN HOUSE PARTIES ARE UNLAWFUL; TO PROVIDE THAT
PROSTITUTION IS UNLAWFUL; TO PROVIDE THAT ANIMAL CRUELTY IS
UNLAWFUL; TO PROVIDE THAT FRAUDULENT SCHEMES ARE UNLAWFUL; TO
PROVIDE THAT BREACH OF THE PEACE IS UNLAWFUL; TO PROVIDE THAT
PUBLIC INTOXICATION IS UNLAWFUL; TO PROVIDE PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE; TO REPEAL ALL ORDINANCES OR PARTS
OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH; TO PROVIDE FOR
SEVERABILITY; TO PROVIDE FOR SAVINGS CLAUSE; TO PROVIDE FOR
PUBLICATION; AND TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH ORDAINS:
Ordinance No. 1016, Amendment# 22, the Criminal Code Supplementation Ordinance, is
hereby adopted to read as follows:
SECTION I: SUPPLEMENT TO CRIMINAL CODE
VII-2. 00 Criminal Code, adoption by reference.
A) The Charter Township of Plymouth, pursuant to and as allowed by Section 23 of
Public Act 359 of 1947, MCL § 42.23, adopts by reference the following provisions of the State
Penal Code, Public Act 328 of Public Acts of 1931, as amended, the Fraudulent Access to
Computers, Computer Systems, and Computer Networks Act, Public Act 53 of 1979, as
amended, and the Carless, Reckless, or Negligent Use of Firearms Ac, Act 45 of 1952, as
amended. The following statutes are in addition to, and not a replacement of, the state law
provisions already adopted by the Charter Township of Plymouth and codified in this Section.
MCL §§ 333. 7404, 750. 15, 750.27, 750.28, 750. 33( a), 750. 38, 750.39, 750.40, 750.42b( 2),
750.49, 750. 50, 750. 50a, 750. 51, 750. 52, 750. 57, 750.66, 750.77, 750. 81, 750.95a, 750. 103,
750. 108, 750. 109a, 750. 115, 750. 120a, 750. 120b, 750. 131, 750. 135a, 750. 136b( 1) and ( 8- 10),
750. 137, 750. 141 through 750. 145, 750. 145a- 750. 145f, 750. 157s; 750. 157w, 750. 168( 1),
750. 169, 750. 170, 750. 174( 1- 2), 750. 174a(2), 750. 181( 1- 2), 750. 184, 750. 197a, 750. 199,
750.204b, 750.204c, 750.214, 750.215, 750.216, 750.216a, 750.216b, 750.217a, 750.217g,
750.217h, 750. 218( 2), 750. 219a(2)( a), 750.221, 750.223( 1), 750.227d, 750.229, 750.231c,
750.232, 750.232a( 1), 750.233, 750.234, 750.234d, 750.234e, 750.234f, 750.235, 750.235a,
750.237( 1- 2), 750.240, 750.241, 750.282, 750.291, 750.292, 750.335, 750.337, 750. 352,
750.355, 750. 356, 750. 356d, 750. 364, 750. 368( 1- 3), 750.369, 750.370, 750.377a( 1)( d),
750.380( 5), 750. 381, 750. 382, 750. 383, 750.384, 750.385, 750. 387, 750. 388, 750.390, 750. 391,
750.394 through 750.396, 750.398, 750.400, 750.411a, 750.411d, 750.411g, 750.411h, 750. 414a,
750.415, 750.416, 750.419, 750.421b, 750.421c, 750.448, 750.449a through 750.451, 750.462,
750.463, 750.464a, 750.465, 750.467, 750.468, 750.469, 750.471, 750.473, 750.477a, 750.479c,
750.481, 750.483, 750.485, 750.487, 750.489, 750.490a, 750.492a( 1)( d), 750.493, 750.493a,
750.493b, 750.493c, 750.493d, 750.493e, 750.495, 750.495a( 1), 750.496, 750.497, 750.498,
750.498b( 1), 750. 501, 750. 502c, 750.507, 750. 507b, 750. 510, 750.518, 750. 533, 750. 534,
750.535( 1) and ( 5), 750. 536a, 750. 539b, 750.540a, 750. 540b, 750.540e, 750.540f(1),
750.540g( 1)( a), 750.541, 750.542, 750.543, 750. 546, 750.547, 750.548, 750. 549, 750.550,
750.551, 750.552, 750.552a, 750. 556, 750.562, 750. 563, 750. 564, 750. 565, 750. 566, 752. 791-
752.794, 752. 797( 1)( a), 752. 861, 752.862, and 752. 863c.
B) State Law Misdemeanor Violations. Every act prohibited by state law as a
misdemeanor is hereby prohibited, and whoever violates the provisions of this section within the
Township shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the same penalty provided by state law,
except that the penalty shall, in no case, exceed a fine of$500 or imprisonment for 93 days, or
both.
VII-2. 01- 2. 07 ( Unchanged)
VII-2. 08 Possession and/ or Use of Controlled Substances and/or Chemical Agents
A) It is unlawful for any person to use or knowingly or intentionally to possess lysergic
acid diethlamide, peyote, mescaline, dimethyltryptamine, psicolyn, or such other substances as
defined in Schedules 1- 5 of Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended (MCL 333. 7336), of the State of
Michigan, unless the substance was obtained directly from or pursuant to a valid prescription or
order of practitioner(" practitioner" being defined as in Subdivisions ( a) and ( b) of MCL
333. 7109, as amended) while acting in the course of his professional practice or except as
otherwise authorized by this section.
B) First offenders. When any person who has not previously been convicted as set forth
herein or under any statute of the United States or state law or municipal ordinance relating to
possession or use of the substances as defined herein pleads guilty to or is found guilty of
violating this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the
accused person, may defer further proceedings and place the accused person on probation upon
certain terms and conditions, including therein such requirement that the accused person attend
courses of instruction or rehabilitation on the medical, psychological and social effects of the
misuse of drugs and/ or the substances defined herein. Upon violation of a term of condition, the
court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as the court determines. Upon fulfillment of
the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceeding against
him. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a
conviction for the purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon the
conviction of a crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this subsection with
respect to any person. The Department of Public Safety shall retain a nonpublic record of an
arrest and discharge or dismissal under this subsection. This record shall be furnished to any
court or police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal
action involving possession or use of the substances as defined above has already once availed
himself of the provisions of this subsection.
C) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. A person shall not possess drug paraphernalia as
defined by section 7451 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 ( MCL 333. 7451) knowing that the drug
paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance as defined by
part 71 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 ( MCL 333. 7101 et seq.). This subsection shall not apply
to the lawful use of marihuana, but shall apply to possession of marihuana paraphernalia by
persons less than 21 years of age.
D) Hypodermic syringes, needles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to have,
possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any hypodermic syringe, needle or any other
instrument or implement for the illegal use of narcotic or dangerous or hallucinatory drugs as
defined by state law, by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner
or method of introduction and which is possessed, sold, offered, dispensed or given away for that
purpose.
E) Loitering about places where controlled substances, etc., are illegally stored, kept or
used. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that the controlled substances, devices and/or
other instruments enumerated and prescribed within this section are being illegally sold,
dispensed, furnished, given away, stored kept or used, to loiter about, frequent or be present in
such building, apartment, automobile, beat or place of any description wherein such illegal
activity is being carried on, conducted or operated or wherein such illegal substances, devices
and/ or instruments prescribed herein are being illegally kept or stored.
F) Use of chemical agents.
1) As used in this section, the term " chemical agent" means any substance
containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the property of releasing
toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited to, glue, acetone, toluene, carbon
tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon derivatives.
2) No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses of nervous
system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical agent, drug or other
substance or matter or intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any model glue,
drug or other substance or matter into his respiratory or circulatory system. This section
shall not prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
3) Any person who assists, aids, abets, or encourages any person to violate the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
G) Controlled substances to be kept in original package. It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly possess any controlled substance as defined in MCL § 333. 7212, MCL §
333. 7214, MCL § 333. 7216, MCL § 333. 7218 and MCL § 333. 7220, and as amended,
commonly referred to Schedule 1 through Schedule 5 controlled substances, unless it is kept in
the original package or container in which they were received from a person who may lawfully
prescribe or dispense controlled substances; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed
to apply to any duly licensed medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian, or
chiropodist, or to any authorized person acting directly under their supervision or control.
H) Possession or use of marihuana by a person under 21 years of age. It shall be
unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to knowingly or intentionally possess or use
marihuana.
VII-2.09 Misrepresenting age to obtain alcoholic liquor.
A) No person under the age of 21 years shall by documentary evidence falsely
represent himself to be 21 years of age or over for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to
purchase any alcoholic liquor nor shall any person under the age of 21 years give such false
information regarding his age to any person selling alcoholic liquor for the purpose of securing a
sale thereof to himself or any other person under the age of 21 years.
B) No person shall furnish false documentary evidence to any person under 21 years
of age to be used by any such person for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages.
C) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a maximum fine of$500 and/ or a maximum imprisonment of 93 days.
VII-2. 10 Possession or use of tobacco, vapor products or alternative nicotine products.
A) Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
Chewing tobacco" means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco which is
inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked.
Vapor product" or" alternative nicotine product" means a noncombustible product
containing nicotine or not that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or
other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce vapor from nicotine or not in a solution or other form. "Vapor product" includes an
electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or
device and a vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form than is
intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, or similar product or device. " Vapor product" does not include a product
regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") under
subchapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 USC 351 to 360FFF-7.
Tobacco snuff' means shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco which may be inhaled
through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums.
B) Possession or use in public place prohibited. A person under 18 years of age shall not
possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars, or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or
tobacco snuff, or possess or use tobacco in any other form, or possess or smoke vapor product or
alternative nicotine products on a public highway, street, alley, park, or other lands used for
public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement.
C) Penalty. A person who violates subsection( b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than$ 50. 00 for each offense. Pursuant to a
probation order, the court may require a person who violates subsection( b) of this section to
participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, if available. A
probationer who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment
program under this section is responsible for the cost of participating in the program. In addition,
a person who violates this section is subject to the following:
1) For the first violation the court may order the person to do one of the following:
a. Perform not more than 16 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing
home or long term care facility.
b. Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as described in
this subsection.
2) For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion risk
reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than 32 hours of
community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long term care facility.
3) For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health
promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not
more than 48 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long term care
facility.
VII-2.11. Open house parties.
A) Definitions:
Alcoholic beverage" means an alcoholic liquor as defined in section 105 the Michigan
Liquor Control Code of 1998 ( MCL 436. 1105 et seq.).
Allow" means to give permission for, or approval of, possession or consumption of an
alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, by any of the following means:
1) In writing.
2) By one or more oral statements.
3) By any form of conduct, including a failure to take corrective action, that
would cause a reasonable person to believe that permission or approval has been
given.
Control over any premises, residence, or other real property" means the authority to
regulate, direct, restrain, superintend, control, or govern the conduct of other individuals
on or within that premises, residence, or other real property, and includes, but is not
limited to, a possessory right.
Controlled substance" means that term as defined in section 7104 of Public Act No. 368
of 1978 ( MCL 333. 7104).
Corrective action" means any of the following:
1) Making a prompt demand that the minor or other individual depart from the
premises, residence, or other real property, or refrain from the unlawful
possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or controlled substance on or
within that premises, residence, or other real property, and taking additional
action described in subsection( 2) or( 3) of this definition if the minor or other
individual does not comply with the request.
2) Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of
alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to a law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction over the violation.
3) Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of
alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to another person having a greater
degree of authority or control over the conduct of persons on or within the
premises, residence, or other real property.
Minor means an individual less than 21 years of age.
Premises" means a permanent or temporary place of assembly, other than a residence,
including, but not limited to, any of the following:
1) A meeting hall, meeting room, or conference room.
2) A public or private park.
Residence" means a permanent or temporary place of dwelling, including, but not
limited to, any of the following:
1) A house, apartment, condominium, or mobile home.
2) A cottage, cabin, trailer, or tent.
3) A motel unit, hotel unit, or bed and breakfast unit.
Social gathering means an assembly of two or more individuals for any purpose,
unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are members of the same
household or immediate family.
B) Except as otherwise provided in subsection ( c) of this section, an owner, tenant, or
other person having control over any premises, residence, or other real property shall not do
either of the following:
1) Knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage at a social
gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property.
2) Knowingly allow any individual to consume or possess a controlled substance at a
social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property.
C) This section does not apply to the use, consumption, or possession of a controlled
substance by an individual pursuant to a lawful prescription, or to the use, consumption, or
possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor for religious purposes.
D) Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the
defendant allowed the consumption or possession of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled
substance on or within the premises, residence, or other real property, in violation of this section:
1) The defendant had control over the premises, residence, or other real property.
2) The defendant knew that a minor was consuming or in possession of an alcoholic
beverage or knew that an individual was consuming or in possession of a controlled
substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real
property.
3) The defendant failed to take corrective action.
E) This section does not authorize selling or furnishing an alcoholic beverage to a
minor.
F) A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be imposed in addition to
any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense arising from the same conduct.
VII-2. 12 Prostitution
A) No person shall commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of
prostitution, or moral perversion.
B) No person shall secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd act,
or an act of prostitution, or moral perversion.
C) No person shall be in or near any place frequented by the public or any public
place for the purpose of inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act, or an act
of prostitution or moral perversion.
L
D) No person shall knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of
committing a lewd act, or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
E) No person shall knowingly receive, or offer to or agree to receive, any person into
any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act, or an act of prostitution or moral
perversion, or knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such
purpose.
F) No person shall direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the
purpose of committing any lewd act, or act of prostitution or moral perversion.
VII-2. 13 Animal Cruelty
It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or person having the charge or custody of any
animal within the township to abandon any diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, infirm or disabled
animal in any place within the township, or willfully or negligently to permit and allow any aged,
diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, infirm or disabled animal in any place within the township to
suffer unnecessary torture or pain, or to treat any animal cruelly.
VII-2. 14 Fraudulent schemes.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to engage in any fraudulent scheme,
device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or to aid or abet or in any manner to be
concerned therein.
VII-2. 15 Breach of peace.
Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper
diversion, rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the township are unreasonably
disturbed, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
VII-2. 16 Public intoxication.
Any person who is publicly intoxicated in a public place, and who is either endangering the
safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that unreasonably creates a public
disturbance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION II. PENALTY.
The penalty for violation of this Code shall be a maximum of 90 days in jail and/ or a
maximum fine of$500 or both, unless the penalty under state law for a violation of the pertinent
section is a maximum 93 days in jail, in which case the penalty for violation under this ordinance
shall be a maximum of 93 days in jail and/ or a maximum fine of$500 or both.
SECTION III. REPEAL.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance,
except as herein provided, are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this
Ordinance full force and effect.
SECTION IV. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion thereof.
SECTION V. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
The repeal or amendment herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or act committed
or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending litigation or prosecution of any
right established or occurring prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION VI. PUBLICATION.
The Clerk for the Charter Township of Plymouth shall cause this Ordinance to be
published in the manner required by law.
SECTION VII. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take full force and effect upon publication.
CERTIFICATION
The foregoing Ordinance was duly adopted by the Charter Township of Plymouth Board
Trustees at its regular meeting called and held on the 22nd day of January, 2019, and was
ordered to be given publication in the manner required by law.
orva,
A-1(-5(
Jerry 1 rk
Introduced: January 8, 2019
Published: January 24, 2019
Adopted: January 22, 2019
Effective upon Publication: January 24, 2019
20 of 110
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF WAYNE
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH
FIREWORKS ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. # 1016
AMENDMENT # 24
SECOND i'{ EADING
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP
UTH REGULATING FIREWORKS; PROVIDING FOR DEFINITIONS;
PROVIDING FOR EXEMPTIONS; PROVIDING FOR PERMIT ; i R
REGIST' ATION; PROVIDING FOR DISCHARGE OF NOVELTIES; PROVIDING
F ) R PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS; PROVIDING FOR PERMIT FOR DISCHARGE OF
CONSUMER FIREWORKS; PROVIDING FOR TRANSPORTATION AND
STORAGE; PROVIDING FOR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES; PROVIDING FOR
PENALTY; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY;
PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF PLYMOUTH ORDAINS
Ordinance No. # 1016, Amendment 24, the Fireworks Ordinance is hereby
adopted to read as follows:
SEMS N
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the ' Firew rrks
Ordinance."
SECTION II. ORDINANCE.
sec. bn\ o Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Act 256 shall mean Act 256 of the Public Acts of 2011, being MCL 28. 451.
Articles pyrotechnic shall mean pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are
similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction, but are not
intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks, but are
not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR
172. 101.
21 of 110
Consumer fireworks shall mean firework devices that are designed to provide visible
effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction chemical
composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer
product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and are listed in APA
standard 87- 1, 3. 1. 2, 3. 1. 3, or 3. 5. Consumer fireworks do not include low- impact
fireworks.
Consumer fireworks certificate or certificate shall mean a certificate issued under
Section 28. 467a of Act 256.
Department shall mean the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs.
Display fireworks shall mean large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects
by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555. 11, 49 CFR 172,
and APA standard 87- 1, 4. 1.
Fireworks shall mean any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare
gun, or a flare designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low
impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects.
Low-impact fireworks shall mean ground and handheld sparkling devices as that
phrase is defined under APA standard 87- 1, 3. 1, 3. 1. 1. 1 to 3. 1. 1. 8, and 3. 5.
Novelties shall mean the term defined under APA standard 87- 1, 3. 2, 3. 2. 1, 3. 2. 2,
3. 2. 3, 3. 2. 4, and 3. 2. 5 and all of the following:
1) Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps
containing not more than . 25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in
packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap.
2) Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in
which toy caps as described in subparagraph ( i) are used, that are constructed
so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the
explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to
form a missile by the explosion.
3) Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/ 8 inch in diameter.
Person shall include an individual, agent, association, charitable organization,
company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal representative,
partnership, unincorporated association, or any other legal or commercial entity.
Special effects shall mean a combination of chemical elements or chemical
compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and
designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect as
an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical, or opera production or
live entertainment.
22 of 110
Temporary structure shall mean a movable structure that is used in the sale,
display, storage, transportation, or distribution of consumer fireworks, including, but not
limited to, a tent or a stand.
Sec. B. Exemptions.
A permit is not required under this division for the possession, ignition or discharge
of novelties or low- impact fireworks. A permit for the discharge of consumer fireworks
may be required under section F.
Sec. C. Permit or registration required.
1) No person shall sell consumer fireworks in the township without having obtained a
consumer fireworks certificate from the department as required by, and complied
with all the requirements of Act 256, as amended. The consumer fireworks
certificate shall be prominently displayed at the retail location for which the
certificate was issued.
2) No person shall sell low- impact fireworks without having registered with the low
impact fireworks retail registry maintained by the department.
Sec. D. Discharge or novelties, low- impact fireworks and consumer
fireworks.
1) Except in the case of a consumer permit issued by the township under section F,
consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by any person at any time,
except on the following days after 11 a. m.:
a) December 31 until 1 a. m. on January 1.
b) The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11: 45
p. m. on each of those days.
c) June 29 to July 4 until 11: 45 p. m. on each of those days.
d) July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11: 45 p. m.
e) The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11: 45 p. m.
on each of those days.
2) When permitted, consumer fireworks and low- impact fireworks shall not be ignited
or discharged on public property, school property, church property, or property of
another person without that organization' s or person' s written permission to use
consumer fireworks and low- impact fireworks on the premises.
3) Low- impact fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used between the hours of
10: 00 p. m. and 8: 00 a. m.
3
23 of 110
4) No fireworks shall be ignited or discharged within 70 feet of any building, or on any
public street.
5) Minors shall be prohibited from possessing, using, igniting or discharging consumer
fireworks.
6) No person shall use consumer fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor
or a controlled substance or both.
Sec. E. Permit for pyrotechnic displays or other use.
1) The township board, upon application in writing, on forms provided by the
department may grant a permit for the use of fireworks otherwise prohibited by
section D, within the township, manufactured for outdoor pest control or
agricultural purposes, or for public display by municipalities, fair associations,
amusement parks, or other organizations or groups of individuals approved by the
township board, if the applicable provisions of this division and the Act are complied
with. After a permit has been granted, the possession or transportation of fireworks
for the purposes described in the permit only may be made. A permit granted under
this subsection shall not be transferable, nor shall a permit be issued to a person
under the age of 18 years.
2) Before a permit for articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks is issued, the person
making application therefor shall furnish proof of financial responsibility by a bond
or insurance in an amount deemed necessary by the township board, to satisfy
claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an act or omission
on the part of the person, or any agent or employee thereof, in the amount,
character and form the township board determines necessary for the protection of
the public.
3) No permit shall be issued under this section to a nonresident person for conduct of
articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks until such person has appointed in writing a
resident member of the bar of this state or a resident agent to be his legal
representative upon whom all process in an action or proceeding against him may
be served.
4) The township board shall rule on the competency and qualifications of operators of
articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks as the operator has furnished in his
application form, and on the time, place and safety aspects of the displays, before
granting permits.
Sec. F. Permit for discharge of consumer fireworks.
1) Persons wishing to discharge consumer fireworks on a day other than the day
preceding, day of, or day after a national holiday shall do so only after paying a fee
and obtaining a permit from the township.
2) Application for a permit to discharge consumer fireworks under this section shall be
made on forms available from the township clerk.
4
24 of 110
3) Approval of a permit to discharge consumer fireworks shall be subject to the
following minimum conditions:
i) A minimum radial setback of 70 foot per one inch of the largest aerial device
proposed to be discharged from the proposed launch site to the nearest
occupied structure.
ii) Satisfactory inspection by the fire prevention division of the township fire
department upon delivery of the consumer fireworks to the proposed launch
site.
iii) Written permission of the property owner, if different than the applicant, shall
be provided.
iv) Additional reasonable conditions the fire prevention division deems necessary
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
4) A permit under this section shall not be issued to a minor.
5) A permit shall not be issued for any public property, including roads, road rights- ofway,
or sidewalks.
6) The required inspection shall be requested by the applicant not later than 24 hours
prior to the proposed discharge. For a proposed discharge on a Saturday or
Sunday, the request shall be made not later than 8: 30 a. m. of the Thursday
preceding the proposed day of discharge.
Sec. G. Transportation and storage.
Transportation and storage of fireworks through and in the township shall be in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Act 256.
Sec. H. Temporary Structures.
No person shall maintain a temporary structure without first having obtained a
permit from the Building Department. The Township Board may by resolution restrict
the number of permits for a temporary structure, and set forth the terms under which a
permit may be granted. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the temporary
storage, transportation, or distribution of fireworks by a consumer fireworks certificate
holder at a retail location that is a permanent building or structure.
SECTION III. VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with Section II. D( 1) shall be
responsible for a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $1, 000.00. Any person who
shall violate or fail to comply with any other provisions of this ordinance is responsible
for a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine not to exceed $ 500. 00.
SECTION IV. REPEAL.
25 of 110
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance, except as herein provided, are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary
to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
SECTION V. SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion thereof.
SECTION VI. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
The repeal or amendment herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or act
committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending litigation or
prosecution of any right established or occurring prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance.
SECTION VII. PUBLICATION.
The Clerk for the Charter Township of Plymouth shall cause this Ordinance to be
published in the manner required by law.
SECTION VIII. EFFECTIVE DATE.
Except for Section II.H, this Ordinance shall take full force and effect upon
publication. Section II. H shall take effect on August 1, 2019.
CERTIFICATION
The foregoing Ordinance will have its second and final reading by the Board of
Trustees of the Charter Township of Plymouth at a special meeting called and held on
the 7th day of May, 2019, and was ordered to be given publication in the manner
required by law.
Jerry /. rva ,'.• erk
Introduced: April 23, 2019
Published: May 9, 2019
Adopted: May 7, 2019
Effective upon Publication: May 9, 2019