Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Rules of Construction; General Penalty
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 1 of the 1984
Code]
§ 1-1. Interpretation and construction of ordinances.
All ordinances of the City of Roseville shall be interpreted and construed
in accordance with the following provisions, unless such interpretation and
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City
Council.
§ 1-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
CHARTER — The Charter of the City of Roseville.
CITY — The City of Roseville.
COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL — The legislative body of the City of
Roseville.[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
COUNTY — The County of Macomb.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes firms, joint adventures, partnerships,
corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural
persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating
or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or
fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and
assigns thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING — When used by way of reference to
any title, chapter or section of any ordinance of the City, the title,
chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which
such reference is made, unless some other title, chapter or section is
expressly designated in such reference.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, park, cemetery or public building or
any place of business or assembly or parking lot or any other premises
open to the public or frequented by the public.
SEAL — In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office
shall be required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or
office, the impression of such seal on such paper alone, as well as the
impression of such seal affixed thereto by means of a wafer or wax.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.
STATE — The State of Michigan.
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING — Includes any form of reproduction or
expression of language.
YEAR — A calendar year; and the word "year," alone, shall be equivalent
to the words "year of our Lord."
B. Word usage.
(1) Officers. The several officers, titles mean such officers of the City.
(2) Time. Whenever time is referred to, it means Eastern standard time
or the time officially in force in the City.
(3) Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed
as including the future as well as the present or past.
(4) Titles, headings and catchlines. The key words used in any
ordinance as headings, titles or catchlines for chapters, sections
and subsections are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the
use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect
the meaning of any of the provisions hereof.
(5) Gender. Words importing masculine gender shall apply to females
and to firms, associations, partnerships and corporations.
(6) Number. Words in either the singular or plural numbers shall
include either or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a
particular person or persons.
(7) Conjunctive words. Conjunctive and disjunctive words may be
interchangeable to effect the purpose of any provisions.
(8) Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as
giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons
unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting
the authority.
(9) Sundays or legal holidays. Whenever any act required to be done
pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance falls on a Sunday or
legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding
business day.
(10) Oath, affirmation, sworn or affirmed. The word "oath" shall be
construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by
law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases
the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed."
§ 1-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 1-3
1:4
§ 1-3. Performance of required actions.
Whenever any act is required to be done pursuant to the provisions of
this Code or any ordinance of the City by any designated officer or official
of the City, and such officer or official has not been appointed, such act
shall be performed by the City Manager. Whenever in accordance with the
provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the City any specific act is
required to be done by any designated officer or official of the City, such act
may be performed by any City employee duly authorized to perform that act
by such officer or official.
§ 1-4. Computation of time.
The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in
any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the
last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the
time is expressed in hours, the whole of a Sunday or a legal holiday, from
12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded.
§ 1-5. Effect of repealers.
Whenever an ordinance or any part thereof is repealed by a subsequent
ordinance, such ordinance or any part thereof so repealed shall not be
revived by the repeal of such subsequent repealing ordinance.
§ 1-6. Conflicting provisions of ordinances to be repealed.
Whenever an ordinance is adopted, all ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict therewith shall, to the extent of such conflict, be repealed.
§ 1-7. Effect on penalties, forfeitures and liabilities.
The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof shall not release or relinquish
any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such ordinance or any
part thereof, unless the repealing act shall so expressly provide, and such
ordinance and part thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force for
the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution for
the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability.1
§ 1-8. General penalty.
A. Whenever in this Code or any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in this
Code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision
by any person shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500, plus costs, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
1. Editor's Note: Former § 1-8, Severability, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-9. Continuing violations.
In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any
ordinance shall be deemed a new and separate offense for each day that
such condition continues to exist.
93 days, or both, except whenever a specific penalty is otherwise
provided by state law. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125;
7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 1269]
B. Any minor who violates any provision of this Code or any ordinance of
the City shall be dealt with by the Family Division of the Circuit Court or
as prescribed by the laws of the state.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of this general penalty section and elsewhere
where any criminal penalty is provided by the Code of Ordinances or
pursuant to any section which is adopting a code by reference, in
addition to penalties providing for fine, imprisonment or both, the
court, as a sanction, may collect reasonable costs of prosecution and
court costs, including in whole or in part, the actual court costs or costs
of prosecution, in addition to any other sanction or penalty provided.
[Added 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 1269]
§ 1-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 1-9
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
§ 1-10. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to M.S.A. § 5.2073 [M.C.L. § 117.3(k)], the ordinances of the City
of Roseville of a general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council
of the City of Roseville, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 370, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of Roseville," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-11. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1984 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-12. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-13. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Roseville
by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-14. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Roseville" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-15. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Roseville, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-16. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-17. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the City Council or may be furnished electronically. The Clerk may
also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-18. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City
of Roseville to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-19. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-20. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 1-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 1-20
1:8
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-21. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-22. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 1-26-1999.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-22
1:9
§ 1-23. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Roseville being Ordinance No.
1009, adopted 2-26-1999, and any and all amendments thereto.
O. Ordinance No. 371, adopted 12-7-1954, water and sewer revenue bond,
series 1955, and any and all amendments thereto.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)2
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes in nomenclature have
been made throughout the Code of the City or Roseville:
(1) City Commission to City Council.
(2) Juvenile Division of the Probate Court and Juvenile Court to Family
Division of the Circuit Court.
(3) Board of Parks and Recreation to Parks and Recreation Board.
(4) Building Department and Plumbing Department to Department of
Buildings and Inspection.
(5) Director of the Building and Safety Engineering Department to the
Director of Buildings and Inspection.
(6) Dog Warden to Animal Control Officer.
(7) Building Inspector to Building Official or Building Director.
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-23B, the chapters, parts, articles and sections which
were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the
Code by a footnote referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions and deletions will be
replaced with the following wording: "Amended/Added/Repealed 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125." A complete description of all changes is on file in the City offices.
§ 1-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 1-23
1:10
§ 1-24. Gender-neutral.
In the interpretation of wording in the Code of the City of Roseville, it is
the intention of the City Council that all words purporting the male gender
be interpreted to include the female gender as well, unless the context
precludes such interpretation.
(8) Water Department, Sewer Department and Water and Sewer
Division to Department of Water and Sewers.
(9) Superintendent of Police to Chief of Police.
(10) In Chapter 75, Police Chief to Police Chief or designee.
(11) In Chapters 139 and 142 and 144, fire official to Fire Chief.
§ 1-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-24
1:11

ARTICLE III
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the City Council for inclusion in the
Code of the City or Roseville. Such new ordinances are noted in the
histories of individual chapters or articles as "Adopted . . . during
codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). During the
course of routine supplementation, specific dates of adoption and
ordinance numbers will be inserted where pertinent in the various
chapters. The enumeration below lists each chapter affected by any
such legislation adopted during codification.]
Chapter/Article
Adoption
Date
Ordinance
No.
Ch. 133, Fees 7-27-1999 1124
Ch. 354, Water, Art. V, Utility Tampering and
Unauthorized Water Usage
7-27-1999 1123
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-24
1:13
Chapter 5
ASSESSMENTS, SPECIAL
CHARTER REFERENCES
Power to assess taxes — See Ch. 9.
Board of Review — See Ch. 9, Sec. 9.7 et seq.
Special assessments — See Ch. 10.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 304.
§ 5-1. Applicability.
The making and financing of public improvements by the special assessment
method shall be governed by this chapter, and all proceedings therefor shall
be taken in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-2. Public improvement defined; costs; special assessments.
The term "public improvement," as used in this chapter, shall include the
reconstruction in whole or in part of any structure or work as well as the
original construction thereof. The cost of surveys, plans and specifications
of a public improvement and all expenses incident to the proceedings for
the making of such improvement, the making and collecting of the special
assessments therefor and the issuance of bonds in anticipation of such
special assessments shall be deemed a part of the cost of said improvement.
Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation or otherwise for the
purpose of any public improvement, the cost thereof, exclusive of that part
of such cost representing damages for injury to improvements to such
property and the cost of the proceedings required to acquire such property,
may be added as a part of the cost of such improvements. No contract or
expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary legal procedures
and engineering plans and estimates, shall be made for the improvement
until special assessments to defray the cost of the same shall have been
levied, unless the owners of all of the property in the assessment district
petition for the public improvement proposed to be made. Any assessment
may be made upon the basis of the estimated cost of the improvement if the
actual cost has not been definitely determined.
§ 5-3. Filing of petition for improvement; contents.
A petition addressed to the Council may be filed with the City Clerk
requesting the Council to make a public improvement therein described
and to assess the cost thereof, or such part of the cost as the Council shall
decide, to benefited lands comprising a special assessment district to be
determined by the Council. Any petition so filed may be in one or more
§ 1-24 ROSEVILLE CODE § 5-3
5:14
parts and shall be signed by the owners of lands having at least 50% of
the privately owned frontage abutting upon the proposed improvement, and
the City Clerk shall not present to the Council any petition not so signed. A
purchaser on land contract shall be deemed the owner of such land. Such
petition, in addition to the signatures of the owners, shall contain a brief
description of the property owned by the respective signers thereof, and
the genuineness of the signatures on each petition or part thereof shall
be verified by the affidavit of the circulator. Any such petition shall not be
mandatory upon the Council but shall be advisory only, and in no event shall
such petition be deemed jurisdictional.
§ 5-4. Determination by Council; survey and report.
Irrespective of whether or not such a petition shall have been filed, the
Council may determine to make any public improvement and to defray any
part of the cost thereof by special assessment of lands benefited or to
be benefited thereby. Before any other action shall be taken thereon, the
Council shall refer the matter to the City Manager, who shall make and
submit to the Council a survey and report setting forth the need for such
improvement, the desirable extent and probable (estimated) cost thereof,
the portion of the cost to be borne by the city at large and the portion
to be assessed to benefited lands and the lands to constitute the special
assessment district to be so assessed. The City Manager shall also prepare
or cause to be prepared the plans for such improvement and shall submit
the same to the Council.
§ 5-5. Resolution to proceed; designation of district; hearing;
notices.
Upon receipt of such survey and report, with such plans, the Council shall
order the same to be filed with the City Clerk; and if the Council shall desire
to proceed with the improvements, it shall so declare by resolution and
shall designate the special assessment district and what part of the cost of
said improvement shall be paid by special assessment against the lots and
parcels of land in said special assessment district and what part, if any, shall
be paid from the general funds of the city. The Council shall also fix a time
and place when it will meet and hear any objections to such improvement
and to the special assessment district, at which all persons within the
proposed special assessment district therefor or who own property therein
may be heard. The Council shall cause notice of such hearing to be given
by publication thereof in a newspaper published within the city and also
by mailing a copy of such notice to each person owning any land in the
special assessment district, as shown on the last preceding tax assessment
roll of the city or as otherwise known to the city, at his or her last known
address, such publication and mailing to be not less than 10 days prior to
the date of such hearing, provided that there shall be mailed with each
such notice, or endorsed thereon, an instruction to the addressee to the
effect that, if he or she is not the owner or the land contract purchaser
of the property assessed, he or she shall forward the notice to the owner
or land contract purchaser. Such notice shall state that the plans and cost
§ 5-3 ASSESSMENTS, SPECIAL § 5-5
5:15
estimate are on file with the City Clerk and shall contain a description of
the proposed improvement and special assessment district. At the time of
such hearing, or any adjournment thereof, which may be without further
notice, the Council shall hear any objections to such improvement and to
the special assessment district and, without further notice, may revise,
correct, amend or change the plans, estimate and/or district, provided that
no property shall be added to the district until notice is given as above
provided or by personal service upon the owners thereof, and a hearing
afforded such owners.
§ 5-6. Resolution authorizing improvement.
After the hearing provided for in the preceding section, if the Council
desires to proceed with such improvement, it shall adopt a resolution
approving the plans and cost estimate as originally presented or as revised,
corrected, amended or changed, determining to proceed with the proposed
public improvement, determining the probable life of the improvement,
finally fixing the special assessment district therefor and ordering the
Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll therefor, provided that, if
prior to the adoption of the resolution authorizing the making of the public
improvement written objections thereto have been filed by the owner of
property in the district, which according to estimates will be required to
bear more than 50% of the cost thereof, or by a majority of the owners
of property to be assessed, no resolution determining to proceed with
the improvement shall be adopted, except by the affirmative vote of five
members of the Council.
§ 5-7. Special assessment roll.
The City Assessor shall thereupon prepare the special assessment roll in
which shall be entered and described all the lots and parcels of land to be
assessed, with the names of the respective owners thereof, if known, and
the amount to be assessed against each such lot or parcel of land, which
amount shall be such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against
all the lots and parcels of land in the special assessment district as the
benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lots
and parcels of land in the special assessment district. There shall also be
entered upon said roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at
large. When the City Assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, he
or she shall file the same with the office of the City Clerk, after first having
affixed thereto a certificate stating that it was made pursuant to a resolution
of the Council of said city adopted on a specified date and that in making
such assessment roll he or she has, according to his or her best judgment,
conformed in all respects to the directions contained in such resolution and
to the Charter of the city.
§ 5-8. Hearing by Board of Review, notice; report; confirmation.
Before confirming any assessment roll, the Council shall appoint a time and
place when the Board of Review established by the City Charter3 will meet
§ 5-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 5-8
5:16
and review the same and hear any objections thereto, and the Assessor,
as Clerk of the Board of Review, shall give notice of such hearing and of
the filing of such assessment roll by publication in a newspaper published
in the city and also by mailing a copy of such notice to each person in
whose name any land is assessed on said roll, at his or her last known
address, such publication and mailing to be not less than 10 days prior to
the date of said hearing, provided that there shall be mailed with each such
notice, or endorsed thereon, an instruction to the addressee to the effect
that if he or she is not the owner or the land contract purchaser of the
property assessed, he or she shall forward the notice to the owner or land
contract purchaser. The Board of Review shall meet at the appointed time
and place and at such meeting or any adjourned meeting (which may be
without further notice) shall review the special assessment roll and hear
and consider any objections thereto, review the special assessment roll and
hear and consider any objections thereto and report thereon to the Council.
Such report shall be prepared by the Assessor, signed by him or her and
the members of the Board of Review and filed with the City Clerk and shall
set forth the names of all persons who objected to said roll, the properties
owned by them, the nature of their objections and the recommendations
of the Board of Review with respect to such objections and with respect
to confirmation of the roll. Any person objecting to the assessment shall
file an objection in writing with the Assessor prior to the meeting of the
Board of Review or shall appear and make the objection in person at such
meeting. Within three days after the report of the Board of Review is filed
with the City Clerk, any such objector may appeal from said report and
the recommendations therein contained by filing an appeal with the City
Clerk, and any appeal so filed shall be heard by the Council at its next
regular meeting following the expiration of said three-day period or, on due
notice to the appellant, at a subsequent meeting prior to confirmation of
the roll. After receiving the report of the Board of Review and after hearing
any appeals therefrom, the Council, by resolution, may confirm the special
assessment roll or may correct the same as to any matter appearing therein
and confirm it as so corrected or may refer it back to the Assessor for
revision or may annul it and direct a new roll to be made. When a special
assessment roll shall be confirmed, the Clerk shall endorse thereon the date
of confirmation. After such confirmation the special assessment roll and all
assessments therein shall be final and conclusive.
§ 5-9. Resolution confirming roll; installment payments.
In the resolution confirming the roll, the Council shall fix the date upon
which the special assessment, or the first installment thereof if installment
payments are allowed, shall be due and payable; the number of annual
installments (not exceeding 15) in which the special assessment may be
paid; and the rate of interest (not exceeding 6% per annum) to be charged
upon all deferred installments from a stated date. The amount of each
installment, if more than one, need not be extended upon the special
assessment roll until after confirmation. Deferred installments, together
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 9, Sec. 9.7, of the Charter.
§ 5-8 ASSESSMENTS, SPECIAL § 5-9
5:17
with interest on all unpaid installments, shall be due at intervals of 12
months from the due date of the first installment or from such other date as
the Council shall fix. Any one or more installments may be paid to the City
Treasurer at any time, together with interest and penalties on all unpaid
installments accrued to the date of payment. If any installment of a special
assessment is not paid when due, then the same shall be deemed to be
delinquent; and there shall be collected thereon, in addition to interest as
above provided, a penalty at the rate of 1/2 of 1% for each month or fraction
thereof that the same remains unpaid, prior to return of the same to the
County Treasurer. The city's portion of the cost of any improvement may
be divided into installments the same as the assessments against lands
in the district, and in such case the provisions of this chapter relative to
such installments shall apply to the city installments insofar as they are
applicable.
§ 5-10. Assessment to be lien on property.
Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special
assessments thereon shall become a debt to the city from the persons to
whom they are assessed and, until paid, shall be a lien upon the property
assessed, for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges
thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by
the City Charter for city taxes. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the
Council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of
the city, upon the premises assessed, for such amount of the assessment
as may be equitably charged against the same or as by a regular mode of
proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon.
§ 5-11. Collection.
When any special assessment shall be confirmed, the Council shall direct
the assessments so made in the special assessment roll to be collected.
The City Clerk shall thereupon deliver to the City Treasurer said special
assessment roll to which he or she shall attach the warrant commanding
the City Treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in said
roll the amount of money assessed to and set opposite his or her name
therein. Upon receiving such special assessment roll and warrant, the City
Treasurer shall proceed to collect the several amounts assessed therein.
§ 5-12. Delinquent assessments.
In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor,
any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties,
may be collected in an action of assumpsit in the name of the city, against
the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If
in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities
or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the
defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may,
nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the
city, which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in
§ 5-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 5-12
5:18
question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such
defendant or upon such premises.
§ 5-13. Division of lands after assessments.
Should any lot or parcel of land be divided after a special assessment
thereon has been confirmed and before the collection thereof, the Council
may require the Assessor to apportion the uncollected amounts upon the
several parts of such lot or parcels of land. The report of such
apportionment, when confirmed, shall be conclusive upon all parties,
provided that, before such confirmation, notice of hearing shall be given to
all the interested parties by personal service or by publication and mailing
as above provided in case of an original assessment roll.
§ 5-14. Additional assessments; limit.
Additional pro rata assessments may be made when any special assessment
roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied
and the expenses incidental thereto or insufficient to pay the principal and
interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll, provided
that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed 25% of the
assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the Council is held
to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be
published and mailed as provided in the case of review of the original
special assessment roll.
§ 5-15. Invalid assessments; reassessment to be made.
Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be
invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if
any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be
illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not
or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power
to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the
former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for
the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided
for in the original assessment except as to correction in the proceedings
required to make the assessment legal. Whenever any sum or part thereof
levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside has been paid and
not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment.
If the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be
made.
§ 5-16. Special assessment account; disposition of excess funds.
Moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall
be credited to a special assessment account and shall be used to pay for
the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and of
expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money
borrowed therefor and to refund excessive assessments. Should the amount
§ 5-12 ASSESSMENTS, SPECIAL § 5-16
5:19
collected on assessments prove larger than necessary by 5% or less the
amount of the original roll, the Council may place the excess in any of the
funds of the city; but if such excess shall exceed such 5%, then the same
shall be credited pro rata on the assessments against the several parcels
of lands according to the amounts thereof, such credit as to each parcel to
be made upon the unpaid installments to inverse numerical order, provided
that, if as to any parcel there shall be no unpaid installments or if the
unpaid installments are less than the amount of the credit, then such total
or surplus amount of credit shall be applied toward the payment of the next
city tax levied against such property. If the city shall have been assessed for
any portion of the cost of the improvements, then it shall be considered in
the same category as the owner of private lands and shall be entitled to its
share of any such excess, provided that any amount due the city, which in
case of private lands would be applied to the payment of city taxes, shall be
refunded to the city in cash.
§ 5-17. Collection of expenses incurred on single premises.
When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect
to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against such premises
and the owner thereof under the provisions of the Charter or any ordinance
of the city or law of the state, and is not of that class required to be pro rated
among the several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district,
an account of the labor, material and service for which such expense was
incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which
the expense was incurred and the name of the owner, if known, shall be
reported to the Controller, who shall immediately charge and bill the owner,
if known. In the event that the Controller finds that such amount is not
otherwise collectible, he or she shall report the same to the Council, which
may direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all
such charges reported to it, together with a penalty of 10%. Such roll
shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall present the same to the Council.
Thereafter the same proceedings shall be followed in respect to such special
assessment roll as are provided in §§ 5-8 through 5-19 of this chapter, and
all the provisions of said sections with reference to special assessments
generally shall apply to special assessments under this section, insofar as
the same may be applicable.
§ 5-18. Assessments on exempt lands to be paid by city.
No lands in a special assessment district which are benefited by the
improvement therein shall be exempt from assessment, but if the same are
owned by a public or other corporation exempt by law from payment of
special assessments, then the special assessments against such lands, or
the installments thereof, shall be paid by the city as the same become due
or may be paid in advance of their due dates.
§ 5-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 5-19
5:20
§ 5-19. Procedure for payment by city upon inability of owner to
pay.
In the event that a lien to secure payment of a special assessment or any
one or more installments thereof is created in favor of the city by deed
of the addressed property to the city pursuant to Section 10.8 of the City
Charter, by reason of the finding of the Assessor and Council that the owner
of such property is unable because of poverty to pay such assessment or
installments and should be accorded relief therefrom, the obligation of the
owner to make such payment shall thereby become the obligation of the
city; and the city shall pay from its general fund any such assessment or
installments, together with interest and penalties, which falls due during
the period while the beneficial ownership of such property remains in the
grantor of said deed and while the agreement of the city to grant such relief
remains in effect.
Chapter 6
BOARD OF REVIEW
§ 5-19 BOARD OF REVIEW § 5-19
6:21

ARTICLE I
Authority of Agents Appearing Before Board
[Adopted 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 1118]
§ 6-1. Written authorization of agent required.
All parties appearing in an agency capacity before the Board of Review,
established pursuant to Chapter 9 of the City Charter, shall provide in
writing to the Assessor's office and Board of Review on or before any
such appearance or undertaking activity on behalf of a principal, involving
activities associated with Board of Review functions with departments in
the city, written evidence establishing the current engagement of the agent
for such purposes. Written evidence of engagement shall be signed and
dated by all parties having an ownership interest in the property.
§ 6-2. Unauthorized agents not recognized.
No agency relationship shall be recognized unless notice is provided as set
forth in § 6-1.
§ 6-1 BOARD OF REVIEW § 6-2
6:23

ARTICLE II
Alternate Members of Board
[Adopted 6-12-2007 by Ord. No. 1208]
§ 6-3. Appointment; eligibility; duties.
There shall be appointed not more than two alternate members for the same
term as regular members of the Board of Review. Regular members are
appointed pursuant to the Charter of the City of Roseville. Each alternate
member shall be a property tax payer of the City. Alternate members shall
qualify by taking the constitutional oath of office within 10 days after
appointment. Any vacancy that occurs in the alternate membership of the
Board of Review shall be by appointment as provided in the Charter for
a regular Board of Review member. A member of the City Council is not
eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any vacancy. A spouse,
mother, father, sister, brother, son or daughter, including an adopted child,
of the Assessor is not eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any
vacancy. Any alternate member may be called to perform the duties of a
regular member of the Board of Review in the absence of a regular member.
An alternate member may also be called to perform the duties of a regular
member of the Board of Review for the purpose of reaching a decision in
issues protested in which a regular member has abstained for reasons of
conflict of interest.
§ 6-3 BOARD OF REVIEW § 6-3
6:25
Chapter 7
BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
§ 7-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established in and for the City of Roseville a
commission hereafter to be known as the "City Beautification Commission."
§ 7-2. Membership; appointment; compensation. [Amended
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 1188; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. 1211]
The Commission shall consist of seven members, who are electors of the
City of Roseville, to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council. Members of the Commission shall serve as such without
compensation and shall be appointed forthwith upon adoption of this
chapter.
§ 7-3. Terms of office; Chair and other officers.
Members of the Commission shall hold office for terms of three years,
except that in the first instance, three members shall hold office for one
year; three members shall hold office for two years, and three members
shall hold office for three years. The Commission shall each year elect one
of its members as Chair and shall elect such other officers as it may deem
necessary.
§ 7-4. Duties.
The City Beautification Commission as herein created shall be charged with
the following duties:
A. To study, conceive, formulate, promulgate and develop plans for the
beautification of streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds, yards,
lots and buildings.
B. To study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health,
sanitation, safety and cleanliness of the City.
C. To encourage and recommend the placing, planting and preservation of
trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of ornamentation in
the City.
D. To collect, study and evaluate information on community improvements
and to make recommendations thereon.
E. To sponsor, plan, promote, coordinate and carry out campaign activities
for the restoration, preservation and enhancement of the beauty of the
City.
F. To otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of the
appearance of the City; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
§ 6-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 7-4
6:26
§ 7-5. Advisory body.
The following City officials or their designated representatives shall
together act as a nonvoting advisory body to the Commission, making
recommendations and suggestions and aiding and cooperating in carrying
out all of the duties of the Commission as hereinabove set forth in § 7-4 of
this chapter:
Chapter 12
CIVIL SERVICE
CHARTER REFERENCES
Elective and appointive officers — See Ch. 4.
Administrative service — See Ch. 7.
Employee retirement system — See Ch. 15.
Civil service for police officers and fire
fighters — See Ch. 16.
City civil service system — See Ch. 17.
§ 12-1. Purpose; appointments and promotions to positions in
classified service.
§ 12-2. Department of Personnel.
construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers and duties
of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the
City or grant the Commission the power or authority to incur debts or
expand public funds without the express resolution of the City Council.
A. Three members of the City Council.
B. The Director of Public Works.
C. The Police Chief.
D. The Fire Chief.
E. The Director of Parks and Recreation
F. One member of the Parks and Recreation Board.
A. The general purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of
personnel administration based on merit principles and scientific
methods governing the appointment, promotion, transfer, layoff,
removal and discipline of its city employees, except as hereinafter
specified.
B. All appointments and promotions to positions in the city's classified
service, except as hereinafter provided, shall be made on the basis of
merit and fitness, to be ascertained by competitive examinations.
§ 7-4 CIVIL SERVICE § 12-2
12:27
A. There is hereby established a Department of Personnel for the purpose
of administering the personnel matters as prescribed in this chapter.
B. The Department of Personnel shall be composed of the following:
(1) An executive officer of the Department who shall be designated as
Director of Personnel. Until such time as the Council deems it
appropriate to appoint a full time Director of Personnel, the City
Manager shall serve in that capacity and/or the Council may retain
by contract the services of an administrative personnel consultant
to carry out the duties and responsibilities of such position.
[Amended 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1030]
(2) Civil Service Board consisting of three electors of the city, to be
appointed or elected within 30 days after the effective date of this
chapter and to assume office thereafter as appointed or elected and
qualified.
(a) One member shall be appointed by the City Council to serve for
three years; one member shall be elected by the city
employees, other than the employees of the Police and Fire
Departments, to serve for two years; and the remaining
member shall be a citizen of the city having the qualifications
required of elective officers by this chapter, who is not a city
officer or employee. He or she shall be appointed by the other
two members of the Board, to serve for one year. No elective
official of the city shall be eligible for the Civil Service Board
during his term of office. Thereafter members of the Civil
Service Board shall be appointed or elected as above set forth
to serve for three years or until their successors have been
appointed or elected and have qualified. The vote for the
member of the Civil Service Board chosen by the employees
shall be by ballot, which shall be marked and counted in
accordance with the provisions of law regarding the marking
and counting of ballots used in the election of members of the
City Council. Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation and shall not hold any other public office, serve
on any political committee or take part in the management of
any political campaign. The Council may remove any member
of the Board for malfeasance or misfeasance in office, after
written notice, and the member shall have the right of a public
hearing within 30 days after such notice of removal. Any
vacancy created in the membership of the Board shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner as the person who
left the Board to create such vacancy was chosen. Vacancies
must be filled within 30 days.
(b) The members of the Civil Service Board shall qualify by taking
the oath of office required by general law. The City Clerk or
someone designated by the Clerk shall act as Secretary for the
Board. The Secretary shall be custodian of all personnel
§ 12-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 12-2
12:28
§ 12-3. Classification of employees.
The administrative service of the city is hereby divided into two classes:
§ 12-4. Civil Service Board; Director of Personnel.
records and shall be the official upon or with whom all notices,
requests for hearing, complaints or other official documents
shall be served or filed. The Secretary shall keep the minutes
of Board meetings and records of all its proceedings.
C. The Civil Service Board shall, at its organization meeting, elect a Chair,
who shall serve for a term of one year. Two members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, except that, for the
purpose of determining eligibility to any position in the city's classified
service, any disciplinary action or any release from the employ of the
city, three members of the Board must be in attendance. The Civil
Service Board shall determine its order of business for the conduct of
its meetings. The Board shall be charged with the responsibility of
drafting the personnel rules of the city.
A. The unclassified service shall include all officers of the city, including
but not limited to the executive officer of the Personnel Department
and/or his or her substitute, members of the advisory boards and the
members of any board or commission appointed by the Mayor, either
with or without confirmation by the Council. [Amended 2-23-1993 by
Ord. No. 1030]
B. The classified service shall comprise all persons, including department
heads, holding positions in all departments of the city when this chapter
is adopted, who shall have served in such position for a continuous
period of six months or more prior to the adoption of this chapter, and
all persons employed by the city who continue in such employment after
a continuous probationary period of 90 days.
A. The Civil Service Board shall have general supervision over the broad
problems of administrative policy involved in the personnel matters
prescribed in this section, and except for the purpose of inquiry, the
Civil Service Board shall deal with the specific technical problems of
administration solely through the Director of Personnel. The members
of the Civil Service Board shall meet quarterly and on call of the Chair
or the Director of Personnel. It shall be the duty of the Civil Service
Board to:
(1) Represent the public interest in the improvement of personnel
administration in the city service.
(2) Make annual reports and special reports to the Council on the
quality and status of personnel administration in the city
government and to make recommendations for improvements.
§ 12-2 CIVIL SERVICE § 12-4
12:29
(3) Do any lawful act necessary to effect the purpose of this chapter
and the rules promulgated in accordance therewith.
(4) Sit as a body in investigating and hearing personnel appeals of
appointing authorities and employees.
(5) Consider such other matters as may be referred to the Board by the
Director of Personnel or the Council.
B. The Director of Personnel shall be the executive officer of the
Department of Personnel and shall initiate and direct administrative
work. The Director shall:
(1) Attend all regular and special meetings of the Civil Service Board.
(2) Make and may amend rules for promoting efficiency in the
classified service of the city and for the appointment, promotion,
transfer, layoff, reinstatement, suspension and removal of city
officers and employees in such service, but no such rule or
amendment shall become effective except by a majority vote of the
Civil Service Board at a public meeting, notice of which meeting,
together with the context of said rule or amendment, shall be given
to all city personnel by posting said notice and rule or amendment
in each building where city personnel are employed at least 20 days
prior to said meeting. The rules shall provide for:
(a) The standardization and classification of all positions and
employments in the classified service of the city, based upon
and graded according to duties and responsibilities and so
arranged as to promote the filling of the higher grades, so far
as practicable, through promotions.
(b) Open competitive tests to ascertain the relative fitness of all
appointments in the classified service.
(c) Public notice of the time and place of all competitive tests, at
least 30 days in advance thereof, by publication in the official
paper of the city and by posting a notice in a conspicuous place
in the City Hall and other public buildings.
(d) The creation of eligibility lists upon which shall be entered the
names of the successful applicants in the order of their
standing in the competitive tests.
(e) The rejection of applicants or eligibles who do not satisfy
requirements as to age, sex, physical condition and moral
character, or who have attempted deception or fraud in
connection with any test or their application thereof.
(f) The certification from the appropriate eligibility list, for filling
a vacancy in the classified service, of the name of the applicant
of the highest standing on such list.
§ 12-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 12-4
12:30
§ 12-5. Application register.
Upon announcement of examination or test, there shall be established an
application register. Applications for employment by the city shall be upon
forms prescribed by the Civil Service Board and must be received not less
than 10 days prior to the date of examination.
(g) The rejection by the appointing authority of the person
certified for appointment, provided that any person rejected
shall have the right of appeal to and hearing before the Civil
Service Board.
(h) Temporary employment without test in the absence of an
eligible list, but no such temporary employment shall continue
after the establishment of a suitable eligibility list nor for more
than 90 days.
(i) Temporary employment for transitory work without tests, but
such employment shall require the consent of the Civil Service
Board in each case and shall not continue for more than 60
days nor be renewed.
(j) Promotion based on competitive tests and upon records of
efficiency, character, conduct and seniority.
(k) Transfer from a position to a similar position in the same class
and grade.
(l) The immediate reinstatement to his position, at no loss of
classification or pay rate, of any person who, without fault or
delinquency on his part, is separated from the service or
reduced in rank, except where such separation or reduction in
rank is caused by normal procedure as set down in the
personnel rules or for reasons of economy in the city
government.
(m) Suspension for purpose of discipline for not longer than 30
days, and for leaves of absence.
(n) Discharge or reduction in grade and pay of any employee after
he or she has been informed in writing, by the person in
authority, of the reason for such action, with copies of the
written reasons submitted to the Mayor and the Civil Service
Board for permanent filing, with the right of the employee to a
public hearing before the Civil Service Board.
(o) Maintaining a record of the efficiency of each employee by
establishing a service rating system.
§ 12-4 CIVIL SERVICE § 12-6
12:31
§ 12-6. Tests; notification.
Tests required by the Civil Service Board shall be practical, shall relate to
matters which fairly measure the relative fitness and merit of applicants
to discharge the duties of the position which they seek and shall take
account of character, training and experience. No question in any test
shall relate to political or religious opinions, affiliations or service. No
appointment, transfer, layoff, promotion, reduction, suspension or removal
shall be affected or influenced by such opinions, affiliations or service. At
least 1O days in advance of the date of examination, each applicant, upon
the appropriate lists of the application register, shall be notified of such
examination by certified mail.
§ 12-7. Register of eligibles.
The list of applicants eligible to appointment by reason of civil service tests,
with their grades, shall be known as the "register of eligibles." Names of
such eligibles shall be arranged in their respective lists in the order of their
standings on the test. The name of no person shall remain on the register of
eligibles for more than two years without a new application and, if the civil
service rules so require, a new test.
§ 12-8. Appointments.
When any position in the classified service is to be filled, the appointing
authority shall notify the Civil Service Board, which shall promptly certify
to such authority the name and address of the highest eligible on the list for
the class or grade to which such position belongs.
§ 12-9. Restrictions on appointments.
No person shall be appointed or employed in the classified service of the
city under any title not appropriate to the duties to be performed, and no
person shall be transferred to or be assigned to perform any duties of a
position subject to competitive test, except with the approval of the Civil
Service Board and unless as a result of an open competitive test equivalent
to that required for the position to be filled or unless he or she shall have
served with fidelity for at least two years immediately preceding in a similar
position under the city government.
§ 12-10. Promotions.
Whenever practicable, vacancies in the classified service shall be filled by
promotion, and the civil service rules shall indicate the lines of promotion
from each lower to higher grade wherever experience derived in the lower
grade tends to qualify for the higher. Lists from which promotions are to
be made shall be created as provided by the civil service rules, and the
appointment of eligibles therefrom shall be made in the same manner as
original appointments.
§ 12-11. Status of present employees; continuation of benefits.
§ 12-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 12-11
12:32
§ 12-12. Simultaneous employment in classified and unclassified
service.
Chapter 15
COMPENSATION COMMISSION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Fixing of compensation by City Council — See
Ch. 4, Sec. 4.6. Compensation of City
Council — See Ch. 5, Sec. 5.1.
A. Persons holding positions in the service of the City of Roseville prior to
adoption of this chapter shall automatically retain their positions and
will be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Board. Employees of any utilities taken
over by the city shall be entitled to the same rights as persons
appointed under civil service.
B. From and after the effective date of this chapter, all employee benefits,
including pay rates, pensions, seniority, insurance, accumulated sick
leave, vacation time and longevity pay benefits of the employees of the
City of Roseville, shall be continued without interruption.
A. No person elected to the City Council shall, during the time for which
elected, be appointed to any office or position in the classified service of
the city. Any employee of the city who receives a salary or wages from
the city who shall become a candidate for nomination or election to any
elective office of the city shall immediately forfeit the office or
employment held under the classified service of the city. No employee
of the city shall be appointed to any board or commission of the city
except those specifically approved by this or other sections of this
chapter.
B. In the event that any person who is employed in the classified service of
the city shall be appointed to any position in the unclassified service of
the city, other than an elective office, he or she shall be granted a leave
of absence from the position in the classified service of the city held by
him or her, with full rights of returning to such position in the classified
service of the city within 60 days after his or her tenure in the
unclassified position held by him or her is terminated. In the event of
failure to return to such classified position within the said sixty-day
period, he or she shall forfeit all rights thereto.
C. The Civil Service Board shall not adopt any rule, and the Council shall
not adopt any ordinance or resolution, which shall deny or limit the
right of any employee of the city to appeal to the courts relative to any
decision of the Civil Service Board concerning any matter pertaining to
his or her employment by the city.
§ 12-11 COMPENSATION COMMISSION § 12-12
15:33
§ 15-1. Establishment.
There is established an Elected Officials Compensation Commission, which
shall establish the salaries of all local elected officials.
§ 15-2. Membership; terms of office; appointments.
§ 15-3. Meetings; compensation; determination of salaries.
A. Said Commission shall consist of seven registered elector members,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by a
majority of the members serving on the City Council. No member,
employee or member of the immediate family of a member of the
legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government shall
be eligible to be a member of the Commission. All appointments to the
Commission shall be for a term of seven years.
B. The terms of the first members of said Commission shall be as follows:
one member for one year, one member for two years, one member for
three years, one member for four years, one member for five years, one
member for six years and one member for seven years.
C. All first members shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective
date of this chapter. Thereafter members shall be appointed before
October 1 of the year of the appointment. If any member shall
subsequently become disqualified, he or she shall immediately cease to
be a member. All vacancies to the Commission shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the other
members were appointed.
A. Immediately after appointment, said Commission shall meet and
organize, electing one of its members Chair. The Commission shall meet
for not more than 15 days in the year 1974 and every odd-numbered
year thereafter. The Commission shall make its determination of
salaries within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the
members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting
business. The members shall receive no compensation but shall be
entitled to reimbursement of their actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties. The Commission shall
determine salaries of local elected officials, which determinations shall
be the salaries unless rejected by resolution of 2/3 of the members
elected to and serving on the City Council.
B. Salaries as determined shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall
become effective 30 days after said filing unless rejected by the
aforereferenced resolution of the City Council. In the event that the City
Council rejects the salaries determined by the Commission, the existing
salaries shall prevail. The expense allowance for reimbursement paid to
elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in
§ 12-12 ROSEVILLE CODE § 15-3
15:34
§ 15-4. Amendment of procedure.
One year following the effective date of this chapter, the procedure for
establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by
Charter amendment revision.
§ 15-5. Referendum petition.
A petition for a referendum may be filed with the City Clerk within 60 days
after the effective date of this chapter. The referendum petition must be
signed by at least 5% of the registered electors of the city on the effective
date of this chapter, or in the alternative, the petition may be filed in
accordance with the procedure provided in the City Charter.4 In the event
that a valid referendum petition is filed, an election shall be conducted in
the same manner as an election on a Charter amendment. If a petition for
referendum is filed, the salaries as determined by the Commission shall not
be effective until the ordinance has been approved by the electors.
Chapter 18
DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN
CHARTER REFERENCES
Compensation Commission — See Ch. 15.
§ 18-1. Eligibility.
the course of city business and accounted for to the city. [Amended
5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1077]
A. The DROP program will be available only to those members of the
retirement system to whom eligibility to participate in the program has
been granted pursuant to the terms of an applicable collective
bargaining agreement or personal services contract. "Collective
bargaining agreement" means any written agreement, supplemental
agreement, memorandum of understanding, final arbitrator's decision,
judicial decision of any public board or agency, by and between
applicable collective bargaining associations and the City. "Personal
services contract" means any written agreement, or supplemental
agreement between nonunion employees and the City as authorized by
City Council.
B. Any member to whom DROP eligibility has been granted may
voluntarily elect to participate in the DROP at any time after they have
attained voluntary retirement age and ten or more years of credited
services. The member's election to participate in the DROP shall not
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Sec. 6.8 et seq., of the Charter.
§ 15-3 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 18-1
18:35
§ 18-2. Participation.
§ 18-3. Election to participate.
operate to change or in any way modify the retirement system's
minimum requirement for voluntary retirement.
A. Any member to whom DROP eligibility has been granted may
participate in the DROP on a year-to-year basis, subject to annual
review and approval, for an aggregate period of no more than seven
years. There is no minimum time period for participation. An employee
must cease service with the City of Roseville at the time their DROP
participation ceases. In no event shall participation in the DROP require
a just-cause standard for termination of the employee in participating in
the DROP, notwithstanding any agreement, collective bargaining
agreement, personal services contract, Act 78 or any other writing
governing the employment relationship between the participant and
the City of Roseville. Annual DROP participation is at the sole discretion
of the City of Roseville. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 1203]
B. Upon termination of employment, the retiree shall commence receipt of
the monthly retirement benefit previously credited to their DROP
account, unless an optional form of benefit is elected pursuant to § 18-4.
Failure to terminate employment at the expiration of the DROP
participation period shall result in forfeiture of the participant's
monthly pension benefit otherwise payable to their DROP account until
termination of employment. Interest on the DROP account, however,
will continue to accrue during such a forfeiture period.
A. Once commenced, participation in the DROP program is irrevocable,
except as specifically provided in § 18-11. An employee who wishes to
participate in the DROP shall complete and sign such application form
or forms as shall be required by the Retirement Board not less than 30
days nor more than 90 days prior to their intended DROP date. The
Retirement Board shall review the application within a reasonable time
period and make a determination as to the employee's eligibility for
participation in the DROP. On the employee's effective DROP date, he or
she shall become a DROP participant and shall cease to be an active
member of the retirement system. The amount of credited service,
multiplier and final average compensation shall be fixed as of the
participant's DROP date. Increases in compensation and accrual of
additional service during DROP participation shall not be factored in
the pension benefits of active or former DROP participants except as
specifically provided in § 18-11. A participant's DROP date only applies
to the employee's retirement benefit provisions as provided herein and
not to any other contractual benefits or retiree medical benefits in
effect or accruing after participant's DROP date.
B. Employees otherwise qualifying for DROP participation shall have a
sixty-day-window period commencing April 2, 2003, through and
§ 18-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 18-3
18:36
§ 18-4. DROP Benefit.
including May 31, 2003, during which eligible employees may file a
retroactive DROP election with the Retirement Board with an effective
DROP date commencing no earlier than July 1, 2001. The employee
must otherwise qualify for DROP participation on his or her effective
DROP date. An employee electing retroactive DROP participation in
accordance with this provision shall have DROP benefits based upon
the retirement provisions and computation formula in effect on his
or her effective DROP date and the employee's applicable wage and
accumulated banks as of his or her effective DROP date. [Added
5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 1179]
C. Upon expiration of said sixty-day-window period, employees electing
DROP participation shall have an effective DROP date no less than
thirty days or more than ninety days after the employee's date of
application. Employees electing retroactive DROP participation shall
receive a refund of their accumulated contributions in the retirement
system which were credited after their effective DROP date. Said
amount shall be treated as a lump-sum payment payable at DROP
election with no reduction in the member's retirement or DROP benefit.
[Added 5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 1179]
A. The participant's DROP benefit shall be the regular monthly retirement
benefit to which the employee would have been entitled if the employee
had actually retired on the DROP date less the annuity withdrawal
reduction as set forth in § 18-5 and/or actuarial reductions as a result of
the employee electing an optional form of benefit under the plan, if
applicable. The calculation of the employee's final average
compensation (FAC) shall be based upon the contract provisions in
effect on the employee's DROP date and, to the extent applicable, shall
include all monies which if the Employee had terminated employment
on their DROP date, would have otherwise been included in calculating
the employee's FAC.
B. The participant's DROP Benefit shall be credited monthly to the
participant's individual DROP account. A DROP participant may, prior
to their DROP date, or at the time of their termination of employment,
elect to receive his or her benefit in the form of the plan's Option I,
Option II, or Option III benefit and nominate a named beneficiary in
accordance with the plan provisions. A participant's DROP benefit that
is credited monthly into the participant's DROP account shall not
change during the participant's DROP participation. A participant
desiring to change his or her form of benefit at termination of
employment must make such election prior to termination and will
receive the actuarially computed revised benefit commencing on the
employee's effective date of termination. The term "spouse," for
purposes of survivorship benefit qualification of DROP participants,
shall mean the person to whom the participant was legally married on
the participant's date of death if such death occurs during DROP
§ 18-3 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 18-4
18:37
§ 18-5. Annuity withdrawal.
participation or the person to whom the retirant was legally married on
both the effective date of termination of employment and the retirent's
date of death, in the event such death occurs after termination of
employment. The definition of "spouse" herein may be amended
pursuant to an eligible domestic relations order entered pursuant to
Michigan Public Act 46 of 1991, as amended (MCL § 38.1701 et seq.).
A. An employee who elects to participate in the DROP, and
correspondingly ceases participation in the retirement system, may
elect the annuity withdrawal option provided by the plan at the time of
electing DROP participation. Such election shall be made
commensurate with the participant's DROP election, but not thereafter,
and will be utilized to compute the actuarial reduction of the
participant's DROP benefit, as well as the employee's monthly
retirement benefit from the retirement system after termination of
employment. If the participant, pursuant to § 18-4, elects an optional
form of benefit upon termination of employment, the annuity
withdrawal reduction shall be redetermined and the retirant's monthly
retirement benefit adjusted.
B. The annuity withdrawal amount (accumulated contributions) shall
remain in the retirement system and shall not be subject to withdrawal
from the retirement system until the time of the termination of
employment. A DROP participant who has elected the annuity
withdrawal option shall, as of his or her DROP date, continue to have
regular interest credited to the member's accumulated balance in the
annuity savings fund. All withdrawal provisions and options under the
retirement system which are available to members shall be available to
the DROP participant at such time as he or she terminates employment
and becomes eligible for withdrawal of his or her contributions.
C. At the time of the annuity withdrawal election, if an employee is
electing a straight life form of benefit with no qualifying spouse, the
annuity withdrawal reduction computation is based in part upon the
actuarial life expectancy of the employee rather than the life
expectancies of both the employee and a qualified spouse. There shall
be no adjustment to the benefits payable to the DROP participant/
retiree upon the participant's subsequent marriage to a qualifying
spouse unless the participant selects an optional form of benefit at
termination of employment as provided in § 18-4. In the event such
spouse (i.e., qualified after calculation of the annuity withdrawal
election) subsequently qualifies for benefits payable by the plan, said
benefits shall not be adjusted based upon the employee's annuity
withdrawal election.
§ 18-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 18-6
18:38
§ 18-6. DROP accounts. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 1203]
For each DROP participant, an individual DROP account shall be created
in which shall be accumulated at DROP interest the participant's DROP
benefits. All individual DROP accounts shall be maintained for the benefit of
each DROP participant and will be managed by the Retirement Board in the
same manner as the primary pension fund. DROP interest for each DROP
participant shall be at a fixed rate of 3.0% per annum with interest credited
on the anniversary date that the participant entered into the DROP. The
Retirement Board shall provide each participant with an annual statement
of their account activity. The reference to individual DROP accounts shall
be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the retirement system
and not to the actual segregation of monies in the funds of the retirement
system.
§ 18-7. Contributions.
§ 18-8. Distribution of DROP funds.
A. The employee's contributions to the retirement system shall cease as of
the participant's DROP Date for each employee entering the DROP.
B. The payroll of DROP participants will be included in the covered
compensation upon which regular City contributions to the retirement
system are based. Employer contributions shall be credited to the
retirement system and not to any individual's DROP Account.
A. Methods of Distribution. Upon termination of employment, the DROP
participant must choose one or a consistent combination of the
following distribution methods to receive payment(s) from his or her
individual DROP account:
(1) A total lump sum distribution to the recipient.
(2) A partial lump sum distribution to the recipient.
(3) A lump sum direct rollover to another qualified plan to the extent
allowed by federal law and in accordance with the Retirement
Board's rollover procedures.
(4) An annuity payable for the life of the recipient.
(5) An optional form of annuity as established by Public Act 345 of
1937, as amended.
(6) No distribution, in which case the accumulated balance shall
remain in the plan to the extent allowed by federal law.
B. Changes in distribution. A former participant may change his/her
distribution method as may be applicable no more than once per
annum. All benefit payments under the plan shall be made, or
commence, in the case of an annuity, as soon as practical after
§ 18-6 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 18-8
18:39
§ 18-9. Death during DROP participation.
Except as otherwise provided in § 18-11, if an employee participating in the
DROP dies either before full retirement (i.e., before termination of service)
or during full retirement (i.e., after termination of service, but before the
DROP account balance has been fully paid out, the participant's designated
beneficiary(ies) shall receive the remaining balance in the participant's
DROP account in the manner in which they elect from the distribution
methods as provided in § 18-8. In the event the participant has failed to
name a beneficiary, the account balance shall be payable to the participant's
beneficiary of benefits from the retirement system. If there is no such
beneficiary, the account balance shall be paid in a lump sum to the
participant's estate. Benefits payable from the retirement system shall be
determined as though the DROP participant had separated from service on
the day prior to the participant's date of death.
§ 18-10. Disability during DROP participation.
Except as otherwise provided in § 18-11, in the event a DROP participant
becomes totally and permanently disabled from further performance of duty
in the employ of the City of Roseville in accordance with the provisions
of the retirement system, the participant's participation in the DROP shall
cease and the member shall receive such benefits as if the member had
retired and terminated employment during the participation period.
Application and determination of disability shall be conducted in
accordance with the retirement system provisions; however, the participant
shall not be eligible for disability benefits from the retirement system,
except as specifically provided in § 18-11.
entitlement thereto, but in no event later than April 1 following the later
of:
(1) The calendar year in which the member attains age 70 1/2; or
(2) The calendar year in which the participant's employment
terminated.
C. Involuntary distribution. If the accumulated balance in any former
participant's account becomes less than $5,000 (or such other amount
as provided in the Internal Revenue Code Section 411[a][11][A]), then
the Retirement Board, in its sole discretion, shall have the option of
distributing the former participant's entire account, in the form of a
lump sum to the former participant.
D. Distribution offsets. Any and all distributions from participant's DROP
account shall not be subject to offset by any workers compensation
wage loss payments received by the participant, including any
redemption amounts.
§ 18-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 18-11
18:40
§ 18-11. Special provision for duty disability or duty death.
A DROP participant who is found by the Retirement Board, in accordance
with retirement system provisions, to be totally and permanently
incapacitated for duty by reason of a personal injury or disease occurring as
the natural and proximate result of causes arising out of and in the course
of the employee's employment with the City, may retroactively revoke the
participant's DROP election if the revocation occurs before the payment
of a distribution to the employee from the participant's DROP account
or payment of disability or retirement benefits to the employee from the
retirement system. If a DROP participant dies in the line of duty while in
the employ of the City, the DROP participant's eligible survivors qualified
under the retirement system provisions and/or the participant's applicable
collective bargaining agreement, and the participant's eligible DROP
beneficiary(ies) may, by unanimous agreement, retroactively revoke the
participant's DROP election if the revocation occurs within 90 days of the
participant's date of death and before payment of a distribution from the
participant's DROP account or payment of benefits from the retirement
system. If a DROP election revocation is made as prescribed by this section,
the participant's DROP account is not distributed, and the participant or
the participant's beneficiary(ies), as applicable, is entitled to all benefits
provided by the retirement system as if a DROP election had not been made.
In the event of revocation of DROP participation as provided herein, there
shall be no requirement for retroactive payment of employee contributions
which would otherwise have been paid by the employee to the retirement
system, and the employee shall receive credit for all service rendered
during the DROP participation or as otherwise provided in the applicable
collective bargaining agreement.
§ 18-12. Internal Revenue Code compliance.
§ 18-13. Effective date. [Added 4-1-2003 by Ord. No. 1174]
Ordinance No. 1171 of the City of Roseville Code of Ordinances, adopted
September 24, 2002, and effective October 14, 2002, is hereby given
retroactive effect to July 1, 2001.
A. The DROP is intended to operate in accordance with Section 415 and
other applicable laws and regulations contained within the Internal
Revenue Code of the United States. Any provision of the DROP, or
portion thereof, that is found by the Retirement Board to be in conflict
with an applicable provision of the Internal Revenue Code of the United
States is hereby declared null and void.
B. The City of Roseville Employees Retirement System consists of both
defined benefit and defined contribution plans. The DROP account
herein discussed shall be established as part of the defined benefit plan
of the retirement system or such other plan as the Retirement Board
and the City shall agree upon (i.e., IRC, Section 415[m], benefit plan)
after consultation with appropriate legal council.
§ 18-11 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 18-13
18:41
Chapter 21
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 45. Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 18-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 18-13
18:42
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 12835]
§ 21-1. Determination of necessity.
The City of Roseville City Council hereby determines that it is necessary and
in the best interests of the public to create a public body corporate which
shall operate to halt property value deterioration, eliminate the causes of
that deterioration, increase property tax valuation where possible in the
business districts of the City, and promote economic growth, pursuant to
Act 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as amended.6
§ 21-2. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as given to
them in Act 197 or as hereinafter provided. As used in this chapter:
ACT 197 — Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as amended.
AUTHORITY — The Downtown Development Authority of the City of
Roseville created by this chapter.
BOARD or BOARD OF DIRECTORS — The Board of Directors of the
Authority, the governing body of the Authority.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER — The Mayor of the City.
CITY — The City of Roseville, Michigan.
COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City.
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT — The downtown district designated by this
chapter, as now existing or hereafter amended, and within which the
Authority shall exercise its powers.
§ 21-3. Creation of the Downtown Development Authority.
There is hereby created, pursuant to Act 197, a Downtown Development
Authority for the City. The Authority shall be a public body corporate
and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title "Downtown
Development Authority of the City of Roseville." The Authority may adopt a
seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this State and shall possess all
of the powers necessary to carry out the purposes of its incorporation as
provided by this chapter and Act 197. The enumeration of powers of this
chapter or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general
powers of the Authority.
5. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 116 but was renumbered to maintain the
organization of the Code. This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 21, Downtown
Development Authority, adopted 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 1100.
6. Editor's Note: See MSA § 5.3010(1a) et seq.; MCL § 125.1651a et seq.
§ 21-1 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 21-4
18:43
§ 21-4. Termination.
Upon completion of its purposes, the Authority may be dissolved by the
City Council. The property and assets of the Authority, after dissolution and
satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the City.
§ 21-5. Description of the Downtown District.
The Downtown District shall consist of the territory in the City described
in Exhibit A, attached hereto and made a part of hereof, subject to such
changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this chapter and Act 197.
§ 21-6. Board of Directors.
The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of the Board.
The Board shall consist of nine members including the Chief Executive
Officer of the City, who shall be appointed and serve in accordance with
the Act. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The Chairperson
of the Board shall be elected by the Board. The Board shall adopt bylaws
governing its procedures subject to the approval of the City Council.
§ 21-7. Powers of the Authority.
Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter, the Authority shall
have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by and
herein.
§ 21-8. Fiscal year; budget.
A. The fiscal year for the Authority shall begin on July 1st of each year and
end on June 30, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by
the Council.
B. The Board shall prepare annually a budget and shall submit it to the
City Council for approval. The Board shall not finally adopt a budget for
any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the City Council.
The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with
the operation of any improvements which have been financed by
revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing
the revenue bonds.
C. The Authority shall submit financial reports to the City Council at the
same time and on the same basis as departments of the City are
required to submit reports. The Authority shall be audited annually by
the same independent auditors auditing the City and copies of the audit
report shall be filed with the Council.
§ 21-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 21-8
18:44
ARTICLE II
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan
[Adopted 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. 1290]
§ 21-9. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BASE YEAR ASSESSMENT ROLL — The base year assessment roll prepared
by the City Assessor in accordance with § 21-13.
CAPTURED ASSESSED VALUE — The amount in any one year by which the
current assessed value of the development area (also known as the "project
area"), including the assessed value of property for which specific local
taxes are paid in lieu of property taxes as determined in Section 1(x) of Act
197 [MCL 125.1651(x)], exceeds the initial assessed value. The method for
calculating captured assessed value shall be as prescribed by the State Tax
Commission.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The project development and financing plan of
the Downtown Development District, dated April 2016, as amended and
transmitted to the City Council by the Downtown Development Authority for
public hearing, as modified by action of the City Council and confirmed by
this article, copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT — The area outlined in the
development plan and legally described in Appendix A on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
INITIAL ASSESSED VALUE — The most recently assessed value as finally
equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the Downtown
Development District (development area) on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived, as such term is used and
defined in Section 1(p) of Act 197 [MCL 125.1651(p)].
PROJECT FUND — The Downtown Development Authority Project Fund
established pursuant to § 21-15.
SPECIFIC LOCAL TAX — A tax levied under Public Act No. 198 of 1974
(MCL 207.551 et seq.), the Commercial Redevelopment Act; Public Act No.
255 of 1978 (MCL 207.651 et seq.), the Technology Park Development Act;
Public Act No. 385 of 1984 (MCL 207.701 et seq.); and Public Act No. 189
of 1953 (MCL 211.181 et seq.), as such term is used and defined in Section
1(x) of Act 197 [MCL 125.1651(x)].
TAXING JURISDICTION — Each unit of government levying an ad valorem
property tax on property in the Downtown Development District
(development area).
§ 21-10. Legislative findings.
A. Preamble.
§ 21-9 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 21-10
18:45
(1) Public Act No. 197 of 1975 provides for, among other things, the
establishment of a Downtown Development Authority; to correct
and prevent deterioration in business districts; to encourage
historic preservation; to authorize the creation and implementation
of development plans in the districts; to promote economic growth;
and to authorize the use of tax increment plans.
(2) The Downtown Development Authority has caused to be prepared,
and has recommended for approval, a tax increment financing and
development plan to the area designated as Downtown District.
(3) Pursuant to Section 18 of the Act (MCL 125.1668), the City Council
conducted a public hearing on May 17, 2016.
(4) The City has given the County Board of Commissioners and School
Board an opportunity to meet with the City Council to express their
views and recommendations regarding the plan, as required by
Section 14 of the Act (MCL 125.1664).
B. Findings. The City Council finds all of the following:
(1) The Downtown Development Authority has approved an overall
development plan designed to bring to the central area of the City
new residents and businesses, specifically, the Downtown District.
(2) The tax increment plan will fund public improvements through
taxes generated by private development.
(3) Implementation of the development plan will bring residents with
disposable income to the downtown area, will create a new tax base
and generate economic growth, thereby providing customers for
retailers, and it will serve as an impetus for additional residential
and retail growth.
(4) The development plan constitutes a public purpose and is
reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act.
C. Approval considerations. The development plan and tax increment plan
are being approved by this article based upon the following
considerations:
(1) The findings and recommendations of a development area citizens
council, if a development area citizens' council was formed.
(2) The plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of the
Act [MCL 125.1667(2)].
(3) The proposed method of financing the development is feasible, and
the authority has the ability to arrange the financing.
(4) The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of the Act.
§ 21-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 21-10
18:46
§ 21-11. Approval; adoption of plans.
The development plan, as amended by the City Council, and the tax
increment financing plan detailed and set forth in such development plan,
are hereby declared by the City Council to constitute a public purpose,
and the plans are hereby approved and adopted. The duration of the
development plan and the tax increment financing plan shall be 20 years
from the date of issuance of the last series of bonds issued pursuant to the
development plan, except as it may be extended by subsequent amendment
of the development plan and this article. A copy of the development plan
and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the City Clerk's
office and cross-indexed to this article.
§ 21-12. Boundaries of Downtown Development District.
The boundaries of the Downtown Development District as set forth in the
development plan and attached to Chapter 21 as Exhibit A, which is on file
in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby adopted and approved, and the
Downtown Development District shall constitute the development area.
§ 21-13. Preparation of base year assessment roll.
(5) The land included within the development area to be acquired is
reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and of
this Act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner.
(6) The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan
of the City.
(7) Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are
or will be adequate to service the project area.
(8) Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities
are reasonably necessary for the project and the City.
A. Within 20 days of May 17, 2016, the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, the City Assessor shall prepare the initial
base year assessment roll. The initial base year assessment roll shall list
each taxing jurisdiction levying taxes in the Downtown Development
District, the initial assessed value of the Downtown Development
District on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived, and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing
jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the Downtown
Development District.
B. The City Assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base year
assessment roll to the City Treasurer, to the county treasurer, to the
Downtown Development Authority and to each taxing jurisdiction,
together with a notice that the assessment roll has been prepared in
accordance with this article and the tax increment financing plan
§ 21-10 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 21-13
18:47
§ 21-14. Preparation of annual base year assessment roll.
Each year, within 15 days following the final equalization of property in
the Downtown Development District, the City Assessor shall prepare an
updated base year assessment roll. The updated base year assessment roll
shall show and contain the information required in the initial base year
assessment roll, and in addition, the updated base year assessment roll shall
set forth and show the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the
annual base year assessment roll shall be transmitted by the City Assessor
to the same persons and entities as the initial base year assessment roll,
together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with the
development plan and this article.
§ 21-15. Establishment of project fund; approval of depository.
The Treasurer of the Downtown Development Authority shall establish a
separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account in a bank
approved by the City Treasurer, such fund to be designated the "Downtown
Development Authority Project Fund." All proceeds of the tax increment
financing plan shall be deposited in the Downtown Development Authority
Project Fund. All monies in the Downtown Development Authority Project
Fund and all earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the
development plan and this article.
§ 21-16. Payment of tax increments to Downtown Development
Authority.
The City Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall transmit tax increments
to the Downtown Development Authority in accordance with Act 197; the
amount of tax increment to be transmitted to the Downtown Development
Authority by the City Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall be that
portion of the tax levy of all taxing bodies (taxing jurisdictions) paid each
year on real and personal property in the project area (development area)
on the captured assessed value. For the purpose of this section, that portion
of a specific local tax that is attributable to the captured assessed value of
the facility shall be included as a part of the tax increment to be transmitted
to the Downtown Development Authority. The tax increments transmitted by
the City Treasurer and the County Treasurer to the Downtown Development
Authority shall be deposited by the treasurer of the Downtown Development
Authority into the project fund. The payment of the tax increments to the
Downtown Development Authority shall be made on the date which the City
Treasurer and the County Treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of
the taxing jurisdictions, unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 21-17. Use of monies in project fund.
contained and set forth in the development plan approved by this
article.
§ 21-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 21-17
18:48
A. The monies and funds credited to and deposited in the project fund
pursuant to this article and the earnings and income thereon shall, in
accordance with Act 197, be annually used in the following manner and
in the following order of priority to:
(1) Pay into the debt retirement fund, for all outstanding series of
bonds issued pursuant to the development plan and this article, an
amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case
of principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to
the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the
debt retirement fund.
(2) Establish a reserve account for payment of principal and interest
on bonds issued, pursuant to the development plan and this article,
an amount equal to 1/5 of the largest combined annual principal
and interest payments due on bonds issued pursuant to the
development plan and this article until the amount equal to the
credit of the reserve account is equal to the largest combined
annual principal and interest requirements on bonds issued
pursuant to the development plan and this article. Any amounts to
the credit of the reserve account at the beginning of a fiscal year in
excess of the requirement of the preceding sentence shall be
considered tax increment revenue for that year.
(3) Pay the administrative and operating costs of the Downtown
Development Authority and City for the Downtown Development
District, including planning promotion, to the extent provided in
the annual budget of the Downtown Development Authority.
(4) Pay, to the extent determined desirable by the Downtown
Development Authority and approved by the City Council, the cost
of completing the remaining public improvements as set forth in
the development plan to the extent those costs are not financed
from the proceeds of bonds.
(5) Pay the costs of any additional improvements to the Downtown
Development District determined necessary by the Downtown
Development Authority and approved by the City Council.
(6) Reimburse the City for funds advanced to acquire property, clear
land, make preliminary plans, and improvements necessary for the
development of the Downtown Development District in accordance
with the development plan.
(7) Provide a pool of mortgage financing, as needed, for private
development in accordance with the development plan.
B. Any tax increment receipts in excess of those needed under subsection
a of this section shall revert to the taxing jurisdictions or be used for
future development activities within the Downtown Development
District, as defined in the development plan or as expanded to include
all or parts of the Downtown Development District pursuant to
§ 21-17 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN § 21-17
18:49
§ 21-18. Annual report required of Downtown Development
Authority.
§ 21-19. Reverting of surplus tax increments.
The Downtown Development Authority shall expend the tax increments for
the development program only pursuant to the tax increment financing
plan. Surplus funds shall revert proportionately to the respective taxing
bodies (taxing jurisdictions).
§ 21-20. Applicability of State law.
This article is adopted pursuant to, and in accordance with, Act 197. The
interpretation and administration of this article shall be governed by the
terms, provisions and requirements of Act 197.
amendment or modification of the development plan and/or this article
pursuant to applicable provisions and requirements of Act 197 and/or
pursuant to other applicable laws.
A. Annually, within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Downtown
Development Authority shall submit to the City Council and to the State
Tax Commission, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the
status of the tax increment financing account (project fund). The report
shall include the following:
(1) The amount and source of revenue in the account;
(2) The amount and purpose of expenditures from the account;
(3) The amount of principal and interest on any outstanding bonded
indebtedness;
(4) The initial assessed value of the project area (development area);
(5) The captured assessed value retained by the Downtown
Development Authority;
(6) The tax increments received;
(7) The amount of any surplus from the prior year; and
(8) Any additional information the City Council or the State Tax
Commission considers necessary and any additional information
deemed appropriate by the Downtown Development Authority.
B. The secretary of the Downtown Development Authority shall cause a
copy of the report to be published once in full in the established legal
newspaper of general circulation in the City.
§ 21-17 ROSEVILLE CODE § 21-20
18:50
Chapter 22
ELECTIONS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Elections - See Ch. 18.
§ 21-20 ELECTIONS § 21-20
22:51

ARTICLE I
Odd-Year Primary Elections
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. 1 of Ch. 22 of the 1984
Code]
§ 22-1. Date on which elections are to be held.
All regularly scheduled city odd-year primary elections shall be held on the
Tuesday following the second Monday in September of each odd-numbered
year.
§ 22-1 ELECTIONS § 22-1
22:53
Chapter 27
FIRE PREVENTION, BUREAU OF
CHARTER REFERENCES
City Attorney - See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.4. Fire Department - See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Approval of fire hydrants — See Ch. 139.
Fire prevention - See Ch. 142.
Approval of fire extinguishing systems at selfservice
gas stations — See Ch. 158, Art. I.
§ 27-1. Establishment; Fire Marshal; fire inspectors; report.
§ 27-2. Powers and duties of officers.
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention of the City Fire Department is hereby
established. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be under the
supervision and control of the Fire Chief.
B. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be known as the "Fire
Marshal." The Fire Marshal shall have met and complied with the
requirements relative to testing and appointment prescribed by Act 78
of the Public Acts of 1935, as amended, State of Michigan.7 The
appointment of the Fire Marshal shall continue during good behavior
and satisfactory service, and he or she shall not be removed from office
except for cause. Wherever the words "Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention" are used in this chapter, they shall be held to mean the Fire
Marshal.
C. Fire inspectors assigned to assist the Fire Marshal shall have met and
complied with the requirements relative to testing and appointment as
prescribed by Act 78 of the Public Acts of 1 935, as amended. The Fire
Chief shall authorize the Fire Marshal to employ such temporary
outside technical inspectors as shall from time to time be required. The
temporary outside technical assistance aforereferenced shall only be
employed when it is unavailable within the local, state or federal
governmental agencies.
D. A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually by the
Fire Marshal and transmitted to the Fire Chief. Said report shall
contain all proceedings under this chapter with such statistics as the
Fire Marshal may wish to include therein. In said report, the Fire
Marshal shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in
his or her judgment, shall be desirable.
7. Editor's Note: See MSA §§ 5.3351 through 5.3370; MCL § 38.501.
§ 22-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 27-2
27:54
§ 27-3. Additional ordinances and amendments.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to investigate and to
recommend to the City Council such additional ordinances, or amendments
to existing ordinances, as the Chief may deem necessary for safeguarding
life and property against fire.
§ 27-4. Preparation of instructions and forms.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall prepare instructions for the Chief
Inspector and assistants and forms for their use in the reports required by
this chapter.
§ 27-5. Investigation of fires of suspicious origin.
The City Attorney, upon request of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, shall
assist the Bureau in the investigation of any fire which, in its opinion, is of
suspicious origin.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce all laws and ordinances of the state, county and city covering
the following:
(1) The prevention of fires.
(2) The storage and use of explosives and flammables.
(3) The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
(4) The maintenance regulations for fire escapes.
(5) The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls,
theaters, places of assembly and all other places in which numbers
of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any
purpose.
(6) The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
B. They shall have such other powers and perform such duties as are set
forth in other sections of this chapter and as may be conferred and
imposed from time to time by law. The Chief of the Fire Department
may delegate any of the powers or duties under this chapter to the Fire
Marshal.
§ 27-2 FIRE PREVENTION, BUREAU OF § 27-5
27:55
Chapter 30
HOUSING COMMISSION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Buildings and
Inspection — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13.
§ 30-1. Adoption of statute by reference; creation.
The city adopts Public Act 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended,8
and pursuant thereto a Commission is hereby created by and for the city to
be known as the "Roseville Housing Commission."
§ 30-2. Appointment of members; terms of office; compensation.
The Mayor and City Manager are hereby directed to jointly appoint the
members of said Roseville Housing Commission as soon as possible after
this chapter shall take effect. The term of office of the members of the
Housing Commission shall be five years. Members of the first Commission,
however, shall be appointed for terms of one year, two years, three years,
four years and five years, respectively, and annually thereafter one member
shall be appointed for the term of five years. Members of the Commission
shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office by the
appointing authorities. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the appointing
authorities for the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 30-3. Powers and duties.
Said Roseville Housing Commission shall have all the powers and duties
vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by said Public Act
No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as heretofore or hereafter amended,9
and any laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental
thereto, it being the intention of this chapter to have vested in the Roseville
Housing Commission all powers and duties permitted by law.
§ 30-4. Officers and employees.
The Commission shall prescribe the duties of all of its officers and
employees and may, with the approval of the appointing authorities, fix their
compensation. For the purpose of this chapter, engineers, architects and
consultants are deemed "employees."10
8. Editor's Note: See MSA § 5.3011 et seq.; MCL § 125.651.
9. Editor's Note: See MSA § 5.3011 et seq.; MCL § 125.651.
10.Editor's Note: Former § 130-5, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 27-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 30-4
30:56
Chapter 36
MEDICAL SERVICE, MOBILE EMERGENCY CARE
CHARTER REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10. Civil service for fire fighters — See Ch. 16.
§ 36-1. Establishment.
A mobile emergency care medical service shall be established and provided
within the city's Fire Department, to be comprised of at least two
emergency vehicles to be in service 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and
to be staffed by the legally required number of basic emergency medical
technicians.
Chapter 38
MEETINGS
CHARTER REFERENCES
City Council meetings — See Ch. 5, Sec. 5.3.
§ 38-1. Regular Council meetings. [Amended 12-20-1995 by Ord.
No. 1074; 10-25-2012 by Ord. No. 1256; 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
1291]
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second and fourth
Tuesday of each month at the City Hall, and shall commence at 6:30 p.m.,
Eastern standard time. In the event that any such Tuesday is a legal holiday,
the meeting shall be rescheduled and held within 10 business days prior to
or after the Tuesday that is a legal holiday.
Chapter 41
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Parks and Recreation — See
Ch. 7, Sec. 7.14.
Budget procedure and general finance — See
Ch. 8.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 215.
§ 30-4 MEDICAL SERVICE, MOBILE EMERGENCY § 38-1
36:57
§ 41-1. Creation; membership; terms of office.
There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Board composed of eight
persons having the qualifications required by the City Charter for elective
officers. The City Manager shall also be a member of the Board. The terms
of office of members of the Board shall be for four years, with the terms
of two members expiring on the first day of July in each year. In making
appointments to the Board, the Mayor shall first consult with the Board
concerning qualified and interested persons therefor.
§ 41-2. Organization meeting; adoption of rules.
On or before the 15th day of July of each year, the Board shall meet and
organize by electing one of its members as Chair and by electing such other
officers as may be necessary. It shall adopt such rules as it deems necessary
for the conduct of the public parks and recreation facilities and programs of
the city.
§ 41-3. Powers and duties; Director of Parks and Recreation.
The Board shall have charge of and shall operate the public parks and
recreation facilities and programs of the city. For the performance of its
functions, it shall appoint a Director of Parks and Recreation, subject to
confirmation of the Council, and, subject to the civil service system of the
city, shall employ the personnel needed therefor.
§ 41-4. Disposition of receipts and earnings; annual statement of
financial needs.
All receipts or earnings of the Board and all funds administered by the
Board under any gift or trust shall be placed in a fund or funds separate
from the general funds of the city and shall be used only for the extension,
maintenance, improvement and conduct of the public parks and of the
recreation facilities and programs of the city. The Board shall submit its
annual statement of financial needs as required by Section 8.2 of the
Charter and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 8 of the Charter
in the administration and conduct of its affairs the same as are other
departments of the city.
§ 41-5. Joint programs.
The city, upon the recommendation and approval of the Board, may contract
or cooperate with the school district or any other unit of government for
the joint or mutual ownership or operation, or both, of any public park or
recreational facility or program.
§ 38-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 41-6
41:58
§ 41-6. Facilities to be provided.11
The Council shall provide adequate quarters for the efficient operation of
the Board.
Chapter 45
PLANNING COMMISSION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Power of City Council to make contracts - See
Ch. 13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land - See Ch. 294. Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 45-1. Establishment.12
There is hereby established a City Planning Commission to be known as the
"City Planning Commission of Roseville."
§ 45-2. Membership; compensation.
The City Planning Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall
represent, insofar as is possible, different professions or occupations and
who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval by a majority
vote of the members elect of the City Council. If deemed desirable by
the Council, such Commission may consist of the Mayor, one of the
administrative officials of the municipality selected by the Mayor and one
member of the City Council to be selected by it, as members ex officio, and
six persons who shall be appointed by the Mayor as is herein provided. All
appointed members of the Commission may be compensated at a rate to be
determined by the appointing or legislative body, and in this case also the
appointed members shall hold no other municipal office, except that one of
such appointed members may be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 45-3. Terms of office; removal of members.13
The terms of ex officio members shall correspond to their respective official
tenures, except that the term of the administrative official selected by the
Mayor shall terminate with the term of the Mayor selecting him. The term
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
12.Editor's Note: The provisions of this chapter must be read in conjunction with the Public
Acts of 1921, No. 207 as amended; MCLA § 125.581 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 41-6 PLANNING COMMISSION § 45-3
45:59
of each appointed member, where six are appointed, shall be three years
or until a successor takes office, except that the respective terms of two
of the members first appointed shall be for one year and two for two
years. Members other than the member selected by the Council may, after
public hearing, be removed by the Mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office. The Council may, for like cause, remove the member
selected by it. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor.
§ 45-4. Chair; meetings; rules; records.
The Commission shall elect its Chair from among the appointed members
and shall create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine.
The term of the Chair shall be one year with eligibility for reelection.
The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It
shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall
be a public record.
§ 45-5. Employees; expenditures.
The Commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary
for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be
subject to the same provisions of laws as govern other corresponding civil
employees of the municipality. The Commission may also contract with city
planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it
may require. The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall
be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Council, which
shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the
Commission's work.
§ 45-6. Preparation of Master Plan.14
It shall be the function and duty of the Commission to make and adopt
a Master Plan for the physical development of the municipality, including
any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment,
bear relation to the planning of such municipality. Such plan, with the
accompanying maps, charts, plats and descriptive matter, shall show the
Commission's recommendations for the development of said territory,
including, among other things, the general location, character and extent
of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, floodplains, waterfronts,
boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces, the general location
of public buildings and other public property and the general location and
extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned
or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication,
power and other purposes and also the removal, relocation, widening,
narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 45-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 45-6
45:60
the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or
terminals, the general and neighborhood units and the general character,
extent and layout of the preplanning and redevelopment of blighted districts
and slum areas, as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area,
bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. As the work of making
the whole Master Plan progresses, the Commission may, from time to time,
adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, and such part to cover one or
more major sections or divisions of the municipality or one or more of
the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The
Commission may, from time to time, amend, extend or add to the plan.
§ 45-7. Surveys and studies to be made; purpose of plan.
In the preparation of such plan, the Commission shall make careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth
of the municipality and with due regard to its relation to the neighboring
territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and
accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the
municipality and its environs which will, in accordance with the present
and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the
process of development, including, among other things, adequate provision
for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate
provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient
distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and
arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the
adequate provisions of public utilities and other public requirements.
§ 45-8. Adoption of plan; public hearing.
The Commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution or
may, by successive resolutions, adopt successive parts of the plan, said
parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the
municipality or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the
plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition
thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or any part, amendment, extension
or addition, the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon,
notice of the time and place of which shall be given not less than 15
days prior to such hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality and in the official gazette, if any, of the
municipality and by registered United States mail to each public utility
company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public
utility or railroad within the geographical sections or divisions of the
municipality affected. The adoption of the plan or of any such part or
amendment or extension or addition shall be by resolution of the
Commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six members
of the Commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and
descriptive and other matter intended by the Commission to form the whole
or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and
plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the Chair and/or
§ 45-6 PLANNING COMMISSION § 45-8
45:61
Secretary of the Commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof
shall be certified to the Council and to the County Register of Deeds.
§ 45-9. Approval of new construction required; coordinated
programs.
Whenever the Commission shall have adopted the Master Plan of the
municipality or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street,
square, park or other public way, ground or open space or public building
or structure shall be constructed or authorized in the municipality or in
such planned section and district until the location, character and extent
thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the Commission,
provided that, in case of disapproval, the Commission shall communicate
its reasons to the Council, which shall have the power to overrule such
disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than 2/3 of its entire membership,
which would be five affirmative votes; provided, however, that if the public
way, ground, space, building, structure or utility is one the authorization or
financing of which does not, under the law or Charter provisions governing
same, fall within the province of the City Council, then the submission
to the Planning Commission shall be by the board, commission or body
having such jurisdiction, and the Planning Commission's disapproval shall
be overruled by said board, commission or body by a vote of not less than
2/3 of its membership. The failure of the Commission to act within 60
days from and after the date of official submission to the Commission shall
be deemed approval. For the purpose of furthering the desirable future
development of the municipality under the Master Plan, the City Planning
Commission, after the Commission shall have adopted a Master Plan, shall
prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and
improvements. The Commission shall annually prepare such a program for
the ensuing six years, which program shall show those public structures
and improvements, in the general order of their priority, which, in the
Commission's judgment, will be needed or desirable and can be undertaken
within the six-year period. The above comprehensive coordinated programs
shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of
public improvements, and to that end, each agency or department of such
municipality concerned with such improvements shall, upon request,
furnish the Commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of
public structures and improvements within the purview of such department.
§ 45-10. Approval of City Council resolutions.
Whenever the City Council shall have ordered the opening, widening or
extension of any street, avenue or boulevard or whenever the Council
shall have ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or
enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space,
such resolution shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been
referred back to the City Planning Commission for a report and until after
a public hearing shall have been held. The City Council shall have power
to overrule the recommendation of the City Planning Commission by a vote
of not less than five votes, which represents 2/3 of its entire membership.
§ 45-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 45-10
45:62
Said report of the Planning Commission shall be forthcoming within 60 days
from the date of its referral by the City Council, and in the absence of said
report being forthcoming within that period of time, it shall be deemed that
the Planning Commission has approved the action of the City Council.
§ 45-11. Additional powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and
understanding of the plan and, to that end, may publish and distribute
copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of
publicity and education as it may determine. Members of the Commission,
when duly authorized by the Commission, may attend city planning
conferences or meetings of city planning institutes or hearings upon
pending city planning legislation, and the Commission may, by resolution
spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to
such attendance; provided, however, that the City Council has appropriated
the necessary funds attendant thereto. The Commission shall, from time
to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public
structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part
of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public
utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations
and with citizens with relation to the protecting of or carrying out the
plan. The Commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the
exercise of its functions. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to
the Commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as
it may require for its work. The Commission, its members, officers and
employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any
land and make examination and surveys and place and maintain necessary
monuments and marks thereon. In general, the Commission shall have such
powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote
municipal planning or carry out the purposes of this chapter.15
§ 45-12. Approval required for plats.
Whenever the Planning Commission shall have adopted that sort of a
Master Plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its
subdivision, jurisdiction or part thereof and shall have filed a certified copy
of such plan in the office of the County Register of Deeds of the county in
which such territory or part is located, then no plat of a subdivision of land
within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have
been approved by such Planning Commission and such approval entered in
writing on the plat by the Chair or Secretary of the Commission.
§ 45-13. Adoption of subdivision regulations.
A. Before exercising the powers referred to in § 45-12, the Planning
Commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land
15.Editor's Note: Former § 45-12, Succession of prior Commission, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 45-10 PLANNING COMMISSION § 45-13
45:63
§ 45-14. Procedure for approval of plats.
The Planning Commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within
60 days after the submission thereof to it; otherwise such plat shall be
deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be
issued by the Commission on demand; provided, however, that the
application for the Commission's approval may waive this requirement and
consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any
plat shall be stated upon the records of the Commission. Any plat submitted
to the Commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom
notice of a hearing shall be sent, and no plat shall be acted on by the
Commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be sent to the said address by registered mail
not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notices shall
be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as
their names appear upon the plats in the County Register of Deeds office, or
addressographed office, and their addresses appear in the directory of the
municipality or on the tax records of the municipality or county. Every plat
approved by the Commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to
be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the municipal plan and a
within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper
arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets
and to the Master Plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces
for traffic, utilities, access of fire-fighting apparatus, recreation, light
and air and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including
minimum width and area of lots. Such regulations may include
provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be
graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility
mains, piping or other facilities shall be installed as a condition
precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice
of the Commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat
previous to such installation, but any such tentative approval shall be
revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion
of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the
plat, the Commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to
the municipality the actual construction and installation of such
improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications
fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the Commission.
The municipality shall have the power to enforce such bond by all
appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
B. All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the
publication of ordinances, and before adoption a public hearing shall be
held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the Commission to the
recorders of the counties in which the municipality and territory are
located. Ordinance No. 465 of the city, effective May 31, 1960, is
deemed to provide the regulations and standards required above.16
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 294, Subdivision of Land.
§ 45-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 45-14
45:64
part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an
acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the
plat. The Planning Commission may, from time to time, recommend to the
Council amendments to the Zoning Ordinance or Map or additions thereof
to conform to the Commission's recommendations for the zoning regulation
of the territory comprised within approved subdivisions. The Commission
shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or
bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within
the subdivision, provided that such requirements or restrictions do not
authorize a violation of the then effective Zoning Ordinance of the
municipality. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the
plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same
force of law and shall be enforceable in the same manner and with the
same sanctions and penalties and subject to same power of amendment or
repeal as those set out as a part of the Zoning Ordinance or Map of the
municipality.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
Chapter 47
POLICE, RESERVE
CHARTER REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9. Civil service for police and fire fighters — See
Ch. 16.
§ 47-1. Appointment of reserve officers.
§ 47-2. Equipment.
Reserve police officers shall wear such badge, dress and insignia and be
equipped in such manner so as to properly discharge their duties in
accordance with the Police Chief's directions.
§ 47-3. Qualifications.
The Police Chief shall promulgate rules relating to qualifications,
appointment and removal of reserve police officers and shall fix minimum
A. The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint
special patrol officers to be known as "reserve police officers," in such
numbers as the Police Chief deems necessary, subject to such rules and
regulations as the Police Chief shall promulgate.
B. Such officers may be called to active duty at any time by the Police
Chief or, in his or her absence, by a command officer of the Roseville
Police Department. Such officers shall be under the direction,
supervision and control of the Police Chief.
§ 45-14 POLICE, RESERVE § 47-3
47:65
and maximum ages of said officers. The maximum age may be waived for
former or retired police officers or for persons with military experience.
§ 47-4. Concealed pistol licensing. [Added 5-28-2002 by Ord. No.
116517]
§ 47-5. Compensation.
Police officers shall serve without compensation except where the City
Council shall have made provision and an appropriation for a particular duty
being performed or actual expenses incurred, as approved by the Chief of
Police.
§ 47-6. Worker's compensation benefits. [Amended 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 1125]
A reserve police officer, while acting under the direction of the Police Chief
during a regular assigned tour of duty, is an employee of the City and
is entitled to receive worker's compensation benefits. The average weekly
earning shall be deemed to be such amount as will qualify the reserve police
officer and/or his or her dependents for benefits based on the average wage
of an active duty patrol officer on duty in the City under the Michigan
Worker's Compensation Law at the date of injury.
A. All reserve officers are required to obtain and have a current concealed
pistol license permit. It is the responsibility of the reserve officer to
comply with all of the requirements of the Concealed Pistol Licensing
Act, as amended. If a reserve officer does not have a valid concealed
pistol license permit, he or she will not be called to duty until they
obtain one.
B. When called to duty, a reserve officer shall be in full uniform and carry
his or her weapon in a holster on a duty belt where others can easily
observe it. Coats or other outer clothing must not conceal the weapon,
and at all times the weapon must remain in plain view. Under the
meaning of this section, a reserve officer is only authorized to act as a
reserve officer if he or she has been officially scheduled to work a
designated function or event as provided by the Chief of Police or his
designee. The Department will take no responsibility for any actions
undertaken by a reserve officer carrying a concealed pistol when that
officer is not under the Department's jurisdiction, direction, or
supervision. The reserve officer at all times is required to comply with
the Concealed Pistol Licensing Act, as amended. A reserve officer has
no greater rights under the Concealed Pistol Licensing Act than any
other ordinary citizen and must abide by all restrictions contained in
the Act.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 47-4
through 47-10 as §§ 47-5 through 47-11, respectively.
§ 47-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 47-7
47:66
§ 47-7. Exercise of authority in performance of duty only. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
It shall be unlawful for a reserve police officer to exercise his or her
authority or to wear the uniform or insignia or to display the badge or
identification card in an attempt to exercise his or her authority except
during the performance of actual authorized police duty.
§ 47-8. Neglect of duty.
Any reserve police officer who willfully neglects or refuses to respond
for assignment or duty when called, under such rules and regulations as
promulgated by the Police Chief, may be subject to suspension or dismissal
by the Police Chief.
§ 47-9. Impersonation of officers unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as a
reserve police officer to impersonate such officer or to wear, carry or display
the badge, identification card, dress or insignia for reserve police officers.
§ 47-10. Termination of service; resignation.
The services of any reserve police officer may be terminated by the Police
Chief at any time. Likewise, any reserve police officer may resign at any
time by notification in writing to the Police Chief.
§ 47-11. Civil service and retirement laws not applicable.
Neither the civil service or retirement laws of the City relating to regular
full-time employees nor the civil service or retirement laws of the state
applicable to police officers shall apply to any reserve police officer of the
city.
Chapter 48
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 48, Department of Public Safety and Emergency
Management, adopted 5-29-2018 by Ord. No. 1303, was repealed
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1304.]
Chapter 49
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 7, Sec.
7.11.
§ 47-7 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 47-11
49:67
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 91.
Car washes — See Ch. 98.
Solid waste collection — See Ch. 285.
Weeds — See Ch. 364.
§ 49-1. Establishment; responsibilities.
§ 49-2. Other duties.
The Department of Public Works shall have such other duties as may from
time to time be assigned to it by the City Manager with the approval of the
City Council.
§ 49-3. Director of Public Works.
The Department of Public Works shall be under the charge and direction
of a Director of Public Works, who shall be appointed to such position by
the City Manager subject to the approval of the City Council and shall be
directly responsible to such Manager.
Chapter 51
PURCHASING
CHARTER REFERENCES
Making of contracts — See Ch. 13, Sec. 13.1.
Purchasing Department and Purchasing
Agent — See Ch. 13, Sec. 13.2.
Purchases and sales — See Ch. 13, Sec. 13.3.
Officers doing business with City — See Ch.
13, Sec. 13.4.
A. There is hereby established a Department of Public Works.
B. Such Department shall be responsible for:
(1) The operation, construction, maintenance, extension and
improvement of the streets of the city, together with the storm
sewers and all public works and improvements on, within and over
the streets and public places of the city, except such as are by the
Charter for the city assigned to any other department of said city.
(2) The maintenance and repair of all motor vehicles owned by the city
and shall have under its charge, supervision and control any and all
personnel necessary to accomplish such duties.
(3) The operation, organization and supervision of any and all
equipment and personnel necessary to and connected with any
system of collection and/or disposal of garbage, trash and similar
materials, matters or substances.
§ 47-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 49-3
49:68
§ 51-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing Ordinance
of the City of Roseville."
§ 51-2. Word usage and definitions.
§ 51-3. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the administrative service of the City the
Department of Purchasing and, in said Department, the office of City
Purchasing Agent.
§ 51-4. Purchasing Agent.
The City Purchasing Agent shall be the head and shall have general
supervision of the Department of Purchasing. The Agent shall perform all
duties required of a department head by law and shall have the powers and
duties prescribed by this chapter.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of
Roseville.[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
CITY PURCHASING AGENT or AGENT — The Purchasing Agent of the
City.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES — Includes all telephone, gas, water,
electric light and power service; towel and cleaning service; leases
for all grounds, buildings and office or other space required by the
using agencies; and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment,
machinery and other City-owned personal property. The term shall not
include professional and other contractual services which are in their
nature unique and not subject to competition.
SUPPLIES — Includes all supplies, materials and equipment.
USING AGENCY — Any department, agency, commission, bureau or
other unit in the City government using supplies or procuring
contractual services as provided for in this chapter.
A. Position specifications.
(1) Appointment. The Agent shall be appointed by the City Manager,
with the consent of the City Council.
§ 49-3 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 51-4
49:69
(2) Experience requirement. The Agent shall have had, prior to his or
her appointment, at least two years' experience in a purchasing
office of a public corporation in an executive capacity.
B. Scope of purchasing authority.
(1) Purchase or contract. The Agent shall have the power and it shall
be his or her duty to purchase or contract for all supplies and
contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its
support fully or in part from the City, in accordance with
purchasing procedures as prescribed by this chapter and such
rules and regulations as the Agent shall adopt for the internal
management and operation of the Department of Purchasing and
such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the City
Manager or the City Council.
(2) Exceptions prohibited. The authority of the Agent to negotiate all
purchases for all using agencies shall not be abridged by excepting
any particular using agency.
(3) Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it shall be
unlawful for any City officer or officers to order the purchase of any
supplies or make any contract within the purview of this chapter
other than through the Department of Purchasing, and any
purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions
hereof shall not be approved by the City officials, and the City shall
not be bound thereby.
C. Other powers and duties. In addition to the purchasing authority
conferred in Subsection B above and in addition to any other powers
and duties conferred by this chapter, the Agent shall:
(1) Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the City the highest
quality in supplies and contractual services at the least expense to
the City.
(2) Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor
to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases
and sales.
(3) Rules and regulations. Establish and amend when necessary all
rules and regulations authorized by this chapter and any others
necessary to its operation.
(4) Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the
field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products
and secure for the City the benefits of research done in the field of
purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical
societies and trade associations having national recognition and by
private businesses and organizations.
§ 51-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 51-4
49:70
§ 51-5. Preparation and adoption of specifications.
(5) Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as the Agent shall find
reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter.
(6) Standard nomenclature. Prepare and adopt a standard purchasing
nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers.
(7) Vendors' catalog file. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors'
catalog file. Said catalog shall be filed according to materials and
shall contain descriptions of vendors' commodities, prices and
discounts.
(8) Bulk purchases. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to
take full advantage of discounts.
(9) Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the City all federal
tax exemptions to which it is entitled.
(10) Cooperation with the Controller and Manager. Cooperate with the
City Controller and Manager so as to secure for the City the
maximum efficiency in budgeting and accounting.
(11) Disqualifications of bidders. Have the authority to declare vendors,
who default on their quotations, irresponsible bidders and to
disqualify them for receiving any business from the municipality for
a stated period of time.
A. Capacity of Agent. The Agent shall prepare and enforce all City
specifications and, in cases where a variance appears, consult with the
using department head and make a written report to the City Manager
of reasons for acceptance.
B. Standardization. The Agent shall adopt as standard the minimum
number of qualities, sizes and varieties of supplies consistent with the
successful operation of the City government.
C. Specifications. The Agent shall prepare and adopt written specifications
of all standard supplies.
D. Exception. The Agent shall have the authority to exempt a using agency
of the City from the use of the supply described in such standard
specification.
E. Consultation and using agencies. The Purchasing Agent shall consult
with the heads and other officials of the using agencies to determine
their precise requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe those
standards which meet the needs of the majority of such agencies.
F. Nature of specifications. All specifications shall be definite and certain
and shall permit competition; provided, however, that the provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to noncompetitive types and kinds of
supplies.
§ 51-4 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 51-6
49:71
§ 51-6. Filing of requisitions or estimates.
All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the
department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the
Agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies
and contractual services in such manner, at such time and for such future
periods as the Agent shall prescribe.
§ 51-7. Unencumbered funds to be available for orders.
Except in cases of emergency, the Agent shall not issue any order for
delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the Comptroller
shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the using
agencies concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in
excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order.
§ 51-8. Statement on business dealings; acceptance of gifts
prohibited.
A. Unforeseen requirements. A using agency shall not be prevented from
filing, in the same manner, with the Agent, at any time, a requisition or
estimate for any supplies and contractual service, the need for which
was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed.
B. Revisory power in Agent. The Agent shall examine each requisition or
estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality
or estimated cost, but revision as to quality shall be in accordance with
the standards and specifications established pursuant to this chapter.
A. An officer or employee who intends to have business dealings with the
City whereby he or she may derive any income or benefits, other than
such as are provided as remuneration for his or her official duties, shall
file with the Clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of
such business dealings and his or her interest therein. The statement
shall be filed with the Clerk not less than 10 days before the date when
action may be taken by the Council upon the matter involved. The
statement shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and
published in full therein. Approval of any such business dealings shall
require a require a concurring vote of at least six members of the
Council, not including any member who is disqualified under Section
5.3 of the City Charter. Any business dealing made in violation of this
section shall be void.
B. Gifts and rebates. The Agent and every officer and employee of the City
are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any
person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or
contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift or money or anything
of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the
City.
§ 51-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 51-9
49:72
§ 51-9. Competitive bidding required; exceptions. [Amended
2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 967; 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 1305]
All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services and
all sales of personal property which have become obsolete and unusable
shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based wherever possible on
competitive bids. All contracts for demolition of condemned buildings and
structures required by court order, consent judgments or demolition and
lien agreements shall not be subject to competitive bidding, provided that
the estimated cost of the demolition does not exceed $15,000 and provided
that the cost of demolition becomes a lien on the real estate where the
demolition occurs.
§ 51-10. Formal contract procedure. [Amended 7-25-1989 by Ord.
No. 995; 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 1187; 1-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1065;
3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 1068; 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 1187; 9-28-2010
by Ord. No. 1238; 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 1305]
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein,
when the estimated costs thereof shall exceed $15,000 shall be purchased
by formal written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due
notice inviting proposals. All items sent out for printing, such as forms and
envelopes, letterheads and traffic tickets, and all services for mechanical
repairs, such as engine replacements and transmission repairs, when the
estimated costs thereof shall exceed $4,000 shall be purchased by formal
written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice
inviting proposals. All sales of personal property which have become
obsolete and unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $10,000,
shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder
after due notice inviting proposals in accordance with the following
procedures:
A. Notice inviting bids.
(1) Newspaper publication. Notice inviting bids for purchases and/or
contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be
published once in a newspaper having general circulation in the
City at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt of
proposals. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the articles to be purchased and/or
contracted for and shall state where bid blanks and specifications
may be secured and the time and place for opening of bids.
(2) Bidders' list. The Agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all
responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names
to be added to a bidders' list, which the Agent shall maintain, by
sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice
as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any
case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be
limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily
handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent.
§ 51-9 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 51-10
49:73
(3) Bulletin board. The Agent shall also advertise all pending
purchases or sales by a notice posted on the public bulletin board
in the City Hall.
(4) Alternate technologies. The agent may also advertise all sales,
including a general description of the articles to be sold, via the
internet or other means as such technology becomes available, so
as to generate interest in the items being sold and where it is in the
City’s best economic interests to do so.
B. Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Agent, bid deposits shall
be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled to return of deposit where the Agent has required
same, upon failure on his or her part to enter a contract within 10 days
after the award and notification to him.
C. Bid opening procedure.
(1) Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Agent and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
(2) Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated
in the public notices.
(3) Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for
public inspection.
D. Rejection of bids.
(1) On bids in excess of $2,500, the Agent shall recommend the
rejection of all bids, parts of all bids or all bids for any one or more
supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract
when, in his or her opinion, the public interest will be served
thereby.
(2) Bidder in default to City. The Agent shall not accept the bid of any
person, firm or corporation who is in default on the payment of
taxes, licenses or other moneys due the City.
E. Award of contract.
(1) Authority in Agent. The Agent shall have the authority to award
contracts within the purview of this chapter.
(2) Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible
bidder, in addition to price, the agent shall consider:
(a) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required.
(b) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, within the time specified and without delay
or interference.
§ 51-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 51-10
49:74
(c) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment and efficiency of
the bidder.
(d) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
(e) Previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service.
(f) The sufficiency of financial resources and the ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or to provide the service.
(g) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
(h) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract.
(i) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
(j) Whether the bidder has business premises in the City of
Roseville or whether the principal officer of the bidder is a
resident of the City of Roseville. Consideration of location
within the City shall be permitted to be utilized as a factor in
determining the lowest responsible bidder where a bidder
situated in the City of Roseville is within 5% percent of the
contract price of a nonresident bidder who would otherwise be
determined as the lowest responsible bidder.
(3) Award other than lowest priced bidder and contract amendment. If
the award is not given to the lowest priced bidder, a full and
complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere
shall be prepared by the agent and filed with other papers relating
to the transaction. Where a contract for work, goods or services or
any combination thereof has previously been awarded through
competitive bidding, additional work, goods or services or any
combination thereof may be added to the existing contract up to
25% of the original contract amount, provided that such work,
goods or services or any combination thereof has been bid utilizing
a unit pricing and such amendment occurs within 24 months of the
original contract.
(4) Tie bids. Where there is a tie for lowest responsible bidder, the
agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing
lots in public.
(5) Performance bonds. The Agent shall have the authority to require a
performance bond, before entering a contract, in such amount as
he or she shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best
interest of the City.
F. Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
§ 51-10 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 51-11
49:75
§ 51-11. Open market procedure. [Amended 7-25-1989 by Ord. No.
995; 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 1187; 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 1238;
8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 1305]
All purchases of supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise
provided herein, of less than the estimated value of $15,000 and all
purchases of supplies and contractual services for printing, such as forms,
envelopes, letterheads and traffic tickets, and all contractual services for
mechanical repairs, such as engine replacements and transmission repairs,
of less than the estimated value of $4,000, and all sales of personal property,
which has become obsolete and unusable, of less than the estimated value
of $10,000, shall be made in the open market, without newspaper
advertisement, and shall be in accordance with the following procedure:
§ 51-12. Storerooms and warehouses.
§ 51-13. Price agreement contract procedure.
The head of the using agency shall have the authority to submit requisitions
to the Agent for supplies available under the terms of a price agreement
contract made by the Agent.
§ 51-14. Emergency purchase procedure.
A. Minimum number of bids. All open market purchases shall, wherever
possible, be based on at least three competitive bids and shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 51-10E above.
B. Notice inviting bids. The Agent shall solicit bids by direct mail request
to prospective vendors or by telephone or by public notice posted on the
bulletin board of the City Hall, or by internet or other technologies
likely to generate interest in the items being sold and in the City’s best
economic interest to do so.
C. Recording. The Agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and
the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall be
open to the public inspection.
A. Storerooms Revolving Fund. The Agent shall control and supervise
storerooms and warehouses and shall administer the Storerooms
Revolving Fund. There is hereby appropriated, out of any money in the
City treasury not otherwise appropriated, $4,000 which shall be known
as the "Storerooms Revolving Fund." [Amended 7-25-1989 by Ord.
No. 995]
B. Accounting procedure. Requisitions from supplies in a storeroom or
warehouse shall be credited by the Agent to the Storerooms Revolving
Fund by a charge against the appropriation of the using agency.
C. Inventory. The Agent shall maintain a perpetual inventory record of all
materials, supplies or equipment stored in storerooms and warehouses.
§ 51-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 51-14
49:76
§ 51-15. Inspections.
The Agent shall inspect, or cause to have inspected, all deliveries of supplies
or contractual services to determine their conformance with the
specifications set forth in the order or contract.
A. By Agent.
(1) In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate
purchase of supplies or contractual services, the City Manager
shall be empowered to authorize the Agent to secure by open
market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable
price, any supplies or contractual services regardless of the
amount of the expenditure.
(2) Recorded explanation. A full report of the circumstances of an
emergency purchase shall be filed by the agent with the City
Council and shall be entered in the minutes of the Council and shall
be open to public inspection.
B. By head of departments.
(1) In case of actual emergency, and with the consent of the Agent and
the approval of the City Manager, the head of any using agency may
purchase directly any supplies whose immediate procurement is
essential to prevent delays in the work of the using agency which
may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of citizens.
(2) Recorded explanation. The head of such using agency shall send to
the Agent a requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together
with a full written report of the circumstances of the emergency.
The report shall be filed with the Council as provided in Subsection
A(2) above.
(3) Emergency procedure. The Agent shall prescribe by rules and
regulations the procedure under which emergency purchases by
heads of using agencies may be made.
A. Inspection by using agency. The Agent shall have the authority to
authorize using agencies having the staff and facilities for adequate
inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies under
rules and regulations which the Agent shall prescribe.
B. Tests. The Agent shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries
which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with
the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the Agent shall
have special the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any
agency of the City government or of any outside laboratory.
§ 51-14 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 51-16
49:77
§ 51-16. Disposition of surplus stock.
All using agencies shall submit to the Agent, at such time and in such form
as the Agent shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which
are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped.
§ 51-17. Cooperative purchasing.
The Agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in
cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the City would be
served thereby.
§ 51-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 54
RETIREMENT SYSTEM, EMPLOYEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deferred Retirement Option Plan — See Ch.
18.
A. Transfer. The Agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to
other using agencies.
B. Sale.
(1) The Agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have
become unsuitable for public use to or to exchange the same for, or
trade in the same on, new supplies.
(2) Competitive bidding. Sales under this section shall be made to the
highest responsible bidder and in conformance with § 51-10 or
51-11 hereof, whichever is applicable.
§ 51-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 51-18
49:78
ARTICLE I
Part-Time Employee Benefits
[Adopted 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 1177]
§ 54-1. Definitions. [Amended 8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 1180]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DAY OF WORK — Eight hours of work.
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — Any person, except an elected or appointed
officer of the City, who is employed by the City in a position which normally
pays in a period of three consecutive years an average of more than $300 a
year, but requires less than 40 hours per week.
§ 54-2. Retirement system; membership; determination. [Amended
8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 1180]
A. Part-time employees who are employed by the City on or after the
effective date of this article, shall be eligible for membership in the City
of Roseville Employees' Retirement System, provided an application
requesting membership is submitted to the retirement system.
Membership shall be effective on the first day of the month following
the retirement system's receipt of the application.
B. Upon membership in the retirement system, a part-time employee will
be required to make employee contributions as provided by the
retirement system. Part-time employees who are members of the
retirement system will be credited with one day of service credit for
each day worked after becoming members of the retirement system.
C. Full-time and part-time employees who are employed by the City on the
effective date of this article, may be eligible to purchase service credit
for periods of time during which they were part-time employees prior to
membership in the retirement system, provided the individual is a
member of the retirement system, files a written application with the
retirement system within six months of the effective date of this article,
requesting part-time employment service credit; and contributes to the
retirement system an amount equal to the employee contributions, plus
interest, which would have been credited had the individual been a
member of the retirement system during the period of time requested.
Payment for such service credit shall be made in one lump sum and
shall be made within six months of the effective date of this article. Parttime
service shall be credited as one day of service for each day of work.
Part-time service which occurred prior to a five-year break in service
will not be eligible for purchase. Failure to comply with the foregoing
requirements will result in the individual being ineligible for service
credit for past part-time service. Only full-time employees who are
employed by the City may have service credit recognized under the
Reciprocal Retirement Act. [Amended 5-11-2010 by Ord. No. 1236]
§ 54-1 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 54-2
49:79
§ 54-3. Part-time employee service.
For a member who is a part-time employee, as provided in this article, for
any portion of a calendar year, service credit in a calendar year shall be
determined as a day worked equals a day's service credit. In the event a
member has credited service in both part-time and full-time positions, the
member's pension shall be separately determined for his or her part-time
service and his or her full-time service.
D. In the event a member is credited for service as a part-time employee
and a full-time employee, the member's pension benefits shall be
separately determined for his or her part-time service and for his or her
full-time service, based upon the benefits, terms and conditions in effect
at the time the individual transferred employment between part-time
and full-time positions.
E. Former employees with past part-time service shall not be eligible for
nor shall they receive, service credit for prior part-time service.
§ 54-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 54-3
49:80
Chapter 61
VIOLATIONS BUREAUS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 12, Sec. 12.2.
Creation of Bureau by Council — See Ch. 12,
Sec. 12.9.
Establishment of Bureau by Court — See Ch.
12, Sec. 12.11.
§ 54-3 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 54-3
49:81

ARTICLE I
Traffic Violations Bureau
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 61 of the 1984 Code]
§ 61-1. Establishment.18
The District Judge shall establish the District Court and under his or her
supervision a Violations Bureau to assist the Court with the clerical work of
traffic cases. The Violations Bureau shall be in charge of the Clerk of the
District Court, and said Clerk shall be assisted by such other person as may
from time to time be named or designated by the District Judge.
§ 61-2. Designation of offenses; specification of fines.
The District Judge shall, from time to time, designate the particular offenses
and the number of violations of each such offenses that may be handled by
the Violations Bureau, and for which payments of fines may be accepted
by the Violations Bureau. The District Judge shall, from time to time, set
and specify by suitable schedules the amount of fines for first, second and
subsequent traffic violations, provided that such fines are within the limits
declared by law and the provisions of the ordinances of the City.
§ 61-3. Options of appearing before Bureau or Court.
§ 61-4. Duties.
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the Violations Bureau:
A. Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be
made to the Violations Bureau shall have the option of paying such fine
at the Violations Bureau within the time specified in the notice of
violation or notice of arrest on such charge, upon entering of a plea of
guilty to the charge and waiving a hearing in court and giving power of
attorney to the clerk to make such plea and to pay such fine and by
paying to the Violations Bureau the fine prescribed in the schedule of
fines established for such charge; or such person shall have the option
of depositing required lawful bail and to appear in court for trial as
authorized by law.
B. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and the power of attorney for any
offense shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation,
and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
A. It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in court
such violators as are so authorized and who plead guilty and waive
court appearance. The entry of a plea of guilty, the payment of a fine
and acceptance of the receipt of the Violations Bureau shall constitute
18.Editor's Note: The City of Roseville is now part of the 39th Judicial District of the State of
Michigan, established pursuant to MCLA § 600.8122 and MSA § 27A.8122. The District
Court Violations Bureau is authorized by MCLA § 600.8395 and MSA § 27A.8391.
§ 61-1 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 61-4
49:83
§ 61-5. Records; disposition of fines.
The Violations Bureau shall keep such records as shall be required by the
District Judge for the purpose of coordinating the records of the Violations
Bureau with the records of the District Court. All fines collected by the
Violations Bureau shall be turned over to the District Court, and all such
fines shall thereafter be the responsibility of the District Judge, to be
handled and deposited by said Court pursuant to the law and regulations
governing said Court.
authority from the person in charge of the Violations Bureau to
represent the violator in court.
B. It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bill from the persons who
desire to be heard in court, enter the time of such person's appearance
on the court docket and notify the arresting officer and witness, if any,
to be present at the time for trial as shall be set by the court.
C. It shall have no discretion for the determination of the guilt or
innocence of any person appearing before the Violations Bureau and
shall have only the right and authority, as agent of the person charged,
to receive a plea of guilty, to receive the prescribed fine therefor and to
represent such person in court by the entry of a plea of guilty in behalf
of such person in court and the payment of such fine to the court.
D. If a violator, in any traffic offense where the name of the violator is not
known, does not appear in the Violations Bureau within the time
specified in the notice of violation, the Violations Bureau shall send to
the registered owner of the motor vehicle involved in such offense a
letter informing such owner of the violation and warning said owner
that he or she will be held responsible for the appearance of the
offender and that, in the event the letter is disregarded for a period of
10 days after the date of mailing, a complaint will be filed and a warrant
issued for the arrest of the owner of said motor vehicle.
E. If the violator in any traffic offense where the name of the violator is
known fails to comply with a notice of violation or notice of arrest by
failing to appear before the Violations Bureau, within the time specified
in such notice, the Violations Bureau shall forthwith request a
complaint to be entered against such person in the District Court and a
warrant issued by said Court for the arrest of such violator.
§ 61-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 61-5
49:84
ARTICLE II
Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
[Adopted 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 1233]
§ 61-6. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted by the City Council pursuant to Public Act No. 236 of
1961 (MCL § 600.101 et seq.).
§ 61-7. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT — Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL § 600.101 et seq.).
AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL — A police officer or other personnel of
the City authorized by this article or by any other section of this Code or
City ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction notices or municipal civil
infraction citations.
BUREAU — The Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as designated and
established by this article.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION — An act or omission that is prohibited by
this article or by any other section of this Code or City ordinance, but which
is not a crime under this article or under any other section of this Code
or City ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including but not limited
to fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be assessed or ordered as
authorized by Chapter 87 of the Act (MCL § 600.8701 et seq.). A municipal
civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of any violation of a section
of this Code or City ordinance that is a criminal offense.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION — A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION — A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized City official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction
violation by the person cited.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE — A written notice
prepared by an authorized City official, directing a person to appear at
the Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any,
prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the City,
as authorized under Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act [MCL §§ 600.8396
and 600.8707(6)].
§ 61-8. Issuance of citations.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized
City officials as follows:
§ 61-6 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 61-8
49:85
A. The time for appearance specified in a municipal civil infraction citation
shall be within a reasonable time after the municipal civil infraction
citation is issued.
B. The place for appearance specified in a municipal civil infraction
citation shall be the 39th District Court.
C. Each municipal civil infraction citation shall be consecutively numbered
and shall be in a form approved by the State Court Administrator. The
original municipal civil infraction citation shall be filed with the District
Court. Copies of the municipal civil infraction citation shall be retained
by the City and issued to the alleged violator as provided by Section
8705 of the Act (MCL § 600.8705).
D. A municipal civil infraction citation signed by an authorized City official
shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the
municipal civil infraction citation occurred in the presence of the
authorized City official signing the complaint and if the municipal civil
infraction citation contains the following statement immediately above
the date and signature of the authorized City official: "I declare under
the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of
my information, knowledge, and belief."
E. An authorized City official who witnesses a person commit a municipal
civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as
completely as possible, an original and the required copies of a
municipal civil infraction citation.
F. An authorized City official may issue a municipal civil infraction citation
to a person if:
(1) Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or
(2) Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
authorized City official has reasonable cause to believe that the
person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and if the City
Attorney approves in writing the issuance of the municipal civil
infraction.
G. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized City
official as follows:
(1) Except as provided by Subsection G(2) of this section, an
authorized City official shall personally serve a copy of the
municipal civil infraction citation upon the alleged violator.
(2) If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
municipal civil infraction citation does not need to be personally
§ 61-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 61-8
49:86
§ 61-9. Contents of citations.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall contain and set forth the following
information:
served upon the alleged violator, but the municipal civil infraction
citation may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land,
building or structure by posting the copy of the municipal civil
infraction citation on the land or by attaching the copy of the
municipal civil infraction citation to the building or structure. In
addition to the foregoing, a copy of the municipal civil infraction
citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land,
building or structure at the owner's last known address.
A. A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(2) The municipal civil infraction alleged;
(3) The place where the alleged violator shall appear in court;
(4) The telephone number of the court; and
(5) The time at or by which the appearance by the alleged violator shall
be made.
B. The municipal civil infraction citation shall further inform the alleged
violator that such person may do one of the following:
(1) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.
(2) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with
explanation by mail by the time specified for appearance or in
person or by representation by the time specified for appearance.
(3) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either
of the following:
(a) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or a
District Court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a
judge is requested by the City.
(b) Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
C. The municipal civil infraction citation shall also inform the alleged
violator of all of the following:
(1) If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility with
explanation in person or by representation, the alleged violator
§ 61-8 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 61-9
49:87
§ 61-10. Establishment; location; violation notices.
must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain
a scheduled date and time for appearance.
(2) If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged
violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or
by representation within the time specified for appearance and
obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a
hearing date is specified on the municipal civil infraction citation.
(3) A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is
requested by the alleged violator or by the City.
(4) At an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge or District Court magistrate without the opportunity
of being represented by an attorney.
(5) At a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
D. The municipal civil infraction citation shall contain a notice in boldface
type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time
specified in the municipal civil infraction citation or at the time
scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result
in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the
municipal civil infraction.
A. Establishment of Bureau. The City hereby designates and establishes a
Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, as authorized under Section
8396 of the Act (MCL § 600.8396), to accept admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal
civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized City
officials and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by
this article and other sections of this Code or City ordinances and as
provided by the Act.
B. Location of Bureau. The Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau shall
be located at the 39th District Court.
C. Disposition of violations. The Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
may only dispose of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine
has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation
notice has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a
particular municipal civil infraction violation shall not, in and of itself,
entitle a person to dispose of the municipal civil infraction violation at
the Bureau. Nothing in this section shall prevent or restrict the City
from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any municipal civil
infraction violation or from prosecuting or pursuing any violation in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 61-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 61-10
49:88
§ 61-11. Fines for citations.
The fines for municipal civil infraction citations are as follows:
D. Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Pursuant to Section 8707(6)
of the Act [MCL § 600.8707(6)], municipal civil infraction violation
notices shall be issued and served by authorized City officials under the
same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for
municipal civil infraction citations. In addition to any other information
required by this article or by any other section of this Code or City
ordinance, the municipal civil infraction violation notice shall indicate
the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the Bureau, the
methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and
telephone number of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is
open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged municipal civil
infraction violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay
the required fine within the specified time period.
E. Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a
municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or
by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction
violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by
representation.
F. Procedure applicable when admission of responsibility is not made or
fine not paid. If an authorized City official issues and serves a municipal
civil infraction violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is
not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule
of fines for the municipal civil infraction violation are not paid at the
Bureau within the prescribed time period, a municipal civil infraction
citation may be filed with the District Court and a copy of the municipal
civil infraction citation may be served by first class mail upon the
alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The
municipal civil infraction citation filed with the District Court does not
have to comply in all particulars with the requirements for municipal
civil infraction citations as provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the
Act (MCL §§ 600.8705 and 600.8709), but shall consist of the sworn
complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil
infraction violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator
how to respond to the municipal civil infraction citation.
A. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, copartnership, corporation,
company, association, club, joint venture, and any other group, entity or
association, acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such
group, entity or unit, who is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
shall pay a civil fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500, plus costs
and other sanctions as authorized and permitted by law, for each
municipal civil infraction.
§ 61-10 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 61-11
49:89
B. Repeat violations shall be subject to increased civil fines as set forth in
this subsection. As used in this subsection, the term "repeat violation"
means a second or any subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of
the same requirement or section of this Code committed by a violating
party within any twelve-month period and for which the violating party
admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased
civil fine for a repeat violation under this article shall be as follows:
(1) The civil fine for any violation which is a repeat violation shall be no
less than $250, plus costs and other sanctions as authorized and
permitted by law.
(2) The civil fine for any violation which is a second repeat violation or
any subsequent repeat violation shall be no less than $500, plus
costs and other sanctions authorized and permitted by law.
§ 61-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 61-11
49:90
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 69
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Installation and maintenance of fire alarm
systems — See Ch. 27, § 27-1.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fee — See Ch. 133.
§ 69-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 973]
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms and words are defined as follows:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any electrical board, control system, device or devices,
which a reasonable informed individual of common experience would refer
to as a "burglar alarm system" or "police alarm system," that will, upon
activation, emit a sound or transmit a signal or message.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, corporation or other entity using the
services of a fire alarm system and/or burglar alarm system and/or police
alarm system.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm system or its components
which does not signal an actual fire or an actual criminal act or its attempt
or does not provide evidence for investigative officers to determine if a
crime was committed or attempted; also an alarm system activation which
indicates a situation other than that which the alarm system was designed
to indicate.
PERSON — Includes any individuals, licensees, managers, lessees,
partnership, corporations, societies, organizations or other entities.
TELEPHONE NUMBER — Any numbers assigned by a public utility
company engaged in the business or providing communications services
and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect
with the Police Department and/or Fire Department of the City of Roseville.
§ 69-2. Dialer-type systems prohibited.
No person shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate or arrange, adjust,
program or otherwise install any alarm system that will, upon activation,
either mechanically, electronically or by any other automatic means, initiate
the intrastate calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number
assigned to the Police Department and/or Fire Department of the City of
Roseville by a public telephone company.
§ 61-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 69-3
69:91
§ 69-3. Approval of plan of system required.
Any person intending to install an alarm system at any commercial or
industrial establishment or private residence that transmits a signal directly
to the Police Department or Fire Department shall submit a plan of said
system to the Fire Marshal or Chief of Police for the City of Roseville for
approval.
§ 69-4. Registration card.
Each alarm system user shall maintain a current information card with the
Police Department and/or Fire Department, containing the business name,
address and telephone number of a person or persons who can render
service to the alarm and business premises at any time of the day or night.
The registration card may include such other information as the Chief of
Police or the Fire Marshal shall find necessary for implementation of this
chapter. Each alarm user shall immediately inform the Chief of Police or
Fire Marshal of any and all changes in the information on file with the Police
Department and Fire Department regarding such registration.
§ 69-5. Restrictions on activation of systems.
§ 69-6. Time limit for turning off of alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any alarm user who has or maintains an audible-type
alarm system to fail to appear and turn off any such alarm within one hour
after being notified by the Police or Fire Department to do so.
§ 69-7. Monthly alarm report. [Amended 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 973]
The Chief of Police shall cause to have maintained a monthly alarm report
in which shall be recorded all of the alarms to which the police have
responded.
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to activate any alarm system for the
purpose of summoning the Police or Fire Department except in the
event of a fire or what is reasonably believed to be an unlawful act and/
or an unauthorized entry on premises. Whenever an alarm system has
been designed and commonly understood to alert others to a fire or the
commission of a particular crime, it shall be unlawful for anyone to
activate such alarm system for the purpose of summoning the Police or
Fire Department, except in the event of what is reasonably believed to
be such particular crime or fire.
B. It shall be unlawful to install or use an alarm system which, upon
activation, emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles
or for civil defense purposes.
C. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to audible alarms
affixed to motor vehicles.
§ 69-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 69-8
69:92
§ 69-8. False alarms; fines. [Added 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 973]
§ 69-9. City under no obligation.
The City of Roseville shall be under no duty or obligation to any person
hereunder by reasons of any provision of this chapter, including any delays
in response or failure to respond to any alarm.
§ 69-10. Violations and penalties.20
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
imposition of a fine of not less than $100 nor more than provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 71
A. 19Notwithstanding any penalties provided for in the event of a
conviction for violation of this chapter and notwithstanding the fact that
a prosecution for violation of this chapter has or has not been
commenced, in order to defray the cost of responding to false alarms,
the owner or lessee of an alarm system described in § 69-1 of this
chapter shall be charged for false alarms as indicated in Chapter 133,
Fees, where the alarm system is activated and responded to by the
Police and/or Fire Department in any of the following cases:
(1) No evidence of illegal entry or an attempt thereof.
(2) No evidence of fire.
(3) A malfunction in the system.
(4) Alarm activated by mistake.
(5) Alarm activated by persons working on the alarm system, where
the Police and/or Fire Department was not previously notified.
B. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no owner or lessee
shall be required to pay said costs on the first or second occasion of a
false alarm during any one calendar year, but shall be advised, in
writing, of said false alarms and of the existence of this chapter. Any
costs incurred by the city to respond to third and subsequent occasions
of a false alarm during any one calendar year shall be a lien upon the
premises and, if not paid by April 1 of the next year following the year in
which the costs were incurred, shall be added onto the next city tax
statement. Costs shall not be required in the case of any false alarm
activated by severe weather or other conditions beyond the control of
the owner or lessee of an alarm system.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 69-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 69-10
69:93
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Controlled substances — See Ch. 109.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Minors — See Ch. 197.
Alcoholic beverages in massage parlors — See
Ch. 193.
Sexual conduct and nudity in proximity to
alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 206, Art. II.
Alcoholic beverages at skating rinks — See
Ch. 245.
Alcoholic beverages at tattoo parlors — See
Ch. 302.
Drinking on duty by taxicab drivers — See Ch.
308.
§ 69-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 69-10
69:94
ARTICLE I
Sale, Possession and Consumption
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 71 of the 1984
Code; amended in its entirety 11-14-2017 by Ord. No. 1300]
§ 71-1. Purchase by minors, sale or delivery to minors, and bringing
alcoholic beverages into establishment licensed to sell same.
A. A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to
possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as
provided in this section. A minor who violates this subsection is
responsible for a City civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as
follows:
(1) For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a City civil
infraction and shall be fined not more than $100. A court may order
a minor under this subsection to participate in substance use
disorder services as defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health
Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL § 333.6230, and designated by the
Administrator of the Office of Substance Abuse Services, and may
order the minor to perform community service and to undergo
substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own
expense as described in Subsection E. A minor may be found
responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection.
(2) If a violation of this subsection occurs after one prior judgment, the
minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this
subsection is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30
days if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation,
failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or
community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine
for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more
than $200, or both. A court may order a minor under this
subsection to participate in substance use disorder services as
defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368,
§ MCL 333.6230, and designated by the Administrator of the Office
of Substance Abuse Services, to perform community service, and to
undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her
own expense as described in Subsection E.
(3) If a violation of this subsection occurs after two or more prior
judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor
under this subsection is punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 60 days, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of
probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment,
screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine
of not more than $500, or both, as applicable. A court may order a
minor under this subsection to participate in substance use
§ 71-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-1
69:95
disorder services as defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health
Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL § 333.6230, and designated by the
Administrator of the Office of Substance Abuse Services, to
perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in Subsection E.
B. An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or,
notwithstanding Subsection A, a minor who uses fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not
more than $100, or both.
C. If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
Subsection A(2) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of Subsection A(2), the court,
without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a
determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile
has committed the offense and with the consent of the accused, may
defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation. The
terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not limited to,
the sanctions set forth in Subsection A(3), payment of the costs,
including minimum state cost as provided for in Section 18m of Chapter
XIIA of the Probate Code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCL § 712A.18m, and
Section 1j of Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA
175, MCL § 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in Section 3
of Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL
§ 771.3. If a court finds that an individual violated a term or condition of
probation or that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another
court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination
in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed
the offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual
fulfills the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge
the individual and dismiss the proceedings. A discharge and dismissal
under this section is without adjudication of guilt or without a
determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual
has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile
adjudication for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by
law on conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only one
discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The court shall maintain
a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and
the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal
under this subsection. The Secretary of State shall retain a nonpublic
record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this
subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of the following:
(1) To a court, prosecutor, or police agency on request for the purpose
of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection.
(2) To the Department of Corrections, a prosecutor, or a law
enforcement agency, on the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law
§ 71-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-1
69:96
enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following
conditions:
(a) At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the
Department of Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the
Department of Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency.
(b) The record is used by the Department of Corrections, the
prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine
whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of
employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for
employment.
D. A misdemeanor violation of Subsection A successfully deferred,
discharged, and dismissed under Subsection C is considered a prior
judgment for the purposes of Subsection A(3).
E. A court may order an individual found responsible for or convicted of
violating Subsection A to undergo screening and assessment by a
person or agency as designated by the department-designated
community mental health entity as defined in Section 100a of the
Mental Health Code, 1974 PA 258, MCL § 330.1100a, to determine
whether the individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services,
including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment
programs. A court may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor
conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding,
a violation of Subsection A to submit to a random or regular preliminary
chemical breath analysis. The parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor
who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA
293, MCL §§ 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular
preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation.
F. The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's
license of an individual convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
Subsection A or of violating Subsection B as provided in Section 319 of
the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL § 257.319.
G. A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may
request that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order,
but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. The results of a
preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol
test are admissible in a state civil infraction proceeding or criminal
prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content.
H. A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is less
than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL
§ 71-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-1
69:97
§§ 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased
alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic
liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of Subsection
A shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the
individual as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent,
guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law
enforcement agency. The law enforcement agency shall notify the
parent, guardian, or custodian not later than 48 hours after the law
enforcement agency determines that the individual who allegedly
violated Subsection A is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCL §§ 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement
agency may notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means
reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice, including, but not
limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If
an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating
Subsection A, his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified
immediately as provided in this subsection.
I. This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor
during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed by this act, by the
commission, or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is
not possessed for his or her personal consumption.
J. The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of
Subsection A:
(1) A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily
presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for
treatment or for observation, including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a
violation of Sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code,
1931 PA 328, MCL §§ 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a
minor.
(2) A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the
following criteria:
(a) Has consumed alcoholic liquor.
(b) Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or
agency for treatment or for observation, including, but not
limited to, medical examination and treatment for any
condition arising from a violation of Sections 520b to 520g of
the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL §§ 750.520b to
750.520g, committed against a minor.
(3) A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency
medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical
assistance for a legitimate health care concern.
§ 71-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-1
69:98
K. If a minor who is less than 18 years of age and who is not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCL §§ 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents himself
or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation
as provided under Subsection J, the health facility or agency shall notify
the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian of the individual as to the
nature of the treatment or observation if the name of a parent,
guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the health facility
or agency.
L. This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of a vendor or
the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of this
act.
M. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution
in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a
faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the
consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course.
N. The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by
this act.
O. Subsection A does not apply to a minor who participates in either or
both of the following:
(1) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and
with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an
employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.
(2) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the
commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement
action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of
alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the
state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not
part of the undercover operation.
P. The state police, the commission, or a local police agency shall not
recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover
operation at the scene of a violation of Subsection A, Section 701(1), or
Section 801(2).
Q. In a prosecution for the violation of Subsection A concerning a minor
having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the
minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that
consumption is legal.
R. As used in this section:
(1) "Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following:
§ 71-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-1
69:99
§ 71-2. Sale or delivery to minors prohibited.
(a) An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
(b) Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from
the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of
alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious
service or ceremony.
(2) "Emergency medical services personnel" means that term as
defined in Section 20904 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368,
MCL § 333.20904.
(3) "Health facility or agency" means that term as defined in Section
20106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL § 333.20106.
(4) "Prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, finding
of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any of the
following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the
United States substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or
a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this
state:
(a) This Section or Section 701 or 707.
(b) Section 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949
PA 300, MCL §§ 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625.
(c) Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
§§ 324.80176, 324.81134, and 324.82127.
(d) Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1939 PA 328,
MCL §§ 750.167a and 750.237.
A. No person shall knowingly sell or furnish alcoholic liquor to a person
who is under 21 years of age, or fail to make diligent inquiry as to
whether the person is under 21 years of age. The person who violates
this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided
within this Code of Ordinances.
B. A suitable sign describing the requirements of applicable Michigan
laws, including MCLA 436.33, as amended, and the penalties for
violating such provisions shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each
room where alcoholic liquors are sold. Such sign shall be approved and
furnished by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
C. For a violation of § 71-2A, proof that the defendant or the defendant's
agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing
alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle
operator's license or a registration certificate issued by a federal
§ 71-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-2
69:100
§ 71-3. Bringing alcoholic beverages into establishment licensed to
sell same prohibited.
No person shall bring any alcoholic beverage nor permit any alcoholic
beverage to be brought into an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages except that the person may make a lawful delivery of alcoholic
beverages to an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. A person
who violates this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided
within this Code of Ordinances.
§ 71-4. through § 71-7. (Reserved)
selective service or other bona fide documentary evidence of the agent
identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action under this
section.
§ 71-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-4
69:101

ARTICLE II
Michigan Liquor Control Commission Licenses
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 71 of the 1984
Code]
§ 71-8. Number of licenses limited; referendum on issuance.
On and after the effective date of this article, the City Council shall not
approve, or signify its approval, of the issuance of any additional Michigan
Liquor Control Commission licenses governing the sale of alcoholic
beverages by the glass upon the licensed premises within the City if the
issuance of said licenses by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission would
increase the number of such licenses beyond 22. In taking into
consideration the number of licenses already issued, there shall be included
Class C licenses, Class B licenses, hotel licenses and tavern and special
licenses; provided, however, that the applicant may file the necessary
petitions with the Council requesting that the question of whether or not
such license should be issued be placed upon the ballot in the manner
provided by law for referendums. Upon the receipt of the necessary
petitions in proper form, the matter shall be referred to the people of the
City for an election on such question.
§ 71-9. Reclassification of existing licenses.
It is not the intent of this article to place any prohibition upon the
reclassification of existing licenses by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission.
§ 71-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
§ 71-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-10
69:103

ARTICLE III
Possession or Consumption by Persons Under 21
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. III of Ch. 71 of the 1984
Code]
§ 71-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIQUOR LICENSEE — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association
or other entity licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to sell
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises.
§ 71-12. Unlawful to allow consumption or possession.
It shall be unlawful for any liquor licensee in the City of Roseville to allow
any person under the age of 21 years to purchase, sell, serve, consume or
have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession upon the licensed premises,
except as provided for in this article.
§ 71-13. Exception.
A person who is 20, 19 or 18 years of age and who is employed by the liquor
licensee is not prohibited by this article from selling and serving alcoholic
liquor upon the licensed premises.
§ 71-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this article shall be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 71-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-14
69:105

ARTICLE IV
Open House Parties
[Adopted 9-11-1985 by Ord. No. 922]
§ 71-15. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ADULT — A person 17 years of age or older.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any beverage containing more than 1/2 of 1% of
alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined
in accordance with the provisions of MCL § 436.2, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
CONTROL — Any form of regulation or dominion, including a possessory
right.
DRUG — A controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public
Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are
defined in MSA § 14.15(7104).[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
MINOR — A person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess
alcoholic beverages pursuant to MCL § 436.33b, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
OPEN HOUSE PARTY — A social gathering of persons at a residence, other
than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family
members.
RESIDENCE — A home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit,
and includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit.
§ 71-16. Responsibility of adults.
No adult having control of any residence shall allow any open house party to
take place at said residence if any alcoholic beverage or drug is possessed
or consumed at said residence by any minor where the adult knew or
reasonably should have known that an alcoholic beverage or drug was in
the possession of or being consumed by a minor at said residence and
where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or
consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at said residence.
§ 71-17. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to legally protected religious
observances or legally protected educational activities.
§ 71-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
The penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
§ 71-15 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-18
69:107

ARTICLE V
Roseville Liquor Licenses
[Adopted 10-8-1985 as Ord. No. 926]
§ 71-19. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Roseville's Liquor License
Ordinance."
§ 71-20. Purpose.
This article is established to cause the greatest benefit to the City of
Roseville in its use of the powers with regard to the issuance, transfer,
renewal or revocation of liquor licenses within its jurisdiction. This article is
established in order to provide an orderly and nondiscriminatory procedure
for the review and approval by the City of Roseville of any and all requests
for liquor licenses or any matter relating thereto, for the sale or
dispensation of alcoholic beverages within the City of Roseville, and each
person, firm or corporation who desires such license, approval or renewal
of the same shall comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 71-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented
liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary,
patented and by whatever name called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more of
alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes.
PERSON, FIRM or CORPORATION — Includes any person or legal entity of
whatsoever kind or nature, either charitable or profitable, that desires to
have or is already possessed of any license issued by the State of Michigan
for the sale and dispensation of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a liquor
license of any variety within the City of Roseville.
§ 71-22. Application procedure.
A. Application. The applicant must first submit an application for a liquor
license to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission before submitting
to the City of Roseville an application for liquor license approval. No
applications for a liquor license will be considered by the City of
Roseville until the City has been notified by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission that they have received such an application.
B. The applicant shall submit a current and fully completed City of
Roseville liquor license application, as prepared and furnished by the
City Clerk, to: City Clerk, The City of Roseville, 29777 Gratiot, P.O. Box
290, Roseville, Michigan 48066.
C. Required information and applicable fee.
§ 71-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-22
69:109
(1) The City application shall include at least the following information:
(a) Name and address of applicant. If a partnership or corporation,
all persons with an ownership interest shall be listed.
(b) Type of license desired.
(c) Address and legal description of the property where the license
is to be located.
(d) A preliminary site plan showing the relationship of the
proposed structure to the surrounding property and uses, and
photographs or drawings of each of the sides of the structure
in which the license shall be operated.
(e) A written statement as to the applicant's character, experience
and financial ability to meet the obligations and business
undertakings for which the license is to be issued.
(f) Any other information pertinent to the applicant and operation
of the proposed facility as may be required by the City Council
by prior notice to the applicant.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a deposit of a
nonrefundable fee, in an amount determined by the City Council to
cover the cost of investigation, review and inspection by the City of
Roseville of said application.
D. Following the receipt of the fully completed application and such other
information as may be requested by the City, the City Clerk shall
forward the application to the Police Department, Fire Department,
Department of Buildings and Inspection and such other departments as
required by the City Manager, which departments shall, within 30 days,
make their recommendations prior to consideration by the City Council.
In making its review, the City may request from the applicant other
pertinent information.
E. Upon receipt by the City Clerk's office of the recommendations of the
Police Department, Department of Buildings and Inspection, Fire
Department and other departments as required, the City Clerk shall
cause the application to be placed on the agenda of the City Council
within 60 days after receipt of the same in the office of the Clerk. All
applications are subject to the final approval of the City Council.
F. At the initial hearing before the City Council to consider the application
for a liquor license, the City Council will take one of the following steps:
(1) Ask the applicant to proceed with the submitted plans so that a
more detailed and complete proposal may be heard by the Council
at a later date; provided, however, that this action by the Council
shall not be interpreted to mean approval of the application or the
general details of the proposal.
§ 71-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-22
69:110
(2) Postpone action on the application for a period not to exceed 60
days. The sixty-day limitation for postponement of action may be
waived by the applicant if the postponement is for the purpose of
supplying the City Council with additional information requested of
the applicant by the City Council, when the applicant is unable to
supply the requested information within the stated time period.
(3) Recommend to the Liquor Control Commission of the State of
Michigan approval of the applicant above all others for the
issuance of a liquor license.
(4) Reject the application stating the reasons for this denial.
G. The City Council, in making its decision, shall consider the following
criteria on the application:
(1) The applicant's management experience in the alcohol/liquor
business.
(2) The applicant's general business management experience.
(3) The applicant's general business reputation.
(4) The applicant's moral character.
(5) The applicant's financial status and its ability to build and/or
operate the proposed facility on which the proposed liquor license
is to be located.
(6) Past criminal convictions of the applicant for crimes involving
moral turpitude, violence or alcoholic liquors.
(7) The applicant's excessive use of alcoholic beverages.
(8) The effect the issuance of a license would have upon the economic
development of the surrounding area.
(9) The effects that the issuance of a license would have on the health,
welfare and safety of the general public.
(10) The recommendations of the local law enforcement agency,
Department of Buildings and Inspection and/or Fire Department
with regards to the proposed facility.
(11) Whether the applicant has demonstrated the public need or
convenience for the issuance of the liquor license for the business
facility at the location proposed.
(12) The uniqueness of the proposed facility when contrasted against
other existing or proposed facilities.
(13) The number of liquor licenses issued by the City of Roseville within
the past 24 months.
§ 71-22 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-22
69:111
(14) Whether the facility to which the proposed liquor license is to be
issued complies or will comply with the applicable Building,
Plumbing, Electrical and Fire Prevention Codes21 and zoning
statutes and ordinances applicable in the City.
(15) The effects of the business facility to which the proposed license is
to be issued will have upon vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the
area.
(16) The proximity of the proposed business facility to other similarly
situated licensed liquor facilities.
(17) The effects that the business facility to which the proposed license
is to be issued would have upon the surrounding neighborhood and/
or business establishments.
(18) The permanence of the establishment in the community as
evidenced by the proposed or actual commitments made by the
applicant.
(19) Such other considerations as the Council may deem proper,
provided that such considerations are reasonable under all of the
circumstances.
H. Restrictions on licenses. No license shall be issued to:
(1) A person whose liquor license has been revoked or not renewed for
cause under this article or a comparable City or township
ordinance or state law, whether in Michigan or otherwise.
(2) A copartnership or partnership, unless all the members of such
copartnership or partnership shall qualify to obtain a license.
(3) A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 10% of the stock of
such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason.
(4) A person or corporation who has been convicted of a crime
punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under
the law under which he or she was convicted; a crime involving
theft, dishonesty or false statement (including tax evasion)
regardless of punishment, or a crime or administrative violation of
a federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or
sale of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, or violation of
any applicable local ordinance regulating conduct and activities at
a liquor licensed premises.
(5) For premises where there exists a violation of the applicable
Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing or Fire Codes,
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Building Construction; Ch. 221, Plumbing Standards; Ch. 126,
Electrical Standards; Ch. 142, Fire Prevention, Art. I.
§ 71-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-22
69:112
applicable zoning regulations, applicable public health regulations
or any other applicable City ordinance.
I. Once an applicant who has been asked to proceed by presenting a more
detailed and complete proposal has sufficiently completed its plans and
obtained site plan, engineering, zoning, planning and other necessary
approvals by the City, the applicant may then request consideration by
the Council of a conditional approval. Upon the receipt of a written
notice by an applicant that he or she requests consideration of a
conditional approval, the City Manager shall cause the application to be
placed on the agenda of the City Council for said Council's action within
60 days of the receipt of the same by the office of the Clerk. At that
meeting, the applicant shall be prepared to discuss the following:
(1) Cost estimates for the building, furnishings and fixtures as part of
the proposal.
(2) Site plan information, including landscaping and other aesthetic
features of the proposal.
(3) Estimate of the number of employees who would be required for
the operation.
(4) Information on the individual or individuals expected to manage
the operation, as well as information as to how the facility would
actually be managed.
(5) Information about any entertainment or dancing that might be
involved.
(6) Answers to any related questions about the proposed
improvements and/or general operation of the facility.
J. Following this presentation by the applicant, the City Council may
conditionally approve the application, postpone consideration for a
reasonable period or reject said approval. Conditional approval will be
contingent upon the obtaining of building permits and any other
necessary permits, licenses or approval from the City within six months
from the date of such conditional approval. The construction of new
buildings and alterations of existing buildings shall commence within
six months after the date of the conditional approval, with a completion
date of no more than one year after the issuance of the relevant
building permit. Extensions for completion of construction or alteration
may be granted by the City Council for good cause.
K. After receipt of a conditional approval by the City Council, no floor plan,
building elevation, site plan, seating arrangement, kitchen layout or
other pertinent facts, drawings or documents submitted to the City of
Roseville City Council may be changed without the applicant first
receiving approval from the Department of Buildings and Inspection,
Fire Department and City Council.
§ 71-22 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-22
69:113
§ 71-23. Transfer of existing licenses.
The transfer of any existing liquor license covered hereunder shall be
subject to each of the requirements, criteria and procedure, including fees,
set forth in this article for the granting of a new liquor license. In addition,
the transferee-applicant shall furnish a copy of any and all files which may
be in the Michigan Liquor Control Commission's possession regarding that
Commission's investigation of the transferee as a present licensee, or as a
previous licensee, or in which transferee has or has had a partial interest
in.
§ 71-24. Objections to renewal; requests for revocation.
L. Upon completion of the building and in accordance with the prior
conditional approval of the Council, the City Council shall then
thereupon recommend, above all others, the applicant for approval of
the liquor license to the Liquor Control Commission of the State of
Michigan.
M. Reservation of authority. No applicant for a liquor license has a right to
the issuance of such license to him, her or it, and the City Council
reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who,
if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such licenses.
A. The City Council may object to a renewal of a liquor license or request
the revocation of a liquor license with the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission.
B. Procedure. Before filing an objection to the renewal or request for
revocation of a license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission,
the City Council shall serve the license holder, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, mailed not less than 20 days prior to the hearing, a
notice of such hearing, which notice shall contain the following
information:
(1) Notice of the proposed action.
(2) Reasons for the proposed action.
(3) Date, time and place of such hearing.
(4) A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony
and may confront witnesses and may be represented by a licensed
attorney.
C. Such hearing shall be conducted by the City Council as a whole. The
City Council shall submit to the license holder and the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission, a written statement of its ultimate findings and
determination.
D. Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The City Council may
recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination
§ 71-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-24
69:114
§ 71-25. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to licenses to sell beer, wine or spirits for onpremises
consumption, including but not limited to Class B licenses, Class
C licenses, resort licenses, tavern licenses, club licenses and hotel licenses.
This shall not, in any event, apply to applications for SDM or SDD licenses,
special licenses granted by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or oneday
permits as allowed by statute.
by it that, based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the
hearing, any of the following exist:
(1) A violation of any of the restrictions on licenses set forth in
§ 71-22H of this article.
(2) Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises.
§ 71-24 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-25
69:115

ARTICLE VI
Entertainment Permits
[Adopted 1-18-2000 by Ord. No. 1132]
§ 71-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any liquid and/or compound, by whatever
name called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more alcohol, by volume, which is
fit for use for beverage purposes, or as otherwise defined pursuant to the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
APPLICANT — Any person, persons or legal entity of whatsoever kind or
nature which is seeking or is already possessed of any license issued by
the State of, Michigan, involving activities for which the State of Michigan
issues a dance, entertainment or dance and entertainment license through
the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
LICENSEE — Any applicant issued any entertainment permit, dance permit,
or dance and entertainment permit, by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission and who is not in default of this article. For purposes of
regulation provisions, "licensee" extends not only to the applicant, but also
to any officers, directors, members, partners, employees or independent
contractors working at the premises of an applicant.
§ 71-27. Application requirements.
A. Application. The applicant must submit an application for an
entertainment permit to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission
before submitting to the City of Roseville an application. No application
will be considered until notice is received from the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission that they have received such application.
B. Application form. The applicant shall submit a current and fully
completed application form, as prepared and approved by the Police
Department, which shall be furnished to the City Clerk of the City of
Roseville.
C. Required information and applicable fee. The City application shall
include at least the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Type of permit desired.
(3) Address and legal description of the property where the license is
to be located.
(4) A preliminary floor or site plan showing the areas where dancing
and/or entertainment will occur and any and all facilities to be
utilized in conjunction with such dance and/or entertainment.
§ 71-26 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-27
69:117
(5) A detailed, written statement describing the nature of the
entertainment, the attire of entertainers and procedures for
controlling contact between the entertainers and patrons and
protecting the public health, safety and welfare of patrons.
(6) A statement to the effect that entertainment only as described
within the entertainment application will be permitted, unless
further application and approval is sought and obtained following
the procedures of this article.
(7) The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in an amount as periodically determined by the City
Council to cover the cost of investigation, review and inspection by
the City of Roseville.
D. Upon receipt and review of the fully completed application, the City
Clerk shall forward the application to the Police Department, Fire
Department, Building Department and Treasurer's office and any other
such departments as required by the City Manager, which departments
shall, within 45 days, make their recommendations prior to
consideration by the City Council.
E. Upon receipt by the City Clerk's office of recommendations, the City
Clerk shall cause the application to be placed on the agenda of the City
Council within 60 days. All applications are subject to the final approval
of the City Council.
F. Upon a hearing before the City Council, the Council may take one of the
following steps:
(1) Request additional information from the applicant and postpone
further action. Such action shall not be interpreted to mean
approval.
(2) Postpone action upon the application for a period not to exceed 60
days, unless waived by the applicant, if postponement is for a
reason other than the need for further or additional information
from the applicant.
(3) Recommend approval to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission
in whole or in part.
(4) Recommend disapproval to the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission in whole or in part.
G. The City Council, in making its decision, shall consider the following
criteria:
(1) The applicant's management experience in the alcohol/liquor
business.
(2) The number of violations of any of the rules or laws pertaining to
local building or zoning codes and Michigan Liquor Control
§ 71-27 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-27
69:118
§ 71-28. Prohibited acts.
No applicant or licensee shall allow, cause, do or permit any of the
following, any of which shall serve as a basis for nonissuance, nonrenewal,
or revocation of an entertainment permit:
Commission rules or regulations; the amount of police activity
responding to occurrences within the premises or parking areas
servicing the premises.
(3) The applicant's financial status and its ability to adequately control
and monitor entertainment activities.
(4) Past criminal convictions, of the applicant or officers, members,
partners, shareholders, directors, employees or persons proposed
to or furnishing entertainment, for criminal acts.
(5) The effect the issuance of the entertainment permit would have
upon the surrounding neighborhood and/or business
establishments.
(6) The extent to which the entertainment to be provided has been
clearly defined and explained so that permitted or unpermitted
activities can be properly distinguished.
(7) The extent to which the premises appear to be properly designed
and laid out for the proposed type of activity.
(8) Whether or not the applicant currently, or in the past, has been in
default to the City for payment of any taxes or noncompliant with
respect to building, fire and zoning codes, rules and regulations.
(9) Such other considerations as the Council may reasonably deem
proper.
A. Violate any of the rules or regulations of the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission, regardless of whether such violation occurred directly or
indirectly out of entertainment activities.
B. Violate any of the provisions of the Code of Ordinances, Chapter 206,
Article II, Entertainment on Cabaret Premises.
C. Permit any kind of nudity as defined as public nudity under the laws of
the State of Michigan.
D. Fail to comply with any building code rules and regulations, fire code
rules and regulations or zoning code rules and regulations.
E. Be delinquent in the payment of any taxes or fees to the City of
Roseville, unless such tax or fees are being challenged in a manner
prescribed, pursuant to applicable law.
F. Permit unruly behavior upon the premises or parking areas servicing
the premises. Police responses for disturbances, including but not
§ 71-27 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-28
69:119
§ 71-29. Renewal and revocation of permit.
§ 71-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
limited to altercations, disorderly persons or other criminal activity, six
or more times within any calendar year shall serve as a presumption of
permitting unruly premises.
G. Fail to comply strictly with the permitted entertainment as described in
the application pursuant to this article.
H. Permit entertainers, employees or contestants to wear attire which is
substantially similar in style to bikini-style underwear or swimsuits or
which involves see-through clothing without underwear beneath such
clothing. Expressly prohibited are swimsuit contests, lingerie contests,
wet tee shirt contests or other entertainment or contests for which a
person receives any consideration as a result of his/her attire or
appearance.
I. Permit any actual or simulated sexual acts, including, but not limited to,
sexual intercourse, fellatio or cunnilingus.
A. Action by Council. The City Council may object to the renewal of an
entertainment permit or request the revocation of an entertainment
permit from the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
B. Notice and procedure. Before filing an objection to the renewal or a
request for revocation of a license with the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission, the City Council shall serve the license holder, by certified
mail at the last known address as indicated upon records of the City,
mailed not less than 20 days prior to the hearing, a notice of such
hearing, which notice shall contain the proposed action, reasons for the
proposed actions and the date, time and place of the hearing. The
licensee may present evidence and testimony, confront witnesses and
be represented by a licensed attorney at such proceedings. The Council
shall transmit to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission a written
statement of its findings and determination.
C. Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The City Council may
recommend nonrenewal or revocation upon a determination, upon a
preponderance of evidence, that a violation of any of the provisions of
this article or the provisions of Chapter 206, Article II, has occurred.
D. Applicability. This article shall apply to licensees who are regulated or
otherwise would be subject to regulation by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission.
§ 71-28 ROSEVILLE CODE § 71-30
69:120
Chapter 73
AMUSEMENTS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Power to regulate amusements — See Ch. 3,
Sec. 3.1(b)(2(a)).
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals — See Ch. 96.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Minors — See Ch. 197.
Sale of tobacco to minors — See Ch. 313, Art.
I.
§ 71-30 AMUSEMENTS § 71-30
73:121

ARTICLE I
Poolrooms and Bowling Alleys
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 73 of the 1984
Code]
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOWLING ALLEY — Includes any place in which the game of bowling or any
and all variations thereof are played.
POOLROOM — Includes any place in which the game of pool or any and all
variations thereof are played.
§ 73-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, his or her agents or employees to
operate a poolroom and/or bowling alley in the city without first obtaining a
license therefor as provided in this article.
§ 73-3. License fees.
Every applicant for a license to operate a poolroom and/or bowling alley in
the city shall, at the time of making application therefor, pay the fees as
provided for in Chapter 133, Fees.
§ 73-4. Access for inspections.
Any poolroom and/or bowling alley licensed under the provisions of this
article shall be open to inspection by the Police, Fire or Buildings and
Inspection Department and the authorized members thereof at all
reasonable hours.
§ 73-5. Business hours.
Each and every poolroom and/or bowling alley licensed under the provisions
of this article shall close up by the hour of 1:00 a.m., provided that, in the
event of tournaments or for other good and sufficient reasons, the licensee
may secure special permission to remain open to a later hour by applying
for same to the City Council, but not otherwise.
§ 73-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
When it shall appear that any licensee, his or her agents or employees are
operating a poolroom and/or bowling alley in a manner detrimental to the
public health, safety or morals, the City Council may suspend or revoke
such license after hearing had before the City Council upon 24 hours' notice
given to the said licensee or his or her agents or employees in charge of the
premises.
§ 73-1 AMUSEMENTS § 73-7
73:123
§ 73-7. Expiration date of license.
Each and every license granted under the terms of this article shall expire
on the 30th day of April next succeeding the date of its issuance.
§ 73-8. Unaccompanied minors not allowed in poolrooms.
No owner, manager and/or proprietor of any poolroom licensed hereunder
shall allow or permit minor children under 17 years of age to frequent,
occupy or remain in the licensed establishment unless said minor children
shall be accompanied by at least one of the parents. Furthermore, it shall
be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to frequent, occupy
or remain in any poolroom unless said child is accompanied by at least one
parent.22
§ 73-9. Violations and penalties.23
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Minors.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 73-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 73-9
73:124
ARTICLE II
Amusement Devices
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 73 of the 1984
Code]
§ 73-10. License required.
§ 73-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAGATELLE, PIGEONHOLE, PIN GAME, PUCK GAME, MARBLE GAME,
BAFFLE BOARD, TABLE-TOP GAME OR SIMILAR DEVICE — A game
played with any number of balls, spheres, pucks, disks or similar articles on
a table or board having holes, pockets, cups or other places into which such
balls, spheres, pucks, disks or similar articles may drop or become lodged
and/or having arches, pins, springs or other devices to control, deflect or
impede the direction or speed of the balls, spheres, pucks, disks or other
similar devices put in motion by the player, and shall include the modern
variety of baffle boards, pin games and similar devices.
COIN-OPERATED MUSIC DEVICE — A piano, radio, phonograph, jukebox
or any similar machine or contrivance which emits recitations, songs,
speeches or music upon the insertion of a coin.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, society, club, firm or corporation who places
mechanical amusement, music or vending devices in any place or
establishment, excluding an owner as herein defined, for operation.
A. No person, society, club, firm or corporation shall maintain or operate
or cause to be maintained or operated any mechanical amusement,
music or vending device, as herein defined, without having first
procured a license therefor, as herein prescribed, for such
establishment, store or place wherein such mechanical amusement,
music or vending device is to be maintained or operated and, in
addition thereto, a license for each mechanical amusement, music or
vending device located therein.
B. No person, society, club, firm or corporation shall distribute or cause to
be distributed any mechanical amusement, music or vending device
without first obtaining a license as herein prescribed.
C. No person, society, club, firm or corporation licensed hereunder as a
distributor shall distribute or cause to be distributed for operation any
mechanical amusement, music or vending device to any establishment,
store or place that is not licensed as required by this article.
D. No license shall be granted unless it is approved by the Chief of Police,
who shall indicate such approval in writing upon the face of the
application.
§ 73-10 AMUSEMENTS § 73-11
73:125
ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises wherein any service or merchandise
is offered for sale to the public or where any amusement or service is
furnished for gain or profit, or any building, structure, room, shop or other
place within the city.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A pinball machine, ski-ball
machine, electronic video game, motion-picture machine, miniature pool
table or any similar machine, instrument or contrivance, which may be
operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin, token, plate, disk
or key; or a device for any game of shuffleboard, bagatelle, pigeon hole,
pin game, puck game, marble game, baffle board, tabletop game or similar
devices.
OWNER, TYPE 1 — Any person, society, club, firm or corporation who
owns, operates or conducts any establishment where there are four or
more mechanical amusement devices within the establishment for use by its
patrons.
OWNER, TYPE 2 — Any person, society, club, firm or corporation who
owns, operates or conducts mechanical amusement devices within the
establishment for use by its patrons.
VENDING DEVICE — Any mechanical device which, upon insertion of a
coin, returns the value in merchandise of the sum thus inserted or renders
a service for same.
§ 73-12. Application for license.
A. Application for a license shall be made to the Chief of Police in the form
and manner required by the Chief and in accordance with the
provisions of this article and Code, and the application shall state,
among other things:
(1) The number of mechanical amusement, music or vending devices
intended to be operated.
(2) The type of mechanical amusement, music or vending devices.
(3) The proposed locations for any such mechanical, amusement,
music or vending devices.
B. If after the issuance of any license the licensee desires to operate other
mechanical amusement, music or vending devices in addition to the
number stated in the original application for a license, the licensee shall
make a new application to the Chief of Police in the same manner and
form as the original application for a license.
C. The application for a license shall be accompanied by the fingerprints of
the applicant, and in the event that the applicant is a firm, club, society
or corporation, the application shall be accompanied by the fingerprints
of the officers thereof and, if the applicant shall be a corporation, the
names and addresses of all stockholders thereof.
§ 73-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 73-12
73:126
§ 73-13. Identification of devices; display of license.
D. Each applicant for a license shall, at the time of making such
application, pay the license fees specified in § 73-18 of this article. A
license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for one year,
expiring annually on the 31st day of December.
E. The Chief of Police shall investigate the location or locations wherein it
is proposed to operate such mechanical amusement, music or vending
devices to determine whether it violates any provision or any
prohibition of the city ordinances and shall ascertain if the owner and/
or distributor is a person of good moral character by an investigation to
determine if the owner and/or distributor was guilty of a criminal
activity or offense involving moral turpitude and, on the basis of the
aforesaid investigation, may disapprove the application.
F. All applicants will be required to deliver to the City of Roseville a sum of
money equal to the personal property tax as determined by the
Assessor on the mechanical amusement devices licensed to be held in
escrow by the City of Roseville. Should the taxpayer of the mechanical
amusement devices become delinquent in payment of the personal
property tax, the escrow shall then be forfeited to the City of Roseville
as payment.
A. Every mechanical amusement, music or vending device licensed
hereunder shall have permanently affixed thereto suitable
identification. Such identification shall include:
(1) The business name, business address and business telephone
number of the distributor of the device if such device is owned by
other than the licensee.
(2) The serial number of the device. Such serial number shall be
written on the application for license at the time of making
application.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the keeping and
use of pool tables, billiard tables, bowling alleys or other licensed
amusements or games, and their usual appurtenances, in the places
duly licensed and operated under the applicable city ordinances.
C. Each establishment licensed as herein provided shall permanently and
conspicuously post such license at the location therein where such
device is located.
D. The Chief of Police shall provide an identification disk for each
mechanical amusement, music or vending device licensed. Such disk
shall be affixed to each licensed mechanical amusement, music or
vending device. The identification disks are not transferable, and it
shall be unlawful to remove identification disks from the device once
affixed thereto.
§ 73-12 AMUSEMENTS § 73-13
73:127
§ 73-14. General regulations.
§ 73-15. Use of devices for gambling prohibited.
§ 73-16. Inspection by police; impoundment of machines.
E. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to change or alter any such
mechanical amusement, music or vending device after the same has
been licensed by the city.
A. Establishments licensed for the operation of mechanical amusement
devices, as defined herein, shall not permit persons under 17 years of
age to operate said devices after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a
parent or guardian.24
B. No license shall be issued for any mechanical amusement device that is
adaptable or may be readily converted into a gambling machine.
C. No mechanical amusement, music or vending device shall be licensed
that shall display, expose, produce or emit any motion picture, printed
matter, advertisement, writing, sound, recitation, speech, music or
other matter that is obscene, indecent, pornographic or contrary to
good morals.25
D. It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any
establishment where the operation of mechanical amusement or music
devices are the principal character of the establishment, between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day.
E. No licensee shall permit the playing of any mechanical amusement
device within 600 feet of any church, public or parochial school or
playground.
A. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as permitting the issuance
of a license for any slot machine or as legalizing any device in which is
incorporated any gambling feature.
B. The use of any mechanical device for the purpose of gambling of any
kind is prohibited.
C. No licensee shall allow any person within the establishment to use any
mechanical device as a gambling device or as an instrument of
gambling.
A. It shall be the duty of police officers to make inspections of all
mechanical amusement, music or vending devices and the
establishments wherein they may be located, and if any unlawful
practices are observed in connection therewith, they shall report the
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 206, Obscenity and Pornography.
§ 73-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 73-16
73:128
§ 73-17. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 73-18. Fees.
License fees shall be as provided for in Chapter 133, Fees.
§ 73-19. Violations and penalties.26
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
same to the Chief of Police for such action as he or she may deem
proper, and the Chief of Police may recommend the immediate
suspension of such license.
B. If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical device
is used as a gambling device or as an instrument of gambling, such
machine may be seized by the police and impounded; and if, upon trial
of the owner as herein defined for allowing it to be used as a gambling
device or as an instrument of gambling, said owner shall be found
guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police.
A. Every person, society, club, firm or corporation licensed under this
article is subject to the right of the city, which right is hereby expressly
reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or indirectly,
permit the operation of any mechanical amusement, music or vending
device contrary to the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the
city or the laws of the state or if the license was issued upon misleading
or fraudulent information submitted by the applicant.
B. Said license may be suspended by the City Manager after written notice
to the licensee from the Chief of Police, which notice shall specify the
ordinance or law violation with which the licensee is charged.
C. Upon conviction of the licensee of the violation charged, the license
may be revoked by the City Manager.
D. Should the City Manager cause such license to be revoked, the licensee
may then, within 10 days, appeal the decision of the City Manager to
the City Council.
E. The City Council may then review the action taken by the City Manager
and make its determination to uphold such action or to reinstate the
applicant's license. The decision of the City Council shall be determined
to be final.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 73-16 AMUSEMENTS § 73-19
73:129
Chapter 75
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting — See Ch. 174.
Animal and bird noises — See Ch. 203,
§ 203-3.
Domestic animals in parks — See Ch. 215,
§ 215-6.
§ 73-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 73-19
73:130
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 75 of the 1984
Code; amended in its entirety 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
§ 75-1. Permission required to keep certain animals. [Amended
1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 1231; 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1257]
Except as provided herein, no horses, calves, cows, sheep, new world
camelids, goats, bison, privately owned cervids, ratites, equine, poultry,
waterfowl, or fowl shall be kept within the corporate limits of the City.
A. Keeping of chickens and ducks. Subject to the requirements stated
herein, a person may keep poultry and/or chickens or ducks as follows:
(1) Any person who keeps chickens or ducks in the City of Roseville
shall obtain a permit from the City prior to acquiring chickens or
ducks. Any person who currently has chickens or ducks at the time
this section becomes effective must comply with the regulations
herein, and he/she is expressly not grandfathered. No permit shall
be issued to a person by the City, and no chickens or ducks shall be
allowed to be kept, unless the owners of all residentially zoned
adjacent properties [as defined below in Subsection A(3)(j)]
consent, in writing, to the permit and this consent is presented
along with an application for a permit. Written statements waiving
the distance requirement in Subsection A(3) below shall also be
submitted at the time of the application and become a part of the
permit if issued. Application shall be made to the Police
Department, and the fee for the permit shall be as determined by
Council resolution. Permits expire and become invalid three years
after the date of issuance. A person who wishes to continue keeping
chickens or ducks shall obtain a new permit on or before the
expiration date of the previous permit. Application for a renewal
permit shall be pursuant to the procedures and requirements that
are applicable at the time the person applies for a renewal permit.
(2) Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by the City, private
restrictions on the use of property shall remain enforceable and
take precedence over a permit. Private restrictions include but are
not limited to deed restrictions, condominium master deed
restrictions, neighborhood association bylaws, and covenant deeds.
A permit issued to a person whose property is subject to private
restrictions that prohibit the keeping of chickens or ducks is void.
The interpretation and enforcement of the private restriction is the
sole responsibility of the private parties involved.
(3) A person who keeps or houses chickens or ducks on his or her
property shall comply with all of the following requirements:
(a) Have been issued the permit required under Subsection A(1) of
this section.
§ 75-1 AMUSEMENTS § 75-1
73:131
(b) Keep no more than a total of four chickens or ducks, or any
combination thereof.
(c) The principal use of the person’s property is for a single-family
dwelling or two-family dwelling.
(d) No person shall keep any rooster.
(e) No person shall slaughter any chickens or ducks.
(f) The chickens or ducks shall be provided a covered enclosure
and must be kept in the covered enclosure or a fenced
enclosure at all times. Fenced enclosures are subject to all
provisions of the Fence Ordinance.27
(g) A person shall not keep chickens or ducks in any location on
the property other than in the backyard. For purposes of this
section, "backyard" means that portion of a lot enclosed by the
property’s rear lot line and the side lot lines to the points
where the side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line
established by the rear of the single-family or two-family
structure and extending to the side lot lines.
(h) No covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be located
closer than 10 feet to any property line of an adjacent property.
(i) All enclosures for the keeping of chickens or ducks shall be so
constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other
rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the
walls of the enclosure. A covered enclosure or fenced
enclosure shall not be located closer than 40 feet to any
residential structure on an adjacent property; provided,
however, this requirement can be waived as follows:
[1] If the principal use of applicant’s property is for a singlefamily
dwelling, to obtain such a waiver, the applicant shall
present at the time of applying for a permit the written
statements of all adjacent landowners that there is no
objection to the issuance of the permit.
[2] If the principal use of the applicant’s property is for a twofamily
dwelling, to obtain such a waiver, the applicant shall
present at the time of applying for a permit the written
statements of all adjacent landowners and of the
occupants of the other dwelling stating that there is no
objection to the issuance of the permit.
(j) For purposes of this section, "adjacent property" means all
parcels of property that the applicant’s property comes into
contact with at one or more points, except for parcels that are
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 134, Fences.
§ 75-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-1
73:132
§ 75-2. Exotic or wild animals prohibited.
It is unlawful in the City for persons to possess, breed, exchange, buy, sell or
attempt to offer to buy or sell exotic or wild animals, meaning animals not
occurring naturally, either presently or historically in this state, including:
legally adjacent to but are in fact separated from the
applicant’s property by a public or private street.
(k) All enclosures for the keeping of chickens or ducks shall be so
constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other
rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the
walls of the enclosure. In no event shall poultry and/or
chickens or ducks be allowed in a residence, porch, or attached
garage.
(l) All feed and other items associated with the keeping of
chickens or ducks that are likely to attract or to become
infested with or infected by rats, mice, or other rodents shall
be protected so as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from
gaining access to or coming into contact with them. The sale of
eggs shall not be permitted.
(m) Persons shall dispose of waste materials (feed, manure and
litter) in an environmentally responsible manner by bagging
the materials and disposing of same in the trash. Waste
materials shall not accumulate on the property, and all areas
must remain in sanitary condition.
(n) At all times, chickens or ducks shall be confined in a coop in the
backyard of the residence with a minimum of one square foot
per bird. In no event shall chickens or ducks be allowed to run
free and shall only be permitted to be in an enclosed run, no
larger than eight feet by eight feet, attached to the coop. Such
facility shall be built to keep dogs, cats, and wildlife from
gaining entry.
(4) A person who has been issued a permit shall submit it for
examination upon demand by any police officer or code
enforcement officer.
A. Nonhuman primates.
B. Venomous, cold-blooded reptiles and other cold-blooded animals that, if
in contact with humans, are capable of inflicting fatal injury to the
average human adult or child.
C. Poisonous snakes.
D. Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more.
E. Cats (wild family, including but not limited to bobcat, cheetah, cougar,
jaguar, leopard, lion, lynx, mountain lion, panther, puma, tiger).
§ 75-1 AMUSEMENTS § 75-2
73:133
§ 75-3. Removal of prohibited species.
Any person owning an exotic or wild animal listed in § 75-2 on the effective
date of this article shall within 60 days of the effective date of this article,
remove the animal from the City.
§ 75-4. Exceptions.
Exceptions to this article shall be zoological parks and aquariums
accredited by the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums,
properly zoned and permitted, circuses, wildlife sanctuaries and bona fide
scientific, medical or educational research facilities.
§ 75-4.1. Abuse prohibited. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 1239]
An owner, possessor, or person having the charge or custody of an animal
shall not do any of the following:
F. Nondomesticated carnivores, including hybrid crosses of
nondomesticated carnivores.
G. Crocodilia (by example, crocodiles, alligators).
H. Black piranha fish.
I. Sharks two feet and over in length.
J. Struthio (ostriches).
K. Poisonous spiders, venomous or poisonous insects.
L. Proboscidea (by example, elephants).
M. Perissodeactyla (generally, nonruminant ungulate mammals with oddnumbered
toes: by example, rhinoceros).
N. Artiodactyla (generally hoofed animals with even number of toes; by
example, camel).
O. Turtles having a shell length of under four inches.
A. Fail to provide an animal with adequate care;
B. Cruelly drive, work, or beat an animal, or cause an animal to be cruelly
driven, worked, or beaten;
C. Carry or cause to be carried in or upon a vehicle or otherwise any live
animal having the feet or legs tied together, other than an animal being
transported for medical care, or a horse whose feet are hobbled to
protect the horse during transport or in any other cruel and inhumane
manner;
D. Carry or cause to be carried a live animal in or upon a vehicle or
otherwise without providing a secure space, rack, car, crate, or cage, in
§ 75-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-4.1
73:134
§ 75-4.2. Humane treatment required. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 1239]
No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient wholesome
food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary
care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and
treatment.
§ 75-4.3. Lawful killing. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 1239]
The lawful killing or other use of an animal, including, but not limited to the
following, is not prohibited:
which livestock may stand, and in which all other animals may stand,
turn around, and lie down during transportation, or while awaiting
slaughter. As used in this subdivision, for purposes of transportation
of sled dogs, "stand" means sufficient vertical distance to allow the
animal to stand without its shoulders touching the top of the crate or
transportation vehicle;
E. Abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned, in any place,
without making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless
premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life
during a disaster. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while
traveling, walking, hiking or hunting shall not be regarded as
abandoned under this section when the owner or custodian has made a
reasonable effort to locate the animal;
F. Willfully or negligently allow any animal, including one who is aged,
diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, disabled, or nonambulatory to suffer
unnecessary neglect, torture, or pain;
G. Tether a dog unless the tether is at least three times the length of the
dog as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail and is
attached to a harness or nonchoke collar designed for tethering.
A. Fishing;
B. Hunting, trapping, or wildlife control regulated pursuant to the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, being M.C.L. §§ 324.101
to 324.90106;
C. Horse racing;
D. The operation of a zoological park or aquarium;
E. Pest or rodent control;
F. Farming or a generally accepted animal husbandry or farming practice
involving livestock as permitted under the City's Zoning Ordinance;28
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 75-4.1 AMUSEMENTS § 75-4.3
73:135
§ 75-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
G. Activities authorized pursuant to rules promulgated under Section 9 of
the Executive Organization Act of 1965, being M.C.L. § 16.109;
H. Scientific research pursuant to Use of Dogs and Cats for Research,
being M.C.L. §§ 287.381 to 287.395;
I. Scientific research pursuant to Sections 2226, 2671, 2676, and 7333 of
the Public Health Code, being M.C.L. §§ 333.2226, 333.2671, 333.2676,
and 333.7333.
§ 75-4.3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-5
73:136
ARTICLE II
Dogs
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 75 of the 1984
Code]
§ 75-6. License required.
Except as herein provided in § 75-16, it shall be unlawful to own, possess or
harbor a dog in the City without first obtaining a license therefor from the
Police Chief or designee as hereinafter provided. Any person allowing a dog
to habitually remain within or on his or her house, store, building, enclosure
or premises shall be considered as owning, harboring or keeping the same
within the meaning of this article.
§ 75-7. Application for license; issuance; fee. [Amended 7-22-1986
by Ord. No. 945; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 3-27-2001 by Ord. No.
1148]
A. The owner of a dog that is four months old shall apply to the Police
Chief, or his or her designee, for a license for each dog owned or kept
by him or her. Licenses shall be procured for the duration of the rabies
vaccination. Any prior licensee who fails to renew an expiring license
before 30 days after the current license expires shall be subject to the
additional charges set forth in § 75-16.
B. The applicant must present a rabies certificate which shall state the
breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog and the name and
address of the owner. The application for a license shall be
accompanied by a valid certificate of a current vaccination for rabies,
with a vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture,
signed by an accredited veterinarian. The certificate for vaccination for
rabies shall state the month and year of expiration for the rabies
vaccination, in the veterinarian's opinion.
C. The owner of a dog that is required to be licensed under this section
shall keep the dog currently vaccinated for rabies by an accredited
veterinarian with a vaccine licensed by the United Stated Department
of Agriculture.
D. The applicant shall pay to the Police Chief or his or her designee, prior
to the issuance of the license, the sum as provided in Chapter 133, Fees,
for a license. There will be a renewal license fee as provided in Chapter
133 for unneutered or unspayed dogs and for a renewal license fee for
neutered or spayed dogs. The applicant will be required to pay the fee
as provided in Chapter 133 for each duplicate license requested.
E. A dog which is used as a guide or leader dog for a blind person, a
hearing dog for a deaf or audibly impaired person or service dog for a
physically limited person is not subject to any fee for licensing. This
exemption shall extend to "Paws for a Cause."
§ 75-6 AMUSEMENTS § 75-8
73:137
§ 75-8. Dogs allergic to vaccination.
Any dog that is allergic to a rabies vaccination must be registered with the
Police Chief or designee, and the owner harboring this type of dog must
exhibit proof from a doctor of veterinary medicine showing that the dog is
allergic to a vaccination shot. Persons harboring this type of dog must pay
the Police Chief or designee a fee as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, prior
to the issuance of a special license tag which is good for the life of the
dog. This unvaccinated dog must be muzzled and restrained by a chain-type
leash and under control by a responsible person while on the sidewalk or
in a public place. Before the Police Chief or designee can issue a license to
the owner of this type of dog, the owner must display a muzzle and chaintype
leash to the Police Chief or designee. The Animal Control Officer may
make a periodic check on this type of dog. It is the duty of the owner of an
unvaccinated dog who is allergic to rabies shots to notify the Police Chief or
designee if the dog is destroyed or moved from the City.
§ 75-9. Issuance of tags; fastening of tags to collar. [Amended
3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 1148]
At the time of the issuance of the license, the Police Chief or designee shall
deliver to each applicant a tag which will contain the number of the license,
the year of expiration and such other information as may be required by
the City Council. Such tag shall forthwith be fastened to a collar and placed
upon the dog's neck, and such collar containing the tag must be worn by all
dogs when they are not securely restrained upon the premises of the owner.
§ 75-10. Vicious animal prohibited. [Added 9-28-2004 by Ord. No.
119229]
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit a vicious, fierce or
potentially dangerous or vicious animal to go unconfined and unrestrained
on such person's premises, or to run at large. "Vicious animal" is defined in
Chapter 75, § 75-11 herein.
§ 75-11. Vicious animal defined. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
112530]
As used in this article, "vicious animal" shall mean and include:
A. Any dog or cat which attacks a human being or domestic animal without
provocation.
B. Any dog or cat with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the
safety of humans or other domestic animals.
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 75-10, Restraint of vicious dogs;
destruction of dogs, as amended.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance added new §§ 75-11 through 75-17 and renumbered former
§§ 75-11 et seq. to follow consecutively.
§ 75-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-11
73:138
§ 75-12. Potentially dangerous animal defined. [Added 9-28-2004 by
Ord. No. 1192]
"Potentially dangerous animal" means any of the following:
§ 75-13. Exclusions. [Added 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1192]
§ 75-14. Judicial process. [Added 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1192]
C. Any dog or cat declared by the Animal Control Officer to be a dangerous
dog or cat, or any dog or cat determined to be a dangerous dog or cat
under the authority of the state legislature or declared by any court.
A. Any dog or cat which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions
within a prior sixty-month period, engages in any behavior that requires
defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person
and the dog or cat are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog
or cat.
B. Any dog or cat which, when provoked, bites a person.
A. No animal may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if any
injury or damage is sustained by a person who at the time that injury or
damage was sustained was committing willful trespass or other tort
upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be
declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the animal was protecting
or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from
an unjustified attack or assault. No animal may be declared potentially
dangerous or vicious if an injury or damage was sustained by a
domestic animal, at the time the injury or damage was sustained,
because the animal was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
animal.
B. No animal may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the injury
or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the animal was
working as a hunting animal, herding animal, or predator control
animal on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper,
and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal
appropriate to the work of the animal.
C. Dogs owned and controlled by local, state, and federal law enforcement
agencies which are used in law enforcement or related activities may
not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious.
A. If an animal control officer or law enforcement officer has investigated
and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that an
animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the Animal Control Officer,
or his or her designee, or the head of the local law enforcement agency,
or his or her designee, shall petition the District Court for a hearing for
§ 75-11 AMUSEMENTS § 75-14
73:139
§ 75-15. Immediate seizure of vicious or potentially dangerous
animals. [Added 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1192]
the purpose of determining whether or not the animal in question
should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. Whenever
possible, any complaint received from a member of the public which
serves as the evidentiary basis for the Animal Control Officer or law
enforcement officer to find probable cause shall be sworn to and
verified by the complainant and shall be attached to the petition. The
Animal Control Officer or the local law enforcement agency shall notify
the owner or keeper of the animal that a hearing will be held by
the District Court at which time the owner or keeper of the animal
may present evidence as to why the animal should not be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious. The owner or keeper of the animal
shall be served with notice of the hearing and a copy of the petition,
either personally or by first-class mail with return receipt requested.
The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five working
days or no more than 10 working days after service of the notice
upon owner or keeper of the animal. The hearing shall be open to
the public. The court may admit into evidence all relevant evidence,
including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, limit the
scope of discovery, and may shorten the time to produce records or
witnesses. The court may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence,
that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious and make other
orders authorized by this article.
B. After the hearing conducted pursuant to Subsection A above, the owner
or keeper of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination
and orders issued, either personally or by first-class mail postage
prepaid by the court. If a determination is made that an animal is
potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper of the animal
shall comply with § 75-16 in accordance with a time schedule
established by the Animal Control Officer or the local enforcement
agency, but in no case no more than 30 days after the date of the
determination or 35 days if notice of determination or the owner or
keeper of the animal contests the determination, he or she may appeal
the decision of the court.
A. If upon investigation it is determined by the Animal Control Officer or
law enforcement officer that probable cause exists to believe that the
animal in question poses an immediate threat to public safety, then the
Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer may seize and
impound the animal pending the hearings to be held pursuant to this
article. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable to the City for
the costs and expenses of keeping and impounding the animal.
B. When an animal has been impounded pursuant to Subsection A above
and it is not contrary to public safety, the Animal Control Officer shall
permit the animal to be confined at the owner's expense in a
department-approved kennel or veterinary facility.
§ 75-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-16
73:140
§ 75-16. Disposition of potentially dangerous or vicious animals.
[Added 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1192]
A. The Roseville Police Department Records Division shall include the
"potentially dangerous" designation in the registration records of the
animals either after the owner or keeper of the animal has agreed to the
designation or the court has determined the designation applies to the
animals. An animal designated as "potentially dangerous" shall have an
additional vicious dog license issued at extra cost to be set forth by the
City Council in its schedule of fees.
B. A potentially dangerous or vicious animal shall be housed either within
the owner's home or, if housed outside, within a kennel or other
structure with proper flooring and a roof or other permanent cover. If
the animal is normally housed within the home, the owner may permit
the animal outside on the owner's property so long as the animal is
restricted to the back or rear yard; the animal is securely chained or
otherwise restricted so that the animal is at least four feet away from
the perimeter of the owner's property; and the yard is secured to
prevent children from trespassing. A potentially dangerous animal may
be off the owner's premises only if restrained by a leash less than six
feet in length, is under the control of a responsible adult over the age of
18 at all times, and is muzzled. In no event shall a potentially dangerous
animal be left unattended for any amount of time while off the owner's
property, including chaining or tying up the animal to an object or post,
fence, tree, etc. A potentially dangerous animal shall not be permitted
on any City-owned property, including parks, or on public school
property.
C. If there are no additional instances of the behavior described in § 75-12
within a sixty-month period from the date of designation as a potentially
dangerous animal, the animal shall be removed from the list of
potentially dangerous animals. The animal may, but is not required to
be, removed from the list of potentially dangerous animals prior to the
expiration of the sixty-month period if the owner or keeper of the
animal demonstrates to the Animal Control Officer that changes in
circumstances or measures taken by the owner or keeper of the animal,
such as training of the animal, have mitigated the risk to the public
safety.
D. An animal determined to be a vicious animal may be destroyed by the
Roseville Police Department when it is found, after proceedings
conducted under § 75-14, that the release of the animal would create a
significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
E. The owner of an animal determined to be a vicious animal may be
prohibited by the City from owning, possessing, controlling, or having
custody of any animal for a period of up to three years, when it is found,
after proceedings conducted under § 75-14, that ownership or
possession of an animal by that person would create a significant threat
to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 75-16 AMUSEMENTS § 75-17
73:141
§ 75-17. Voluntary destruction. [Added 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1192]
At any point before the order of the court, the owner or keeper of the animal
may voluntary request that the animal be destroyed. The request may be
made in open court, or by letter that is properly notarized.
§ 75-18. Harboring of barking or vicious dogs prohibited; police to
be notified of bitten dogs. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 112531]
No person shall harbor or keep any dog which, by loud or frequent or
habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall cause annoyance to the
neighborhood or to people passing to and fro on the streets. No person
shall own or harbor a fierce or vicious dog or a dog that has been known to
have been bitten by any animal afflicted with rabies. It shall be the duty of
every person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten
by another dog to immediately notify the Police Department that they have
such dog in their possession.
§ 75-19. Penalties. [Amended 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1192]
§ 75-20. Impoundment. [Amended 5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 952]
All dogs found upon the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks or outside the
home or enclosed portion of the premises of the owner or custodian or
other public places and not adequately and suitably restrained by leash
(licensed or not) as hereinbefore provided shall be immediately impounded
and detained at the Macomb County Animal Shelter, where a charge will be
imposed for their detention. All dogs not claimed by the owner within seven
days after being impounded shall be destroyed or sold to the highest bidder.
Any dog found afflicted with or having been exposed to rabies or any dog
that has attacked any person shall be kept until such time and under such
A. Any violation of this chapter involving a potentially dangerous or
vicious animal shall be a misdemeanor punished by a fine not to exceed
$500, and/or jail time not to exceed 90 days. [Amended 12-27-2011
by Ord. No. 1247]
B. The court may also order the costs associated with the impounding and
caring for the animal to be imposed upon the owner or keeper of the
animal.
C. The court may also order costs associated with destroying the animal to
be imposed upon the owner or keeper of the animal.
D. All fines imposed pursuant to this article shall be paid to the City for the
purposes of defraying the cost of implementation of this chapter.
E. The court may enter other orders necessary to effectuate the intent of
this article.
31.Editor's Note: Former § 75-11, Harboring of barking or vicious dogs prohibited; police to
be notified of bitten dogs, was renumbered § 75-18, 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. 1192.
§ 75-17 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-20
73:142
conditions as shall be required by the Michigan State Department of Health,
and it shall be the duty of the Police Chief or designee of the City to notify
the Macomb County Health Department, which will notify the Michigan
State Department of Health when it has any such dog in its possession.
§ 75-21. Disposition of carcasses.
All carcasses will be disposed of by the Macomb County Animal Shelter.
§ 75-22. Kennel licenses; fee. [Amended 7-22-1986 by Ord. No. 945;
9-28-1993 by Ord. No. 1043; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 7-26-2011
by Ord. No. 1246]
A. All premises where more than three dogs are habitually kept or
harbored shall be deemed to be a kennel, unless the Animal Control
Committee provides an exception to the limitation on the number of
dogs as provided herein. All premises where any number of dogs are
habitually kept or harbored primarily for the purpose of grooming,
boarding or breeding or similar purposes shall be deemed to be a
kennel.
B. Requests for exceptions.
(1) Whenever any person does or desires to possess, harbor, shelter,
keep or have custody of more than three dogs on the same
premises, such person or establishment shall first make written
application to the Animal Control Committee in accordance with
the procedure set forth in this chapter. The applicant shall be a
resident of the premises where the additional animal(s) is proposed
to be kept. In the event the location of the property is a leased
premises, the owner must approve of such license in writing. Proof
of ownership of the subject premises may be required. The Animal
Control Committee shall consist of the City Manager, Chief of
Police, and Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control Committee
shall have the authority to review the application and grant the
applicant's request after consideration of the following criteria:
(a) Whether the animal was one of three or more dogs kept on the
subject premises prior to the effective date of this article;
(b) The total number of animals required to be licensed by this
article which presently are kept or will be kept on the subject
premises;
(c) Convictions, pending violations and complaints made against
the applicant or any resident of the premises where the
animals are proposed to be kept;
(d) The reasons for and circumstances surrounding the request;
and
§ 75-20 AMUSEMENTS § 75-22
73:143
§ 75-23. Kennel license tags; fee. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
The fee paid by any person for a kennel license shall entitle that person to
receive, upon presentation of proper vaccination certificates, a license tag
for each individual dog within the kennel. Such license tag shall be issued
in the same manner as all other dog license tags hereinbefore provided.
For each tag so issued, the sum as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, shall be
charged against the kennel license fee paid until the amount of the kennel
license fee has been used up. After any person has been given credit for
the kennel license fee against the tags so issued so that the entire kennel
license fee has been used up, he or she shall pay the normal rate per dog
as provided in Chapter 133, Fees. No kennel owner or operator shall accept
(e) The risk of disturbing the peace and quiet, quality, tranquility,
safety, and welfare of the neighborhood if the request is
granted.
(2) The Animal Control Committee shall have the authority to contact
residents surrounding the subject premises to receive input
regarding the request. The Animal Control Committee shall have
the authority to impose reasonable conditions upon a license for
additional dogs provided such conditions are designed to
encourage compliance with this article, particularly the provisions
prohibiting any animals from constituting a public nuisance.
C. The granting of any kennel license, other than that which is excepted
above by the Animal Control Committee, shall be done by the Police
Chief, or designee pursuant to the applicable zoning ordinances. A
kennel license may only be issued if permitted within the applicable
zoning district.
D. The denial of a kennel license by the Animal Control Committee shall be
subject to review by the City Council upon appeal being taken to the
City Council. An appeal to City Council shall be filed in writing to the
City Manager within 30 days of the date of notification from the Animal
Control Committee of the denial. Property owners as determined from
the records from the office of the City Assessor and occupants of
property within 300 feet of the property sought to be licensed shall be
provided notice of the date for review by the City Council by mailing
such notice at least seven days prior to the hearing date. The City
Council shall be vested with the authority to review the application
based upon the same criteria as set forth in Subsection B. The City
Council shall have the same authority as provided to the Animal Control
Committee as set forth above.
E. The fee for kennel licenses shall be as provided in Chapter 133, Fees.
Such kennel license shall be secured before May 1 of any year and shall
expire on April 30 of the following year. The fee shall be doubled for a
previously licensed kennel if the license is applied for after June 1.
§ 75-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-23
73:144
any dog for boarding without first requiring proof of vaccination for such
dog from the owner thereof.
§ 75-24. Failure to secure license; exceptions. [Amended 7-22-1986
by Ord. No. 945; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
In addition to any other penalty herein provided for violation of this article,
if the owner of any dog or dogs shall fail to secure any license as required
by this article within 30 days from the date such license is required, there
shall be imposed an additional charge as provided for in Chapter 133, Fees,
for such failure, except in the following cases:
§ 75-25. Yard cleanliness. [Added 5-24-1988 by Ord. No. 970]
Yards and exercise runs shall be kept free of dog droppings and uneaten
food and maintained in a sanitary manner so as not to be a nuisance because
of odor or attraction for flies and vermin.
§ 75-26. Sanitation; responsibility of owner. [Added 5-24-1988 by
Ord. No. 970]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate or to commit any nuisance
on any public thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area, park
or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public property
whatsoever or upon any private property without permission of the owner
of said property unless:
A. No dog shall be required to have a license until it shall have attained
the age of four months. [Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 1148]
B. No dog shall be required to have a license until such dog shall have
been harbored or kept in the City for a period of 30 days.
A. The person who so owns, harbors, keeps or is in charge of such dog
shall immediately remove all droppings deposited by such dog by any
sanitary method. The person shall possess a container of sufficient size
to collect and remove the above-mentioned droppings and exhibit the
container if requested by any official empowered to enforce this article.
B. The droppings removed from the aforementioned areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
such dog in a sanitary method on the property of the person owning,
harboring or in charge of said dog.
§ 75-23 AMUSEMENTS § 75-26
73:145

ARTICLE III
Dogs Running at Large
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. IV of Ch. 75 of the 1984
Code]
§ 75-27. Definitions. [Amended 5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 952]
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AT LARGE — Outside the home or enclosed portion of the premises of
the owner or custodian, unless such dog is under the positive control of a
person of suitable age and discretion and a leash of sufficient strength to
restrain such dog, which leash shall not exceed six feet in length.
OWNER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog.
§ 75-28. Running at large prohibited.
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog to run at large within
the corporate limits of the City of Roseville.
§ 75-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any owner violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 75-27 AMUSEMENTS § 75-29
73:147

ARTICLE IV
Swine
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Article V of Ch. 75 of the
1984 Code]
§ 75-30. Raising swine prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, propagate, harbor or maintain
swine within the City.
§ 75-30 AMUSEMENTS § 75-30
73:149

ARTICLE V
Cats
[Adopted 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 972 (Art. VI of Ch. 75 of the 1985
Code)]
§ 75-31. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings set
forth in this section:
OWNER — Every person, firm or corporation having a right of property in
a cat and anyone who keeps, harbors or has such cat in his or her care and
anyone who permits such cat to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him or her.
§ 75-32. Limitation on number of cats.
§ 75-33. Harboring of meowing cats.
No person shall keep or harbor a cat which, by loud or frequent or habitual
meowing, shall cause a serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to people
passing to and fro upon the streets.
§ 75-34. Yard cleanliness.
Yards and exercise runs shall be kept free of cat droppings and uneaten food
and maintained in a sanitary manner so as not to be a nuisance because of
odor or attraction for flies and vermin.
§ 75-35. Sanitation; responsibility of owner.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any cat shall cause,
suffer or allow such cat to soil, defile, defecate or to commit any nuisance
on any public thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area, park
or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public property
whatsoever or upon any private property without permission of the owner
of said property unless:
A. For the purposes of this section, the words "dwelling unit" shall mean a
building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by one family for
residential purposes and having cooking facilities.
B. There shall not be kept or harbored in a dwelling unit more than a total
of three cats of the age of six months or over.
A. The person who so owns, harbors, keeps or is in charge of such cat shall
immediately remove all droppings deposited by such cat by any sanitary
method. The person shall possess a container of sufficient size to collect
and remove the above-mentioned droppings and exhibit the container if
requested by any official empowered to enforce this article.
§ 75-31 AMUSEMENTS § 75-35
73:151
§ 75-36. Harboring of vicious cats prohibited; police to be notified
of bitten cats.
No person shall own or harbor a fierce or vicious cat or a cat that has been
known to have been bitten by any animal afflicted with rabies. It shall be the
duty of every person owning or harboring a cat which has been attacked or
bitten by another cat, dog or other animal to immediately notify the Police
Department that they have such cat in their possession.
§ 75-37. Kennels; license; fee.
§ 75-38. Kennel license tags; fee. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
The fee paid by any person for a kennel license shall entitle that person to
receive, upon presentation of proper vaccination certificates, a license tag
for each individual cat within the kennel. Such license tag shall be issued
in the same manner as dog license tags. For each tag so issued, the sum as
provided in Chapter 133, Fees, shall be charged against the kennel license
fee paid until the amount of the kennel license fee has been used up. After
any person has been given credit for the kennel license fee against the tags
so issued so that the entire kennel license fee has been used up, he or she
shall pay the normal rate as provided in Chapter 133 per cat. No kennel
owner or operator shall accept any cat for boarding without first requiring
proof of vaccination for such cat from the owner thereof.
B. The droppings removed from the aforementioned areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
such cat in a sanitary method on the property of the person owning,
harboring or in charge of said cat.
A. All premises where more than three cats are habitually kept or
harbored shall be deemed to be a "kennel." All premises where any
number of cats are habitually kept or harbored primarily for the
purpose of grooming, boarding or breeding or similar purposes shall be
deemed to be a "kennel."
B. A fee for a kennel license shall be as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, per
year, provided that an additional per-year fee shall be charged when
such premises contain more than 10 cats but not more than 20 cats, and
an additional amount as provided in Chapter 133 shall be charged for
each cat on the premises in excess of 20 cats. The granting of any such
kennel license shall be done by the Police Chief or designee with due
regard to the quality of the surrounding neighborhood and the
applicable zoning ordinances. The refusal of the Police Chief or
designee to issue any kennel license shall be subject to review of the
City Council upon an appeal being taken to the Council. Such kennel
license shall be secured before May 1 of any year and shall expire on
April 30 of the following year. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
§ 75-35 ROSEVILLE CODE § 75-39
73:152
§ 75-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Every person who shall violate any provision of this article shall punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 75-39 AMUSEMENTS § 75-39
73:153
Chapter 79
APPLICATIONS FOR APPOINTMENTS
§ 79-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — That person, council, body, commission,
employee, or official, except the City Clerk, with the authority to appoint
under the Charter of the City of Roseville, the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Roseville, state statute, or other rule or regulation.
§ 79-2. Application required.
Unless the person proposed to fill the position for appointment is expressly
mandated under statute, ordinance, or other regulation, any person
desiring to be appointed by the Mayor, City Council, City Manager, or other
appointing authority to any City commission, citizens advisory committee,
City board or City authority shall file a written application with the City
Manager on a form to be furnished by the City Manager. The applicant shall
tender with the application the following information:
§ 79-3. Investigation; approval of application.
A. Name, complete residence address and residence telephone number.
B. Two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the
applicant.
C. Written proof of age.
D. Current employer, position, address, telephone number, and name of
direct supervisor.
E. General personal history as would bear upon the character or
reputation of the applicant, including previous public service
experience, special skills or trades, or other qualifications unique to the
position being applied for.
F. Written proof of any license, certification, or other expertise, if
required, pursuant to any other ordinance of the City of Roseville.
G. All criminal convictions, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which
convicted and the offense for which convicted and the circumstances
thereof.
H. A waiver and release to allow the City of Roseville Police Department to
conduct a criminal history background check, including the use of the
Law Enforcement Information Network (LEIN).
§ 75-39 ROSEVILLE CODE § 79-3
79:154
§ 79-4. Qualifications of applicant.
The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of every
applicant shall be considered by the appointing authority. The appointing
authority shall determine that:
Chapter 82
BICYCLES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Skateboarding and roller-skating — See Ch.
267.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 340.
A. Upon receipt of an application as provided herein, the City Manager
shall furnish copies of same to the appointing authority. The Chief of
Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's moral
character, including a criminal background check.
B. The City Treasurer shall determine whether the applicant is in default
to the City for any personal or real property taxes, water and sewer
charges, or any other outstanding debts due and owing to the City at
the time of application.
A. The applicant is of good moral character and reputation, and in making
such determination, the following shall be considered:
(1) Criminal history.
(2) General personal history.
(3) References.
(4) Any other qualifications necessary for appointment as may
otherwise be required under any other ordinances of the City of
Roseville.
B. The applicant shall not be in default in the payment of personal or real
property taxes, water and sewer bills, or other charges past due to the
City, except for current taxes, bills, or other charges due and owing.
§ 79-3 BICYCLES § 82-1
82:155
§ 82-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1151]
As used in this chapter, the following terms have their meanings set forth in
this section:
BICYCLE — A device propelled by human power with two tandem wheels
or three wheels not tandem, solid or pneumatic tires, and having a steering
bar or wheel.
PARKING STRUCTURE — Any public structure or parking lot designed for
the parking of motor vehicles.
PLAZA — That open space area between the main entrance to a building
and the street.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway designed or ordinarily used for
pedestrian travel.
§ 82-2. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any person who resides in the city to operate or use
a bicycle, propelled wholly or in part by muscular power, upon any of the
streets, alleys or public highways of the city, the ownership of which has not
been registered with the Police Department of the city.
§ 82-3. Police Department to register ownership.
The Police Department is hereby directed to register the ownership of
bicycles, which registration, when made, shall allow the use of the same,
after securing a registration card and license as hereafter provided, upon
all of the streets, alleys and public highways in the city.
§ 82-4. Registration cards and license plates.
Applicants for registration shall apply to the Police Department for issuance
of registration cards and license plates for their respective bicycles. The
registration card and license shall be furnished by the city without any
charge, other than that provided for as a registration fee in § 82-7 hereof,
and shall have numbers stamped thereon in numerical order beginning with
number one and shall show the year in which same were issued. Such
license shall expire upon the transfer of ownership of each bicycle. The
registration cards shall be executed in duplicate, one copy to be given to the
registrant and one copy to be retained by the Police Department as a part
of its records. The said registration cards shall state the date of issuance,
the name and address of the registrant, the date of purchase of the bicycle,
the name and address of the person from whom purchased and the name
and serial number of the bicycle, if any. It shall be the duty of the owner
to attach said license to said bicycle in accordance with directions of the
Police Department, and the license shall remain permanently attached to
the bicycle.
§ 82-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 82-5
82:156
§ 82-5. Report of sale or transfer required.
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any
bicycle registered as herein provided to report such sale or transfer to the
Police Department, together with the name and address of the person to
whom said bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made
within seven days from the date of said sale or transfer. It shall also be
the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle, provided that said
bicycle is to be used within the city, to register his or her ownership thereof,
as herein provided, within seven days after such sale or transfer.
§ 82-6. Removal or alteration of registration number.
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer or any other person willfully
or maliciously to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any
bicycle frame registration pursuant to this chapter. It shall be unlawful
for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license, seal or
registration card during the time in which such license, seal or registration
card is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the Police Department from stamping numbers on the frames of
bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which said number
is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.
§ 82-7. Registration and transfer fee; disposition of fees.
The registration and transfer fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be
as provided for in Chapter 133, Fees, and shall be paid to the Police
Department at the time of registration. All fees collected under this chapter
shall periodically be paid by the Police Department to the City Treasurer, to
be credited to the general fund of the city.
§ 82-8. Rentals.
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein and
such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in
this chapter.
§ 82-9. Report of purchase and sale of secondhand bicycles.
Each person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the Chief of the Police
Department of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the
name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a
description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof and
the number of the license plate, if any, found thereon.
§ 82-10. Applicability of traffic laws.
Each person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
§ 82-5 BICYCLES § 82-10
82:157
by the laws of this state declaring rules of the city applicable to the driver
of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter pertaining to
bicycles and except as to those provisions of laws and regulations which, by
their nature, can have no application.
§ 82-11. Obedience to traffic control devices.
§ 82-12. Riding on seat required; number of riders.
§ 82-13. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
§ 82-14. Operation at reasonable speed.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
§ 82-15. Emerging from alley or driveway.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
A. Each person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts
from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person
shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
A. No person propelling a bicycle shall ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
A. Each person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction.
B. No person riding a bicycle upon a street or highway shall ride more
than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
C. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
street or highway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use
the street or highway.
§ 82-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 82-16
82:158
§ 82-16. Attachment to vehicles prohibited.
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any
vehicle upon a roadway.
§ 82-17. Carrying of articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
§ 82-18. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
parallel to the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle
or against a building and in such manner as to afford the least obstruction
to pedestrian traffic, except that no person shall park any bicycle against a
glass window.
§ 82-19. Riding on sidewalks.
§ 82-20. Locations where prohibited. [Added 6-26-2001 by Ord. No.
115132]
A. The Chief of the Police Department is authorized to erect signs on any
sidewalk, street or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon
by any person, and when such signs are in place, no person shall
disobey the same.
B. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
A. The City Council may, by resolution, designate locations and times in
which bicycles may not be operated on sidewalks or other public
property. The restrictions contained in any such resolution shall be
posted on signs in the area designated by the resolution. No person
shall operate a bicycle contrary to the terms of the resolution.
B. Except for travel directly to and from the following locations or within
designated areas, bicycling is expressly prohibited at the following cityowned
properties:
(1) City Hall Plaza.
(2) Library Plaza.
(3) Parks and Recreation Plaza.
(4) 39th District Court and Police Department Plaza.
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 82-20 and
82-21 as §§ 82-21 and 82-22, respectively.
§ 82-16 BICYCLES § 82-20
82:159
§ 82-21. Required equipment.
§ 82-22. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 88
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Buildings and
Inspection — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13.
(5) Roseville Eastland Senior Building premises.
(6) Roseville Lawn Street Housing Development premises.
(7) All Fire Department station plazas.
C. Bicycling shall be prohibited on any surface that deviates from the
adjacent sidewalk elevation, including but not limited to ramps, steps,
retention walls, handrails, planters, curb or gutter edges, barriers and
barricades, benches and picnic tables and monument or sculpture
surfaces located on all property owned or operated by the city.
A. Each bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least
100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any
person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
C. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall punished as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
B. Any minor violating any provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by
the Family Division of the Circuit Court.33
33.Editor's Note: See MSA § 27-3178 (598.1) et seq.; MCL § 712A. 1 et. seq.
§ 82-20 ROSEVILLE CODE § 82-22
88:160
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 91.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Fences — See Ch. 134.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 221.
Signs — See Ch. 264.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 88-1. Adoption of Building Code by reference. [Amended
10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1184]
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as the "Michigan Building Code, 2000
Edition," as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code for
the City of Roseville, State of Michigan, for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
supplements, amendments, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said Michigan Building Code, 2000 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 88-3 of this chapter.
§ 88-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1050 of the City of Roseville, entitled "Building
Construction," and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 88-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Building Code
of the City of Roseville," hereinafter referred to as "this code."
B. Section 112.3.1, Fee Schedule, is amended to read as follows:
112.3.1 Fee Schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building
permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the fee
schedule established by resolution of the Roseville City Council.
C. Section 116.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
§ 82-22 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 88-3
88:161
§ 88-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 88-3 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 88-5. Floods. [Added 6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1201; amended
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 1205]
116.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of any approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of
this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
a due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Section 117.2, Unlawful continuance, is amended to read as follows:
117.2 Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not
less than $100 but not more than $500.
E. Chapter 11, Accessibility: delete this chapter.
F. Chapter 13, Energy Conservation: delete this chapter.
G. Section 3102, Signs: delete this section.
H. Section 3408.2, Applicability, is amended to read as follows:
3408.2 Applicability: Structures existing prior to June 29, 1996, in
which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of
occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section
or the provisions of Sections 3402.0 through 3407.0.
A. Agency designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction
code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of
1972, as amended, the Building Official of the City of Roseville is hereby
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of
the City of Roseville under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, State of Michigan. The City of Roseville assumes
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout its corporate limits.
§ 88-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 88-5
88:162
Chapter 91
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
CHARTER REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 7, Sec.
7.11.
Public utility services — See Ch. 14.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
§ 91-1. Definitions;word usage.
§ 91-2. Permit required.
No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street
or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official.
B. Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the state
construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the
Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building
Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of
Roseville.
C. Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
entitled Macomb County, Michigan (all jurisdictions), dated September
29, 2006, and the Flood Insurance Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of
26099C0338G, 0339G, 0341G, 0342G, 0343G, 0344G, 0402G, and
0406G are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of Section
1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
BUILDING — A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter
or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for
residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial,
institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. A
structure of less than 120 square feet and 15 feet in height shall not fall
within this definition.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Official of the city.
B. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 88-5 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 91-3
91:163
§ 91-3. Application; fee; deposit.
A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application for
such permit with the Building Official.
A. Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by
the Building Official, and shall be filed in the office of the Building
Official.
B. Contents. The application shall set forth:
(1) A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street
number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and
conditions of exterior and interior.
(2) A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be
moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the city.
(3) A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building
be moved, giving lot, block and tract number, if located in the city.
(4) The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved.
(5) The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved.
(6) Proposed moving date and hours.
(7) Any additional information which the Building Official shall find
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should issue.
C. Accompanying papers.
(1) Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with
the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from
which it is to be removed are free of any entanglements and that all
taxes and any city charges against the same are paid in full.
(2) Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than
the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill
of sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence, that the
applicant is entitled to move the building.
(3) License. A license from the Roseville City Clerk to engage in the
business of house moving shall be filed with the application.
D. Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee as provided
for in Chapter 133, Fees.
E. Deposit to ensure completion. A deposit of $500 cash shall be required
to ensure that the building and premises will be completed according to
the plans and specifications set forth by the Building Codes and
requirements and approved for a certificate of occupancy by the
Building Official within six months from the date of issuance of the
§ 91-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 91-3
91:164
§ 91-4. Deposit for city's expenses.
Upon receipt of an application, it shall be the duty of the Building Official
to procure from the Director of Public Works an estimate of the expenses,
if any, that will be incurred in removing and replacing any city property, the
removal and replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving
of the building through the city, together with the costs and materials
necessary to be used in making such removal and replacements. Prior to
issuance of the permit, the Building Official shall require of the applicant
a deposit of a sum of money equal to twice the amount of the estimated
expense.
§ 91-5. Indemnity against damage; bond; insurance.
moving permit. The Building Official shall have the power to extend
this six-month provision, upon good cause shown, for a period not to
exceed two months. In the event that such building and premises are
not finished, the Building Official shall have the right to finish the
building or cause the building to be finished, and any cost incidental
thereto shall be deducted from the $500; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to buildings under 450 square feet.
A. An application hereunder shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in the
sum of $5,000 as an indemnity for any damage which the city may
sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street, alley,
sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the city, which may be
caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along or
across any street in the city, and to indemnify the city against any claim
of damages to persons or private property and to satisfy any claims by
private individuals arising out of, caused by or incidental to the moving
of any building over, along or across any street in the city.
B. Bond in lieu of deposit. Any person filing an application hereunder may,
in lieu of the general cash deposit required above, file with the Building
Official a bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by a
bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the
amount of $10,000 conditioned upon the assurance that this chapter
and other applicable ordinances and laws will be complied with. Such
bond shall run to the city for the use and benefit of any person intended
to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment of any
damage to public or private property and the payment for any damages
or losses resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance
or negligence in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon
which the permit applied for is granted.
C. Insurance policy in lieu of deposit. Any person filing an application
hereunder may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required above, file
with the Building Official a liability insurance policy, issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state and approved
§ 91-3 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 91-5
91:165
§ 91-6. Duties of Building Official.
as to form by the City Attorney, in the same amount and providing the
same protection as would be required for a bond hereunder.
A. Inspection. The Building Official shall inspect the building and the
applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance
of a permit are met and shall have the power to require that the
building be reroofed, refinished or repainted on the outside.
B. Standards for issuance. The Building Official shall refuse to issue a
permit if he or she finds that:
(1) An application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has
not been compiled with.
(2) The building is too large to move without endangering persons or
property in the city.
(3) The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without
endangering persons and property in the city.
(4) The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for
which moved, if the removal location is in the city.
(5) The applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and property
would be endangered by its use.
(6) The building does not conform with the prevailing architectural
standards of the neighborhood, but such finding may be reviewed
and revised by the City Council.
(7) The Zoning Ordinance34 or other ordinances would be violated by
the building in its new location.
(8) For any other reason persons or property in the city would be
endangered by the moving of the building.
C. Fees and deposits.
(1) Deposit. The Building Official shall deposit all fees and deposits and
all bonds or insurance policies with the City Treasurer.
(2) Return upon nonissuance. Upon refusal to issue a permit, the
Building Official shall return to the applicant all deposits, bonds
and insurance policies. Permit fees filed with the application shall
not be returned.
(3) Return upon allowance for expense. After the building has been
removed, the Building Official shall furnish the applicant with a
written statement of all expenses incurred in removing and
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370 Zoning.
§ 91-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 91-6
91:166
§ 91-7. Duties of permittee.
Every permittee under this chapter shall:
replacing all property belonging to the city and of all material
used in the making of the removal and replacement, together with
a statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property
belong to the city; provided, however, that if any wires, poles,
lamps or other property is not located in conformity with governing
ordinances, the permittee shall not be liable for the cost of
removing the same. The Building Official shall authorize the return
to the applicant of all deposits after the City Treasurer deducts the
sum sufficient to pay for all of the costs and expenses and for all
the damage done to property of the city by reason of the removal
of the building. Permit fees deposited with the application shall not
be returned.
D. Designate streets for removal. The Building Official shall procure from
the Department of Public Works a list of designated streets over which
the building may be moved. The Building Official shall have the list
approved by the Chief of Police and shall reproduce the list upon the
permit in writing. In making their determinations, the Department of
Public Works and the Chief of Police shall act to assure maximum safety
to persons and property in the city and to minimize congestion and
traffic hazards on public streets.
A. Use designated streets: move a building only over streets designated
for such use in the written permit.
B. Notify of revised moving time: notify the Building Official in writing of a
desired change in moving date and hour as proposed in the application.
C. Notify of damage: notify the Building Official in writing of any and all
damage or injury that has occurred.
D. Display lights: cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on
every side of the building, while standing on a street, in such manner as
to warn the public of the obstruction and shall, at all times, erect and
maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the
public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building.
E. Street occupancy period: remove the building from the city streets after
24 hours of such occupancy unless an extension is granted by the
Building Official.
F. Comply with governing law: comply with the Building Code, the fire
zone, the Zoning Ordinance35 and all other applicable ordinances and
laws upon relocating the building in the city.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Building Construction, and Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 91-6 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 91-7
91:167
§ 91-8. Enforcement; liability for expenses; noncompliance.
§ 91-9. Permit required if origin and destination not in city; fee.
G. Pay expense of officer: pay the expense of a traffic officer ordered by the
Building Official to accompany the movement of the building to protect
the public from injury.
H. Clear old premises: remove all rubbish and materials and fill all
excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the
premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition.
I. Remove service connection: see that the sewer line is plugged with a
concrete stopper, the water shut off and the meter returned to the city
office. The permittee shall notify the gas and electric service companies
to remove their services.
J. Notice to utilities: notify all telegraph, telephone, electric light and
power companies involved of the time and proposed route of the move
at least one week prior to the move and make the necessary
arrangements with such utilities so that any electric wires, streetlamps
or poles may be moved or adjusted to allow the building to pass by or
under any such wires, streetlights or poles free and unobstructed.
A. Enforcing officers. The Building Official, the Police Department and the
Department of Public Works shall enforce and carry out the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Permittee liable for expense above deposit. The permittee shall be
liable for any expense, damages or costs in excess of deposited amounts
or securities, and the City Attorney shall prosecute an action against
the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of
such excessive amounts.
C. Original premises left unsafe. The city shall proceed to do the work
necessary to leave the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition
where the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter within 48 hours after removing the structure, and the cost
thereof shall be charged against the general deposit.
A. Whenever a person desires to move any structure over, along or across
highways, streets and alleys in the city and neither the point of origin
nor destination of the move is in the city, the following sections of this
chapter shall be complied with:
(1) Section 91-2.
(2) Section 91-3A and B(5), (6) and (7).
(3) Section 91-3C(2).
(4) Section 91-4.
§ 91-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 91-9
91:168
§ 91-10. Violations and penalties.37
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 94
BURNING, OPEN
CHARTER REFERENCES
Fire Department - See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention - See Ch. 142. Open burning of junk — See Ch. 179, § 179-8.
§ 94-1. Open burning prohibited; exceptions.
(5) Section 91-5B and C.
(6) Section 91-6B(1) through (8), inclusive.
(7) Section 91-6D.
(8) Section 91-7A, B, C, D, E, F, G and J.
(9) Section 91-8A and B.
B. The applicant shall pay the sum as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, for a
permit issued pursuant to this section.36
A. All open burning, such as burning weeds, brush, garbage, etc., shall be
prohibited, except that burning under special conditions may be
permitted, provided that such operations do not create a nuisance or
hazard to health and that consideration shall be given to local weather
conditions and related factors so as to avoid causing any nuisance or
hazard to health, as follows: [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(1) Campfires and fires used for outdoor cooking and other
recreational purposes or ceremonial occasions may be allowed.
B. Any officer of the Fire Department or the Police Department, when
made aware of any violation or complaint on burning, may order the
extinguishment of any such fire or may proceed to have it extinguished
by the Fire Department. [Amended 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1190]
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
37.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 91-9 BURNING, OPEN § 94-1
94:169
§ 94-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125; 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1190]
Any violation of § 94-1 shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $500 or 93 days
imprisonment, or both.
Chapter 96
CARNIVALS
CHARTER REFERENCES
General powers — See Ch. 3, Sec. 3.1.
City Manager — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7. 1.
Police Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9.
Fire Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10.
Department of Buildings and
Inspection — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 73.
Electrical equipment for carnivals — See Ch.
126, § 126-33.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
§ 96-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Carnival Ordinance of the City
of Roseville" and will be referred to herein as "this chapter."
C. Any person burning shall be responsible for all damages caused by the
fire so originated by him, her or them and shall be liable to the City for
all costs which may be incurred in calling the Fire Department to
extinguish such fire. [Amended 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1190]
D. Any person openly burning under this chapter must be a minimum of 18
years old and shall be in attendance at the fire or burning at all times.
[Added 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1190]
E. All open burning shall require a continuous water source, for example,
a garden hose, to be located within five feet of the burning site,
fireplace, pit, chiminea or other apparatus in which the fire is
contained. [Added 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1190]
F. Any fire pit, chiminea, barrel, fireplace, or other apparatus or structure
used to burn shall not be in excess of three feet in diameter. [Added
8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1190]
§ 94-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 96-2
94:170
§ 96-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms and words are defined as follows:
CARNIVAL — Refers to circuses as well and shall mean a traveling
enterprise consisting of such amusements as rides, games of skill,
sideshows and devices or other temporary structures and exhibitions, in any
number or combination, designed to serve a special purpose or perform a
special function.
DAILY INSPECTION LOG — The form furnished by the Michigan
Department of Labor to be filled out and used by the owner/operator as a
checklist for the daily inspection of each ride.
GAME OF SKILL — Any amusement whereby a patron is given the
opportunity to obtain a prize, reward or some object of value upon the
performance of some physical act in a specified manner.
OPERATOR or OWNER — A person who owns or controls or who has
the duty to control the operation of a carnival. This includes individuals,
licensees, managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships, corporations,
societies and organizations.
RIDE — A device which carries or conveys passengers along, around or over
a fixed or restricted route or course for the purpose of giving its passengers
amusement, pleasure, thrills or excitement.
SIDESHOW — A subsidiary exhibition accompanying a carnival in which
patrons are entertained or amused by viewing anomalies of nature or
physical objects from a perspective which tends to make the object viewed
or the viewer appear other than what it is, acts or demonstrations requiring
peculiar expertise or training, performances by persons and/or animals
displaying acrobatic or gymnastic skills or any other form of entertainment
which a reasonably informed individual of common experience would refer
to as a "sideshow."
SPONSOR — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, religious
or fraternal organization or society or any other entity which undertakes
to promote a carnival and provide the premises for the location, use and
occupancy of any carnival within the municipal limits of the City of
Roseville.
§ 96-3. Games of luck or chance not permitted.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any games, contest or endeavor played for luck or chance and
involving little or no skill, in which participants may obtain a prize, reward
or some object of value.38
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 73, Amusements, Art. II, Amusement Devices, § 73-15.
§ 96-2 BURNING, OPEN § 96-4
94:171
§ 96-4. Certain carnivals prohibited.
A carnival not expressly permitted by this chapter is prohibited.
§ 96-5. Approval required; waiver of provisions. [Amended
5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 1284]
Any sponsor of a carnival shall obtain the approval of the Roseville City
Council to promote a carnival to be held within the municipal limits of the
City of Roseville. Some or all of the provisions of this chapter may be waived
by Roseville City Council in the event the City of Roseville is a sponsor and/
or operator of a carnival. In the event the City of Roseville is a sponsor,
the provisions related to an operator may be required by the Roseville City
Council.
§ 96-6. Submission of notice of intent; contents.
The sponsor of any carnival shall submit in writing to the Roseville City
Manager a notice of intent to promote a carnival not less than 60 days
before the proposed opening date of the carnival. The notice of intent
shall include the proposed dates, the location and the name of the owner/
operator of said carnival.
§ 96-7. Action by City Manager.
The Roseville City Manager, upon receipt of the notice of intent, shall
forthwith:
§ 96-8. Approval or disapproval by City Council.
The Roseville City Council shall approve or disapprove the sponsor's dates,
location and the owner/operator of said carnival, together with such
conditions as may be required; provided, however, that upon the approval
of the sponsor's dates, location and owner/operator of the carnival, the said
owner/ operator shall not conduct or operate said carnival without first
obtaining a license to operate as hereinafter provided for in this chapter.
§ 96-9. License required.
The owner/operator of a sponsor's approved carnival shall obtain a license
to operate from the City of Roseville Police Department, not less than
30 days prior to the opening date of said carnival. Applications for such
license to operate shall be made to the Roseville Police Department for that
A. Cause the Roseville Police Department to prepare a report for the
Roseville City Council recommending the approval or disapproval of the
sponsor's proposed dates, location and owner/operator of the carnival.
B. Place the sponsor's notice of intent with the Police Department's report
on the agenda for the regularly scheduled meeting of the Roseville City
Council for action by the Council.
§ 96-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 96-9
94:172
purpose, and said applications must be approved by the Roseville Police
Department before any license to operate will be issued.
§ 96-10. Application information.
The application for such license to operate shall contain the following
information:
§ 96-11. Investigation and inspections; issuance of license.
A. The location, opening and closing dates and hours of operation of the
carnival.
B. A list of all employees showing their particular job or jobs and what the
job entails.
C. Proof of adequate insurance, in force, in accordance with Act 225,
Public Acts of 1966 [MSA § 18.484(1) et seq; MCL § 408.651 et seq.].
[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
D. A list of persons in authority who can be reached at any time they are
needed and where they can be reached, including the name, location
and telephone number of the home office of the owner/operator, the
unit manager's name, address and telephone number and the telephone
number at the carnival site.
E. A drawing of the physical layout of the carnival, showing entrances,
exits, quarters for animals, adequate parking areas clearly marked and
the location of public sanitary facilities.
F. A list of all rides and their state inspection numbers, games of skill,
sideshows and devices or other temporary structures designed to serve
a special purpose or perform a special function, including any and all
booths and concessions dispensing food and/or beverages.
G. The name of the service that will provide the number of uniformed
guards as required by § 96-12C of this chapter.
A. The application for a license to operate shall be made out in triplicate,
one copy being referred to the Police Department, the second copy
being referred to the Fire Department and the third copy being referred
to the Department of Buildings and Inspection.
B. The Police Department shall investigate the location, use and
occupancy of said proposed carnival and the moral character of the
applicant and shall ascertain that the carnival will not disturb the public
peace and tranquillity and will not create undue traffic hazard or
congestion and shall either approve or disapprove the application,
stating the reasons for the denial of any application.
C. The Fire Department shall inspect the location, ascertain if the carnival
is free from fire hazards and either approve or disapprove the
application, stating the reasons for the denial of any application.
§ 96-9 BURNING, OPEN § 96-11
94:173
§ 96-12. Restrictions on issuance of license and operation.
D. The Department of Buildings and Inspection shall inspect:
(1) All wiring and ascertain that all electrical work was constructed
under the supervision of a journeyman electrician licensed by the
State of Michigan or reciprocal area.
(2) All temporary structures and/or booths or concessions dispensing
food and/or beverages.
(3) The maintenance and quarters of animals.
(4) Sanitary toilet facilities as provided in § 96-12 and determine if
same complies with the Electrical, Building and Health Codes and
zoning ordinances of the City of Roseville39 and shall either approve
or disapprove the application, stating the reasons for the denial of
any application.
E. The Roseville Police Department shall not issue the license to operate
until written approval is obtained from these departments and all
permit fees, inspection fees and bonds are paid or deposited as
required in this chapter.
A. No license to operate shall be issued to any owner/operator unless he or
she shall be over 18 years of age.
B. No license to operate shall be issued to any owner/operator or sponsor
who intends to sell intoxicating liquor, beer or wine.
C. No license to operate shall be issued to any owner/applicant unless the
owner/applicant supplies a minimum of two uniformed security guards
and as many more uniformed security guards as may be deemed
necessary by the Roseville Chief of Police or his or her representative
based on the location, number of rides, sideshows, number of people
attending and traffic and surface conditions for the proposed carnival.
The uniformed security guards shall be licensed under the provisions of
the Michigan Public Acts of 1968, No. 330 [MSA § 18.185(1) et seq;
MCL § 338.1051 et seq.]. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
D. No license to operate shall be issued to any applicant who has violated
or is associated with any carnival which has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter.
E. No license to operate shall be issued to any owner/operator who
operates a carnival which fails to satisfy all requirements of Act 225,
Public Acts of 1966, and the administrative and operational procedures
promulgated by the State of Michigan for implementation of said Act
225 [MSA § 18.484(1) et seq; MCL § 408.651 et seq.]. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 126. Electrical Standards, Ch. 88. Building Construction, and Ch.
370. Zoning.
§ 96-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 96-12
94:174
§ 96-13. Bond required; waiver by Council. [Amended 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 1125]
Before any license shall be granted, there shall be deposited by the
applicant for such license with the Roseville Police Department a cash or
surety bond in the amount of $5,000, conditioned that no damage will be
done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property and that no dirt,
litter or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon
any private property by such owner/operator. The requirements of this bond
may be waived upon approval of the City Council.
§ 96-14. License fees.
The license fee for any carnival, food stand and/or sideshow shall be as
required in Chapter 133, Fees, of the Code of the City of Roseville. Any
license may be issued without fee for any charitable, religious, educational,
fraternal or public organization not conducted for private profit, upon the
approval of City Council.
F. All electrical construction and connecting of electrical conductors shall
be supervised at all times by a journeyman electrician licensed by the
State of Michigan or reciprocal area.40
G. Licenses to operate may be granted to any one owner/operator for a
period not to exceed eleven days consecutively and may be renewable
for not more than seven days.
H. No carnivals shall be operated except between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m. daily.
I. No carnivals shall be operated in violation of any existing zoning
restrictions.41
J. No ride, tent, booth or concession shall be placed or located within five
feet from any sidewalk or traffic right-of-way.
K. No carnival shall be permitted to operate unless it provides and
maintains a minimum of two male and two female sanitary toilet
facilities.
L. No more than one carnival will be licensed to operate within the City of
Roseville at any one time.
M. No owner/operator of a carnival shall be permitted to operate unless it
provides an affidavit stating that all rides will be examined daily and the
name of the examiner and his or her qualifications and stating that the
daily inspection logs will be available for review at any time by the City
Building Official, the Roseville Chief of Police or their representatives.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 126, Electrical Standards.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 96-12 BURNING, OPEN § 96-15
94:175
§ 96-15. Inspection fee. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Before any license shall be issued covering carnivals regulated by this
chapter, an inspection fee shall be paid according to Chapter 133, Fees.
§ 96-16. Application for variance.
Application by any sponsor and/or owner/operator for any variance of any
provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be made to the Roseville
City Council in the form of a written application delivered to the City Clerk
for permission to operate any carnival as set forth in said application. The
applicant shall present a statement and adequate evidence showing that:
§ 96-17. Granting of variance.
In all cases where the Roseville City Council shall grant a variance of any
provisions or requirements of this chapter, the Roseville City Council shall
find that the granting of the variance under such conditions as the Roseville
City Council may deem necessary or desirable to apply thereto will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and that it will
not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public
welfare.
§ 96-18. Revocation of license.
The Roseville Chief of Police or his or her representative may revoke any
license already issued upon proof submitted of the violation by any sponsor
or owner/operator of any ordinance of the City of Roseville regulating,
controlling or in any way relating to the use or operation of a carnival, as
defined in this chapter, which evidences a flagrant disregard for the safety
or welfare of either the patrons, employees or persons residing or doing
business nearby.
§ 96-19. Cessation of operation.
The Roseville Chief of Police or his or her representative shall close down
the operation of any carnival upon the revocation of the owner/operator's
license to operate the carnival.
A. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the proposed use referred to in the application, which
circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to any proposed
carnival use.
B. The granting of such application will not, under circumstances of the
particular case, materially affect adversely the health, safety or welfare
of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood or attending
any carnival and will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the
immediate neighborhood or the City at large.
§ 96-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 96-20
94:176
§ 96-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punished by the imposition of a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
Chapter 98
CAR WASHES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 7, Sec.
7.11.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 354.
§ 96-20 CAR WASHES § 96-20
98:177

ARTICLE I
Accumulation of Water
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No 895 as Art. I at Ch. 98 of the 1984
Code]
§ 98-1. Removal of water required.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person owning or operating any
auto wash within the city to remove from, and keep free of, the sidewalks
and streets immediately adjacent to their premises any accumulation of
water emanating from the auto wash or from tracking of water from
customers cars which, by its freezing, renders the use of sidewalks or
streets unsafe or dangerous to the public health or safety.
§ 98-2. Removal prior to formation of ice required.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person owning or operating any
auto wash within the city to remove from, and keep free of, the sidewalks
and streets immediately adjacent to their premises any accumulation of
water emanating from the auto wash or from tracking of water from
customers cars, prior to its forming into an icy condition.
§ 98-3. Failure to remove water; action by city.
In the event that the accumulation of water is not removed by the
responsible party prior to its forming into an icy condition, or any icy
conditions eliminated, then the Department of Public Works is hereby
authorized to remove such ice or to cover the same with salt or sand.
§ 98-4. Costs to city to be assessed against property.
In the event that the Department of Public Works clears the sidewalk or
street of ice or covers the same with salt or sand, the Director of Public
Works shall, within 10 days, report the action taken and the costs thereof
to the City Council, and the City Council shall take the necessary steps to
assess such costs against such property as a special assessment and provide
a manner for collection of the same as other special assessments against
property are assessed and collected.42
§ 98-5. Violations and penalties.43
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
42.Editor's Note: Former § 98-5, Notice to owners and operators, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 98-1 CAR WASHES § 98-5
98:179
Chapter 103
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 219.
Christmas lights — See Ch. 264, § 264-9C.
§ 103-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHRISTMAS SEASON — The period between November 1 and December
31 in any year.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
CHRISTMAS TREE — A natural, previously living coniferous tree not
exceeding 12 feet in height. Excluded from the definition of "Christmas
tree" shall be wreaths, grave blankets, roping or any other material.
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES LOT — Any location within the city zoned for
either commercial or industrial activity with adequate space and adequate
parking to conduct Christmas tree sales as determined by the Director of
Buildings and Inspection.
§ 103-2. Compliance required.
No person or entity shall maintain, operate or establish a Christmas tree
sales lot within the city, except as strictly provided herein.
§ 103-3. License required; issuance; fee; security deposit.
Each person or entity prior to establishing a Christmas tree sales lot shall
make application to the Roseville Police Department upon a form approved
by the Chief of Police for a license to operate said lot, which license shall be
valid for one particular Christmas season of that particular year.
A. Where an owner of an existing business which principally occupies a
permanent structure desires to carry on sales adjacent to such
permanent structure, the Police Department shall issue such license
without the payment of any fee on the filing with the Police Department
a certificate by the applicant stating that the business will be carried on
as part of the existing business and that debris, if any, resulting from
any sales will be fully disposed of on or before January 1 of the following
year. If such a business sells merchandise of an identical kind and
§ 98-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 103-3
103:180
§ 103-4. Previous existing Christmas tree sales lots.
Christmas tree sales lots existing under the predecessor ordinance44 and
consecutively licensed each season for five or more years shall be exempt
from the bond requirements of this chapter and zoning limitations. Such
existing lots shall be subject to the remaining provisions of this chapter,
including revisions defining the allowable material for sale, providing
adequate space and parking and promptly eliminating debris.
§ 103-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. Any person or any
entity employing or having ownership by such person who has a conviction
from the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be ineligible for a
period of five years from obtaining a license or working at a Christmas tree
sales lot.
Chapter 106
COLLECTION BOXES
character or substantially similar kind and character to the
merchandise sold by the established merchant as part of its ongoing
adjacent business, representing at least 10% of the sale revenues
within the preceding 12 months, such business may sell Christmas
trees, wreaths, grave blankets and roping. In the event the existing
business is not selling an identical kind and character or substantial
kind and character type of merchandise, such business shall be limited
to selling only Christmas trees if appropriately licensed. [Amended
8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 1204]
B. In the event that the applicant is not the owner of the business
principally occupying an adjacent structure to the proposed location for
Christmas tree sales, such applicant shall pay to the Roseville Police
Department a sum as provided for in Chapter 133, Fees, as the license
fee and shall deposit with said Department the sum as provided in
Chapter 133, Fees, cash or certified check, as a security deposit
guaranteeing the disposal of any debris in the operation of said lot. In
the event that the debris is not disposed of and the lot cleared of
Christmas trees and other associated equipment, the deposit shall be
forfeited, and the city may take whatever action is necessary to remove
the debris and dispose of debris and equipment remaining. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
44.Editor's Note: The predecessor ordinance was Ord. No. 644, adopted 11-25-1969, which
ordinance was repealed with the enactment of this chapter under Ord. No. 1109.
§ 103-3 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 106-1
103:181
§ 106-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Roseville Collection Boxes
Ordinance."
§ 106-2. Intent and definitions.
§ 106-3. Collection box permit.
No later than 90 days from the effective date of this chapter, no person
shall place, operate, maintain or allow any collection box(es) on any real
property without first obtaining an annual permit issued by the City to
locate a collection box(es).
§ 106-4. Permit application.
A. The Collection Boxes chapter is intended to be a regulatory ordinance
in the public's health, safety and welfare for the protection of all
citizens who use collection boxes. The intent of this Collection Boxes
Chapter is to impose restrictions and conditions on all collection boxes
in the City so that they are, and remain, clean, safe and do not create
hazards to pedestrians and to vehicular traffic, or unsightly or
unsanitary conditions. This chapter is passed under the City's
regulatory authority pursuant to state law and the Michigan
Constitution.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLECTION BOX(ES) — Any metal container, receptacle, bin, or
similar device that is located on any parcel or lot of record within the
City and that is used for soliciting and collection, the receipt of clothing,
household items, or other salvageable personal property. This item does
not include recycle bins for the collection of recyclable material, any
rubbish or garbage receptacle or any collection box located within an
enclosed building.
OPERATOR — A person who owns, operates or otherwise is in control of
collection boxes to solicit collections of salvageable personal property.
PERMITTEE — A person over 18 years of age or an entity who is issued
a permit authorizing placement of collection box(es) on real property.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person who is an owner of real property
where the collection box(es) are located.
REAL PROPERTY, PROPERTY or LAND — A lot of record located in the
City of Roseville.
A. Any person desiring to secure a permit shall make an application to the
City.
§ 106-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 106-4
103:182
B. A permit shall be obtained for each collection box(es) proposed.
Combining fees for collection box(es) located on a lot of record may be
addressed in the fee resolution.
C. The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the City
and be signed by an individual who is an officer, director, member or
manager of an entity applicant. The applicant shall furnish the following
information:
(1) Name, address and email of all partners or limited partners of a
partnership applicant, all members of an LLC applicant, all officers
and directors of a nonpublicly traded corporation applicant, all
stockholders owning more than 5% of the stock of a nonpublicly
traded corporate applicant, and any other person who is financially
interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business,
including all aliases.
(2) Date of birth of individuals and date of establishment of an entity or
the birth date of an individual applicant.
(3) Whether the applicant has previously received a permit for a
collection box in the City or operates a collection box or similar
type receptacle without a permit in the City.
(4) The name, address, email and telephone number of a contact
person, reachable 24 hours per day, for all matters relating to a
collection box located in the City.
(5) The physical address of the real property where the collection box
is proposed to be located.
(6) A scaled drawing sufficient to illustrate the proposed location of the
collection box on the real property, the dimensions of the proposed
collection box and that the location complies with the requirements
of § 106-5 of this chapter and all other sections and applicable
ordinances.
(7) If not the owner of the real property, an affidavit from the property
owner providing written permission to place the collection box(es)
on the property, as well as an acknowledgment from the property
owner of receipt of a copy of this chapter shall be provided on a
form provided by the City. For purposes of this subsection the
affidavit and acknowledgment may be executed by an individual
who is an officer, director, member or manager of an entity owning
the property.
(8) A nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the
City Board.
D. Within 10 business days of receiving an application for a permit, the
City shall notify the applicant whether the permit is granted or denied.
§ 106-4 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 106-4
103:183
§ 106-5. Permit requirements.
A permittee shall operate and maintain, or cause to be operated and
maintained, all collection boxes located in the City for which the permittee
has been granted a permit as follows:
If the application is denied, the City shall state in writing the specific
reason for denial.
E. No person to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer, assign or
convey such permit to another person or legal entity.
F. A person shall be issued a permit by the City official if the requirements
of this chapter are satisfied.
G. Upon inspection of the approved location of the collection boxes, the
City shall provide a permit sticker for each approved collection box. The
sticker will display the City name, the permit number, and the
expiration date. The color of the sticker will be determined by the City
and will change yearly. Replacement stickers for damaged or lost
stickers will be available at a fee established by resolution of the City
Board.
A. Collection boxes shall be metal and be maintained in good condition
and appearance with no structural damage, holes or visible rust and
shall be free of graffiti.
B. Collection boxes shall be locked or otherwise secured in such a manner
that the contents cannot be accessed by anyone other than those
responsible for the retrieval of the contents.
C. Collection boxes shall have, at minimum, one-half-inch type visible from
the front of each collection box, the name, address, email, website and
phone number of the operator, as well as whether the collection box is
owned and operated by a for-profit company or a not-for-profit
company. The collection box shall not have information, advertising or
logos other than those relating to the operator.
D. Collection boxes shall be serviced and emptied as needed, but at least
every 30 days.
E. The permittee and property owner, jointly and severally, shall maintain,
or cause to be maintained, the area surrounding the collection boxes
free from any junk, debris or other material. The property owner shall
be responsible to the extent provided by law for the City's cost to abate
any nuisance.
F. A site plan shall be submitted for collection boxes which is to scale, and
provides and/or depicts the following:
(1) Not be permitted in any land zoned or used for residential purposes
other than land zoned residential used as a church or school with a
§ 106-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 106-5
103:184
paved parking lot with completely contiguous parking for at least
75 vehicles;
(2) Not be permitted on any unimproved parcel where a structure for
occupancy does not exist, nor where a multitenant location is not
less than 50% occupied based on the square footage of total units,
nor where the principal use of the land has been discontinued or
the principal business has not been lawfully opened for more than
30 days;
(3) Not be less than 1,000 feet from another collection box as
measured along a straight line from one box to the other.
Notwithstanding this separation requirement, up to two collection
boxes on a single lot of record are permitted if the boxes are side by
side and are no more than one foot apart;
(4) Not exceed 7.0 feet in height, six feet in width and six feet in depth;
(5) Not cause a visual obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; no
refunds will be provided once a permit has been issued;
(6) Not be placed in the front yard setback or closer than the front
facade of the building, whichever is closer. Side yard setbacks shall
be no less than 10 feet, or the distance required by the zoning
district classification, whichever is greater. All other setback
requirements of accessory uses as provided in that zoning district
classification shall be followed;
(7) Not be placed other than on a concrete or asphalt surface in an
accessible location;
(8) Not cause safety hazards with regard to a designated fire lane or
building exit;
(9) Not:
(a) Interfere with an access drive, off-street parking lot
maneuvering lane and/or required off-street parking space to
an extent which would cause safety hazards and/or
unnecessary inconvenience to vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
(b) Encroach upon an access drive, off-street parking lot
maneuvering lane and/or required off-street parking space;
(10) Shall not result in a reduction in useable parking spaces below the
minimum required numbers of parking spaces for all uses on the
subject property;
(11) Shall be insured with general liability insurance in an amount with
coverage limits not less than $100,000 per occurrence and in
aggregate;
§ 106-5 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 106-5
103:185
§ 106-6. Permit and renewal.
§ 106-7. Revocation of permit, removal of collection boxes and
liability.
(12) Only one collection box shall be permitted for parcels one acre or
less with a maximum of two collection boxes per site for larger
parcels;
(13) Shall not disrupt the flow of storm drainage.
A. The permit year shall begin on January 1 in each year and shall
terminate on December 31 of the same calendar year. An annual permit
issued between December 1 and December 31 of any year shall expire
on December 31 of the calendar year next following issuance thereof.
B. A collection box permit shall be renewed annually. The application for
renewal must be filed not later than 30 days before the permit expires.
The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the City.
C. The City shall either approve or deny the renewal of a permit within 10
business days of receipt of the complete renewal application and
payment of the renewal fee. Failure of the City to act before expiration
of the permit shall constitute approval of the renewal of the permit.
D. A permit fee set by resolution of the City Council shall be submitted
with the application for renewal.
E. Prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee may voluntarily cancel
the permit by notifying the City in writing of the intent to cancel the
permit. The permit shall become void upon the City's receipt of a
written notice of intent to cancel the permit. No refunds will be
provided once a permit has been issued.
F. The City shall approve the renewal of a permit if the City finds that no
circumstances existed during the term of the permit which would cause
a violation to exist and that at the time of submission of the application
for renewal, or at any time during the renewal of the application for
renewal, there were not circumstances inconsistent with any finding
required for approval of a new permit. Any permittee whose permit has
been revoked shall be denied renewal of the permit for the subsequent
calendar year.
G. If the permit expires and is not renewed, the collection box(es) must be
removed from the real property within a maximum of 10 days after
expiration of the permit.
A. The City shall have the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder for
a violation of this chapter. Any of the grounds upon which the City may
refuse to issue an initial permit shall also constitute grounds for such
revocation. In addition, the failure of the permittee to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this code or other law
§ 106-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 106-7
103:186
§ 106-8. Appeal to Zoning Board of Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the City in granting or
denying an application for a permit under this chapter or in revoking a
permit issued under this chapter may appeal the decision to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. The appeal shall be made by filing a written notice thereof
with the Building Department setting forth the grounds for the appeal not
later than 10 days after mailing notice of the decision of the City. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may grant relief if the applicant presents clear and
convincing evidence that there was an error in the decision of the City.
§ 106-9. Violations and penalties; remedies.
shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. The City
shall provide a written notification to the permittee and a property
owner at the address upon the application for each stating the specific
grounds for a revocation and a demand for correction and abatement.
The notice shall allow a maximum of 10 days from mailing of the notice
to correct or abate the violation. Upon failure to make the correction
or abatement, the permit shall be revoked by the City and, thereafter,
the permittee shall not be eligible for a permit on the property for the
subsequent calendar year.
B. A permit for a collection box may be revoked if any governmental
authority or agency determines that the collection box has violated the
Michigan Consumer Protection Act45 and/or the Charitable
Organizations and Solicitations Act.46
C. Upon revocation the collection box shall be removed from the real
property within 10 days and, if not so removed within the time period,
the City may remove, store or dispose of the collection box at the
expense of the permittee and/or real property owner. All costs
associated with the removal of the collection box incurred by the City,
or the City's contractor shall be the responsibility of the property
owner. If such obligation is not paid within 30 days after mailing of a
billing of costs to the property owner, the City may place a lien upon
such real property enforceable as a tax lien in the manner prescribed by
the general laws of this state against the property and collected as in
the case of general property tax with the same penalties and interest. If
the same is not paid prior to the preparation of the next assessment roll
of the City, the amount shall be assessed as a special tax against such
premises on the next assessment roll and collected thereunder.
Unpermitted collection boxes may also be removed in the same manner.
Revoked and unpermitted collection boxes may be disposed of by the
City 30 days after appeal is completed, or 30 days after revocation if no
appeal or improper appeal occurs. Disposal after 30 days may occur for
unpermitted collection boxes.
45.Editor's Note: See MCL § 445.901 et seq.
46.Editor's Note: See MCL § 400.271 et seq.
§ 106-7 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 106-9
103:187
Chapter 109
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open house parties — See Ch. 71, Art. IV.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 197, Art. II.
Tobacco sale to minors — See Ch. 313.
A. In addition to revocation of permit pursuant to § 106-7, any person
violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
offense punishable by 93 days in jail and/or $500 fine, plus costs.
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, or any ordinance, shall be deemed a new separate offense
for each day that such condition continues to exist.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from pursuing any other
remedy provided by law in conjunction with or in lieu of prosecuting
persons under this section for violation of this chapter.
D. The real property owner and permittee shall be jointly and severally
liable for each violation and for payment of any fine and costs of
abatement.
E. No fines shall be imposed for a violation of this chapter until 90 days
after its effective date. All collection boxes existing at the effective date
of the chapter shall apply for a permit as required herein within 30 days
of the effective date. Any collection boxes not in compliance with this
chapter after 90 days of the effective date shall be subject to all
remedies for violation as provided therein.
§ 106-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 106-9
103:188
ARTICLE I
Possession, Sale and Distribution of Controlled Substances
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 109 of the 1984 Code.]
§ 109-1. Possession and sale unlawful. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 1125]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, distribute,
administer, dispense, prescribe or give away any controlled substance as
defined under the laws of the State of Michigan, hereafter referred to as
"controlled substances," provided that nothing contained in this section
shall be deemed to prohibit the possession, sale, offering for sale,
distributing, administering, dispensing or prescribing of any of such
controlled substances mentioned in this section in the manner and under
such circumstances as provided in this article.
§ 109-2. Dispensation by authorized persons. [Amended 7-27-1999
by Ord. No. 1125]
A manufacturer, wholesaler, apothecary, medical doctor, osteopathic
physician, dentist, veterinarian, chiropodist, public or private hospital,
sanitarium or institution maintained or conducted in whole or in part for the
treatment of disability, disease, inebriety or drug addition may purchase,
receive, possess, sell, distribute, prescribe, administer or dispense the
controlled substances described in § 109-1, provided that he, she or they
shall have complied with all provisions as required by the United States
Internal Revenue Code, as the same now exists or may be hereafter
amended, and the laws of the State of Michigan, as such law have been or
shall hereafter be amended, and provided further that no medical doctor,
osteopathic physician or other person specified in this section in any
manner authorized to prescribe controlled substances shall prescribe the
same for his or her own use, nor shall any druggist honor such a
prescription, and provided further that all controlled substances obtained
pursuant to this section shall be kept in the original package or container
in which they were received, and provided further that this requirement
should not be construed to apply to any duly licensed medical doctor,
osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian or chiropodist or to any
authorized person or persons acting directly under their supervision or
control.
§ 109-3. Unauthorized possession of hypodermic syringes and
needles.
No person shall, at any time, have or possess a hypodermic syringe or
needle or any other instrument or implement adapted for the use of
controlled substances by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection
or any other manner or method of introduction and which is possessed
for that purpose, unless such possession is authorized by the certificate
of a licensed medical doctor or osteopathic physician issued within the
period of one year, provided that the prohibition contained in this section
§ 109-1 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 109-3
103:189
shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical
technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions,
clinical laboratories, medical doctors or embalmers in the normal legal
course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering
from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring selfinjection.
§ 109-4. Sale or furnishing of methods of introduction.
§ 109-5. Fraud and deceit in obtaining possession.
Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge or concealment of a
material fact or the use of a false name or the giving of a false address for
the purpose of obtaining any controlled substances or hypodermic syringe
or needle or other instrument or implement or empty gelatin capsules,
or false statement on any prescription blank, shall be deemed a violation
of this article. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any
controlled substances, hypodermic syringes, needles or other instruments
or implements adapted for the use of such controlled substances or empty
gelatin capsules, pursuant to the terms of 7this article, shall use the same
or permit or authorize their use for any purpose other than that specifically
authorized in the prescription or order by means of which such possession
was obtained.
§ 109-6. Fraud and deceit in sale of substances.
Any fraud, scheme, device, trick, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge or
any other form of concealment for the purpose of obtaining money or any
other thing of value by the sale, furnishing, supplying or giving away of any
substance represented to be a controlled substance as described in § 109-1,
when the same may or may not be the same, shall be deemed a violation of
this article.
§ 109-7. Applicability.
The provisions of this article restricting the possession of controlled
substances or hypodermic syringes, needles or other implements or
instruments adapted to the use of such controlled substances by means
of subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, supply or give away
any empty gelatin capsules or hypodermic syringe or needle or other
instrument or implement adapted for the use of controlled substances
by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other
manner or method of introduction to any person known to be a
nonmedical habitual user of controlled substances.
B. For the purpose of this section, a "nonmedical habitual user of
controlled substances" shall mean any person who uses controlled
substances merely to satisfy a craving for such drugs and who does not
have a legitimate medical need for controlled substances.
§ 109-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 109-7
103:190
or method of introduction, or empty gelatin capsules, shall not apply to
common carriers or warehousepersons or their employees engaged in the
lawful transportation or storage of such controlled substances, syringes,
needles or capsules or to public officers or employees while engaged in the
performance of their official duties, nor to temporary incidental possession
on the part of employees or agents of persons lawfully entitled to
possession.
§ 109-8. Commitment of addicted persons.
§ 109-9. Loitering near places where substances are illegally kept.
No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building,
apartment, store, automobile, boat, boathouse, airplane or other place of
any description whatsoever where controlled substances, hypodermic
syringes, needles or other instruments or implements, or empty gelatin
capsules, are used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept
illegally.47
§ 109-10. Possession and use of marihuana. [Added 8-27-2019 by
Ord. No. 131348]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, distribute,
consume, administer, dispense, prescribe or give away any controlled
A. No person shall unlawfully use or be addicted to the unlawful use of
controlled substances. Any such unlawful use or addiction shall be
deemed a violation of this article. Any nonmedical habitual user of
controlled substances, as defined in § 109-4, who shall make voluntary
application to the Judge of the Municipal Court may, upon the
presentment of a certificate executed by a practicing physician in the
State of Michigan stating that he or she is a nonmedical habitual user of
controlled substances, be committed, at the discretion of the Court, to
any correctional or charitable institution, hospital, sanitarium or
institution authorized for the treatment of disease or inebriety or drug
addiction. Whenever the medical officer or head of such institution shall
certify to the committing Judge or Court that any person so committed
has been sufficiently treated, or gives any other reason which is deemed
by such Judge or Court to be adequate and sufficient, the Court may, in
accordance with the terms of the commitment, discharge the person so
committed or return him or her to await further action of the Court.
B. Any addicted person who does not make voluntary application for
treatment as provided in this section shall be deemed to be in violation
of this section.
47.Editor’s Note: Former § 109-9.1, Transportation and possession of usable marijuana,
added 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 1264, and which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 1313.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 109-10 as
§ 109-10.1.
§ 109-7 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 109-10
103:191
substance as defined in Article 7, Michigan Public Health Code (MCL
333.7101 et seq.), except as permitted by law and pursuant to the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, and as specifically provided
below:
A. Definitions. The following words, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context otherwise requires:
CULTIVATE — To propagate, breed, grow, harvest, dry, cure, or
separate parts of the marihuana plant by manual or mechanical means.
DELIVER or DELIVERY — The actual, constructive or attempted
transfer from one person to another of marihuana, whether or not there
is an agency relationship.
MARIHUANA — The substance or material identified and defined as
"marihuana" in Section 3 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act. It means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis,
growing or not; the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any
part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin, including
marihuana concentrate and marihuana-infused products. For purposes
of this act, marihuana does not include:
MARIHUANA ACCESSORIES — Any equipment, product, material, or
combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically
designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
marihuana into the human body.
MARIHUANA CONCENTRATE — The resin extracted from any part of
the plant of the genus cannabis.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership of any type, trust, or other legal entity.
PROCESS or PROCESSING — To separate or otherwise prepare parts
of the marihuana plant and to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or
otherwise make or prepare marihuana concentrate or marihuanainfused
products.
The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature
stalks, except the resin extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or
cake, or any sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination;
(1)
(2) Industrial hemp; or
Any other ingredient combined with marihuana to prepare topical
or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
(3)
§ 109-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 109-10
103:192
REMUNERATION — Payment, compensation, and the act of paying or
compensating.
SALE — Includes barter, exchange, or otherwise offer for remuneration.
B. Lawful acts. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following
acts by a person 21 years of age or older are not unlawful:
(1) Except as permitted in Subsection B(2), possessing, using or
consuming, internally possessing, purchasing, transporting, or
processing 2.5 ounces or less of marihuana, except that not more
than 15 grams of marihuana may be in the form of marihuana
concentrate.
(2) Within the person's residence, possessing, storing, and processing
not more than 10 ounces of marihuana and any marihuana
produced by marihuana plants cultivated on the premises and
cultivating not more than 12 marihuana plants for personal use,
provided that no more than 12 marihuana plants are possessed,
cultivated, or processed on the premises at once.
(3) Assisting another person who is 21 years of age or older in any of
the acts described in this section.
(4) Giving away or otherwise transferring without remuneration up to
2.5 ounces of marihuana, except that not more than 15 grams of
marihuana may be in the form of marihuana concentrate, to a
person 21 years of age or older, as long as the transfer is not
advertised or promoted to the public.
C. Unlawful acts. Unless otherwise authorized by the State of Michigan or
City of Roseville to conduct such activities, it shall be unlawful for any
person to:
(1) Operate, navigate, or be in physical control of any motor vehicle,
aircraft, snowmobile, off-road recreational vehicle, or motorboat
while under the influence of marihuana.
(2) Transfer marihuana or marihuana accessories to a person under
the age of 21.
(3) Be under the age of 21 and possess, consume, purchase, or
otherwise obtain, cultivate, process, transport, or sell marihuana
and/or marihuana accessories.
(4) Separate or attempt to separate plant resin by butane extraction or
another method that utilizes a substance with a flashpoint below
100º F. in any public place, motor vehicle, or within the curtilage of
any residential structure.
(5) Consume marihuana in public or smoke marihuana where
prohibited by the person who owns, occupies, or manages the
property except, for purposes of this Subsection C(5), a public
§ 109-10 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 109-10
103:193
place does not include an area the City has designated as an
authorized area of consumption that is not accessible to persons
under the age of 21.
(6) Cultivate marihuana plants if the plants are visible from a public
place without the use of binoculars, aircraft, or other optical aids or
outside of an enclosed area equipped with locks or other
functioning security devices that restrict access to the area.
(7) Consume marihuana while operating, navigating, or being in
physical control of any motor vehicle, aircraft, snowmobile, off-road
recreational vehicle, or motorboat, or smoke marihuana within the
passenger area of a vehicle upon a public way.
(8) Possess marihuana accessories or possess or consume marihuana
on the grounds of a public or private school where children attend
classes in preschool programs, kindergarten programs, or grades
one through 12, in a school bus, or on the grounds of any
correctional facility.
(9) Possess more than 2.5 ounces of marihuana within a person's place
of residence unless the excess marihuana is stored in a container or
area equipped with locks or other functioning security devices that
restrict access to the contents of the container or area.
(10) Possessing, selling, offering for sale, distributing, administering,
dispensing, prescribing, giving away, or cultivating marihuana in
any other manner other than lawful acts as described herein and
for which specific penalty for an unlawful act is otherwise specified
herein is unlawful.
D. Penalty. A person who commits any of the following acts, and is not
otherwise authorized by the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951 et. seq., or the City of Roseville Code of
Ordinances, may be punished as follows:
(1) A person who violates Subsection C(5), (6), or (9), where the person
otherwise possesses not more than the amount of marihuana
allowed, cultivates not more than the amount of marihuana
allowed, delivers without receiving remuneration to a person who
is at least 21 years of age not more than the amount of marihuana
allowed, or possesses with intent to deliver not more than the
amount of marihuana allowed, is responsible for a civil infraction
and may be punished by a fine of $100 and forfeiture of the
marihuana.
(2) A person who possess not more than twice the amount of
marihuana allowed, cultivates not more than twice the amount of
marihuana allowed, delivers without receiving remuneration to a
person who is at least 21 years of age not more than twice the
amount of marihuana allowed, or possesses with intent to deliver
§ 109-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 109-10
103:194
not more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed, is
punishable as follows:
(a) For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and may
be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and forfeiture of
the marihuana.
(b) For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and
may be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 and
forfeiture of the marihuana.
(c) For a third or subsequent violation, is guilty of a misdemeanor
and may be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and
forfeiture of the marihuana.
(d) If a person engages in any of the activities prohibited by
Subsection C while possessing more than the amount of
marihuana allowed, cultivating more than the amount of
marihuana allowed, delivering without receiving remuneration
to a person who is at least 21 years age more than the amount
of marihuana allowed, or possessing with intent to deliver
more than the amount of marihuana allowed, the violation is
punishable as a misdemeanor, with a fine not to exceed $500 or
by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(3) Except for a person who engaged in conduct described by
subsection C(1), (4), or (7), a person under 21 years of age who
possesses not more than 2.5 ounces of marihuana or who cultivates
not more than 12 marihuana plants:
(a) For a first violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and may
be punished as follows:
[1] If less than 18 years of age, by a fine of $100 or community
service, forfeiture of the marihuana, and completion of
four hours of drug education or counseling.
[2] If at least 18 years of age, by a fine of $100 and forfeiture
of the marihuana.
(b) For a second violation, is responsible for a civil infraction and
may be punished as follows:
[1] If less than 18 years of age, by a fine of $500 or community
service, forfeiture of marihuana, and completion of eight
hours of drug education or counseling.
[2] If at least 18 years of age, by a fine of $500 and forfeiture
of the marihuana.
(4) A person who possesses more than twice the amount of marihuana
allowed, cultivates more than twice the amount allowed, or delivers
§ 109-10 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 109-10
103:195
§ 109-10.1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 1125; 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. 1264; 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 1313]
Unless otherwise provided within this article, a person who violates this
article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days, or a fine of not more than $500, or both.
without receiving any remuneration to a person who is at least 21
years of age more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed, is
punishable as follows:
(a) A person shall also be subject to imprisonment in the discretion
of the court if the violation was habitual, willful, and for a
commercial purpose, or if the violation involved violence.
(5) A person who violates subsection C(2), (4), or (7) is responsible for
a misdemeanor, with a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
(6) A person 21 years or older who violates Subsection C(8), is
responsible for a misdemeanor, with a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
E. Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951
et. seq., and all future amendments, revisions, and or changes to the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act when they are
effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference.
§ 109-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 109-10.1
103:196
ARTICLE II
Glue
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 160 of the 1984 Code]
§ 109-11. Definitions. [Amended 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 1297]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHEMICAL AGENT — Any substance containing a toxic chemical or solvent,
or both, having the property of releasing toxic vapors, including but not
limited to glue, cement, hair spray, paint, spray paint, inhalers, pressurized
gas or other solvents, or chemicals having the property of releasing toxic
vapors.
§ 109-12. Inhalation or consumption prohibited. [Amended
6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 1297]
No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or
nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical
agent, intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any chemical agent
into the respiratory or circulatory system or possess with intent to inhale
or consume such chemical agent into the respiratory or circulatory system.
This shall not prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental
purposes.
§ 109-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 109-14. Aiding and abetting.
Any person who assists, aids, abets or encourages any person to violate the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 109-11 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES § 109-14
103:197
Chapter 110
COST RECOVERY FOR CONFINED PERSONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Crimes — See Ch. 111. Emergency response cost recovery — See Ch.
127.
§ 110-1. Responsibility for payment.
Any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the City, including
but not limited to individuals who are under arrest; incarcerated;
imprisoned; escaped from confinement; under supervised release; on
medical furlough; residing in a mental health facility or half-way house;
living under home detention; or confined completely or partially in any way
under a penal statute or rule shall be solely responsible for the payment of
any medical services rendered to, and received by, that person during the
course of his or her confinement with the City, or at the City's discretion or a
court of competent jurisdiction, including, without limitation, transportation
to and from a medical treatment facility and any treatment deemed
necessary by a treating physician, whether or not requested by the person;
and shall be required to reimburse the City, in full, for any fees or charges
incurred for such service, if not paid directly to a medical provider by the
prisoner or his or her insurance carrier.
Chapter 111
CRIMES
§ 109-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 110-1
111:198
ARTICLE I
Attempting to Commit an Offense
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 111 of the 1984
Code]
§ 111-1. Attempting to commit an offense unlawful.
It shall be unlawful in the City of Roseville for any person to attempt to
commit a crime, and any person who shall attempt to commit an offense
prohibited by law and, in such attempt, shall do any act toward the
commission of such offense but shall fail in the perpetration or shall be
intercepted or prevented in the execution of same is guilty of the crime of
attempt to commit a crime.
§ 111-2. Violations and penalties.49
Any person who shall be convicted of the crime of attempt to commit
a crime shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 111-1 CRIMES § 111-2
111:199

ARTICLE II
Conspiracy to Commit an Offense
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 111 of the 1984
Code]
§ 111-3. Conspiracy to commit an offense unlawful.
It shall be unlawful in the City of Roseville for any person to commit the
crime of conspiracy, and any person who conspires together with one or
more persons to commit an offense prohibited by law or to commit an illegal
act in an illegal manner is guilty of the crime of conspiracy.
§ 111-4. Violations and penalties.50
Any person who shall be convicted of the crime of conspiracy shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 111-3 CRIMES § 111-4
111:201

ARTICLE III
Aiding and Abetting the Commission of an Offense
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. III of Ch. 111 of the
1984 Code]
§ 111-5. Aiding and abetting the commission of an offense unlawful.
It shall be unlawful in the City of Roseville for any person to commit the
crime of aiding and abetting, and any person concerned in the commission
of an offense, whether he or she directly commits the act constituting the
offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, is guilty of
the crime of aiding and abetting.
§ 111-6. Violations and penalties.51
Any person who shall be convicted of the crime of aiding and abetting shall
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 111-5 CRIMES § 111-6
111:203
Chapter 126
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Buildings and
Inspection — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13. Public
utility services -See Ch. 14.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 69.
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing — See Ch. 221.
Signs — See Ch. 264.
§ 111-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 111-6
126:204
ARTICLE I
Definitions; Inspections; Contractor Requirements
[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 1149]
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The City of Roseville Electrical Appeals Board.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Roseville Department of Buildings and
Inspection or equivalent department.
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT — All electrical devices in connection with the
generation, distribution, communication and utilization of electrical energy
within or on a building, residence, structure or properties, including fire
alarm and sign devices.
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR — Any person who has the necessary
qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to inspect all
electrical apparatus for compliance with the codes and who shall be the
agent or employee of the Department designated by the Building Official as
an "Electrical Inspector." Inspectors shall be registered pursuant to Act No.
54 of the Public Acts of 1986, being MCL § 338.2301 et seq., and known as
the "Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act."
ELECTRICAL WIRING — All wiring, generating equipment, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances in connection with the generation,
distribution, communication and utilization of electrical energy within or
on a building, residence, structure or properties, and including service
entrance wiring as defined by the code.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Fixed, stationary or portable self-contained, electrically
illuminated equipment that has words or symbols designed to convey
information or attract attention. The term includes outline lighting. Electric
sign does not include those signs that are indoor or outdoor portable
applications or recognized holiday residential signs listed with a recognized
electrical testing laboratory and that use a cord cap plug as the electrical
energizing attachment method.
JOB SITE — The immediate work area within the property lines of a single
construction project, alteration project or maintenance project where
electrical construction or alteration of electrical wiring is in progress.
MINOR REPAIR WORK — Electrical work, such as repairing or replacing
flush and snap switches, fuses, lamp sockets or receptacles, replacement
of fixtures, repairing or taping bare connections, replacing lamps or the
connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently
installed receptacles, provided that the total value does not exceed $100.
MUNICIPALITY — A city, village or township.
OUTLINE LIGHTING — An arrangement of incandescent lamps or electric
discharge tubing which is an integral part of an electrical sign that outlines
§ 126-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-1
126:205
certain features, such as the shape of a building or the decoration of a
window.
OWNER — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
and its legal successors. In all proceedings, actions or prosecution
hereunder in which a corporation is the owner of any building, structure
or part thereof or of premises, any of its officers, directors or persons in
control or management thereof, as well as the corporation, shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
PORTABLE ELECTRIC SIGN — A self-contained single-unit sign, wired in
conformity with methods recognized by the State of Michigan Electrical
Code. Such signs are intended for indoor use only and employ incandescent
lamps or fluorescent lamps, or gas-filled luminous tubes (neon), with
provisions made for standing on a horizontal surface or for being
suspended, and shall be equipped with not more than six feet of flexible
cord and an attachment cap. All other signs are considered nonportable
and require inspection by the Electrical Inspection Authority unless the sign
bears a label of approval by a recognized national testing laboratory. A
connection permit is required for all nonportable signs.
§ 126-2. Contractor registration and fees for inspection and
registration.
When an application is made for a permit required under the terms of this
chapter, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by resolution of the
Roseville City Council. Contractor registration is required and a fee shall be
paid in an amount prescribed by resolution of the Roseville City Council.
§ 126-3. Right of access to buildings.
Subject to the Constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the
Electrical Inspector(s) and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during
reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his or her official
duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation
of electrical wiring, electrical devices and/or electrical materials contained
therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical
supply and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such
electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with
the work of the Fire Department.
§ 126-4. Inspection of wiring; issuance of certificate.
A. Upon the completion of the wiring of any building, it shall be the duty of
the person, firm or corporation installing the same to notify the City of
Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection, which shall notify the
Electrical Inspector(s) to inspect the installation as soon as possible,
and if it is found to be fully in compliance with this chapter and does not
constitute a hazard to life and property, he/she shall, upon request,
issue to such person, firm or corporation, for delivery to the owner, a
certificate of inspection.
§ 126-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-4
126:206
§ 126-5. Reinspection.
The Electrical Inspector(s) may periodically make a thorough reinspection
of the installation in buildings, interior and exterior, of all electric wiring,
electric devices and electric material now installed or that may hereafter
be installed within the City of Roseville; and when the installation of any
such wiring, devices and/or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe
condition, the person, firm or corporation owning, using or operating the
same shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or changes
required to place such wiring, devices and material in a safe condition
and shall have such work completed within 15 days or any longer period
specified by the Electrical Inspector in said notice. The Electrical Inspector
is hereby empowered to disconnect or order in writing the discontinuance
of electrical service to such wiring, devices and/or material so found to
be defectively installed until the installation of such wiring, devices and
material has been made safe as directed by the Electrical Inspectors.
§ 126-6. Conformance to regulations; establishment of standards by
reference.
No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electrical installation
is in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the statutes of
the State of Michigan and the rules and regulations issued by the Michigan
Public Service Commission under the authority of the state statutes and
unless they are in conformity with approved methods of construction for
safety to persons and property. The regulations as laid down in the State
Electrical and Building Codes and NFPA S:71, 72, 73 and 74 for fire alarm
systems as approved by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
and in the amendments, rules and regulations established as hereinafter
provided shall be prima facie evidence of such approved methods.
§ 126-7. Keeping of records; petition for review of condemned
installations.
B. All wires which are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before
concealment, and any person, firm or corporation installing such wires
shall notify the City of Roseville Department of Buildings and
Inspection, giving sufficient time in which to make the required
inspection before such wires are concealed.
A. The Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection shall keep
complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other
official work performed under the provisions of this chapter.
B. When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of any electrical
installation, the owner or his or her agent may, within five days after
receiving written notice from the Electrical Inspector, file a petition, in
writing, for review of said action of the Electrical Inspector with the
Electrical Appeals Board. Upon receipt of the petition, the Board shall
at once proceed to determine whether said electrical installation
§ 126-4 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-7
126:207
§ 126-8. Electrical Appeals Board.
§ 126-9. Location of underground electrical service; detached
dwelling units.
The location of property used in conjunction with furnishing electrical
services to detached dwelling units shall conform to the following:
complies with this chapter, and within three days shall make a decision
in accordance with its findings.
A. The Electrical Appeals Board is hereby constituted, consisting of a
representative of the electrical utility company, a licensed electrical
contractor who is also a licensed master electrician, a licensed
journeyman electrician, a licensed master electrician and an electrical
engineer.
B. The members of said Board shall be appointed in accordance with the
practice of the City of Roseville for such terms as shall be designated at
the time of appointment. The Board may adopt the rules of procedure
for conducting its business. An application for appeal shall be based on
a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better method of
installation is proposed. The Board shall have no authority to waive the
requirements of this Code. The Board of Appeals shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on
matters pertaining to electrical installations and are not employees of
the jurisdiction.
A. No transformer or junction box shall be placed on or near a lot line so as
to obstruct the erection, maintenance, repair and replacement of a
fence.
B. All services to dwelling units from the rear property line shall follow the
side property line to a point perpendicular to the dwelling unit. Service
cables shall be no closer than one foot nor more distant than two feet
from such property line at a depth which is required by the utility
company furnishing such service.
C. Deviation from the installation requirements set forth shall not be
allowed unless written approval is obtained from the Building Director
or his designee and is conditional upon an approved diagram of the
installation as built being posted on the inside cover of the distribution
panel.
D. The utility company shall post on the meter box, in an unobstructed
view, notice of warning of all underground services.
§ 126-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-10
126:208
§ 126-10. Exemption for utilities.
The provisions of this chapter, except for those relating to location (§ 126-9)
shall not apply to apparatus and equipment installed by or for any utility
operating under jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission
in the exercise of its function as a utility and when such apparatus or
equipment is used primarily for the purpose of communication or metering
or for the generation, control, transformation, transmission and distribution
of electrical energy.
§ 126-11. Violations and penalties; minor violations and fines.
§ 126-12. Liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or
installing any electrical wiring, electrical devices and/or electrical material
for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall
the City of Roseville or the Electrical Inspectors be held as assuming any
such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or certificate of
inspection issued as herein provided.
§ 126-13. (Reserved)
§ 126-14. (Reserved)
§ 126-15. (Reserved)
§ 126-16. (Reserved)
§ 126-17. (Reserved)
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any of the
provisions hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter.52
B. Except as provided for in Subsection A, a person licensed or registered
under this chapter who commits a violation of this chapter that is not a
minor violation as described in the General Rules53 or a person not
licensed or registered under this chapter who is performing any activity
regulated by this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction, punishable by a
fine of not less than $1,000 per day for each day of the violation, except
that a fine shall not exceed $5,000 in total per violation. A second or
subsequent violation is punishable by a fine of not less than $2,000 per
day for each day the violation occurs, except that a fine shall not exceed
$10,000 in total per violation.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
53.Editor's Note: See Article II, General Rules, of this chapter.
§ 126-10 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-18
126:209
§ 126-18. (Reserved)
§ 126-19. (Reserved)
§ 126-20. (Reserved)
§ 126-21. (Reserved)
§ 126-22. (Reserved)
§ 126-23. (Reserved)
§ 126-18 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-23
126:210
ARTICLE II
General Rules
§ 126-24. Deviation from requirements.
In cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, the Electrical
Inspection Authority is hereby granted discretionary powers to permit
deviation from the provisions of this chapter, provided that such a proposal
to deviate is first submitted in writing for proper determination in order
that safety requirements, as they pertain to electrical equipment, shall be
obtained.
§ 126-25. Submission of plans and specifications.
A detailed set of plans and specifications shall be submitted with the
application for a building permit for any wiring or alterations to the
electrical system, including the fire alarm system, in all buildings using
over six circuits except single- and two-family dwellings. The electrical
drawings shall include such details as lighting layout, circuiting, switching,
conductor and raceway sizes, wattage schedule, fire alarm panel location,
service location and riser diagram, calculations and proposed method of
construction drawn with symbols of standard form. All conductors are
assumed to be copper unless otherwise stated on the plan. Specifications,
when provided, shall also include this information. The selection of suitable
disconnect and overcurrent devices to provide proper coordination and
interrupting capacity for wiring system is the responsibility of the designer.
The Electrical Inspection Authority, when approving electrical plans,
assumes no responsibility for the design nor any deviations from any
applicable codes not explicitly agreed upon at the time of approval of
electrical drawings. Approval of drawings during plan review are subject to
subsequent approval during field inspection on the job site by the Electrical
Inspector.
§ 126-26. Installation and accessibility of electrical equipment.
§ 126-27. Request for electrical inspection.
A request for electrical inspection shall be made at least 24 hours prior to
the needed inspection.
A. Electrical contractors shall in no case install permanent electrical
equipment that may be damaged by roughing in of heating, ventilation
and plumbing construction or before the roof is covered.
B. Accessibility. No installation of plumbing equipment, refrigeration
equipment, space heating equipment, duct work, cabinets, partitions or
materials shall be made in such a way as to render the wiring in any
electrical service equipment, distribution panel, outlet, splice, junction
or pull box inaccessible.
§ 126-24 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-28
126:211
§ 126-28. Approval of wiring before concealment.
No person shall conceal or cause to be concealed any wiring or electrical
equipment before it has been approved by the Electrical Inspector.
§ 126-29. Availability of plans.
A plan approved by the Electrical Inspection Authority or a certified copy
thereof, where required, shall be available for the use of the Electrical
Inspector as long as construction is in progress under the permit related to
the plans.
§ 126-30. Licensed representative required on site.
The Electrical Inspector reserves the right to require an occupational
licensed representative of the contractor to be on the job site when
inspection is made. A licensed electrical journeyman or master electrician
shall be present at all times that electrical construction is in progress. A
licensed fire alarm specialty technician shall be present at all times that fire
alarm system construction and installation or checkout are in progress. A
licensed sign specialist shall be present at all times when sign construction
and installation is in progress.
§ 126-31. Notices of inspection.
§ 126-32. Requests for code interpretations.
The Electrical Inspection Authority shall not be responsible for code
interpretations or other information relative to electrical installations give
over the phone. Requests for such information should be made in person or
in writing.
§ 126-33. Carnivals, convention displays and product and street
shows.54
Electrical equipment for such places as carnivals, convention displays and
product and street shows shall require a permit for inspection, and approval
must be obtained prior to the time of opening. For special requirements,
consult the Electrical Inspection Authority.
§ 126-34. Certificate of final inspection.
A request for a certificate of final inspection from the person to whom the
permit was issued shall be honored only after the installation has been
A. Any notice of inspection of electrical equipment shall be posted in or on
the job by the Electrical Inspector only.
B. Inspection notices shall not be removed, defaced or altered by anyone
except the Electrical Inspector.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Carnivals.
§ 126-28 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-34
126:212
tested with current on the wires and all electrical equipment permanently
installed. In the case of fire alarm systems, the supervision and function
of the system shall be inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector
before a certificate may be issued.
§ 126-35. Advertising.
A. It shall be a violation of these rules for a person or business to use any
word or words in any sign, display, business form or document or
advertising medium which indicates or tends to indicate that a person is
qualified to supervise, install, repair, replace, remove or service any
electrical, fire alarm or sign equipment which requires a permit and/or
inspection who is not properly licensed as a contractor for the
appropriate installation.
B. It shall be legal for a person to use any word or words in any sign,
display, business form or document or advertising medium which
indicates or tends to indicate that a person is qualified to supervise,
install, repair, replace, remove or service any electrical, fire alarm or
sign equipment which requires a permit and/or inspection, provided
that the uttering, publishing or displaying of the advertisement is done
only by a licensed electrical contractor, fire alarm contractor or sign
contractor.
§ 126-34 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-35
126:213

ARTICLE III
Filing of Permits and Permit Regulations
§ 126-36. Electrical permits.
Electrical permits are required for the installation of all electrical
equipment, including fire alarm and sign equipment, except for minor repair
work as defined in the definitions55 and the exemptions listed in this
chapter.
§ 126-37. Permits for temporary work.
Permits for temporary work must be filed under any of the following
conditions:
§ 126-38. Additions to permits.
After a permit has been issued, no additional work should be included on
the original permit. In cases where additional work is to be installed, a new
permit should be secured and/or fee paid.
§ 126-39. Additional permits or fees.
Additional permits or fees may be required:
§ 126-40. Issuance of permits to authorized persons.56
Permits covering the installation of electrical wiring and/or equipment in
the municipality shall be issued only in the names of persons authorized by
this chapter.
A. For connection to temporary service drop and for equipment to be used
for construction purposes.
B. For connection to permanent service or for installation of temporary
lighting or power equipment not included on original permit; a separate
permit based on the permit fee schedule is required, except that in
single- or two-family dwellings temporary connection of the permanent
service equipment may be included on the original wiring and fixture
permit without additional fee, provided that service is ready for
inspection at the time of the first rough inspection request.
A. If more than one inspection is necessary on any violation notice.
B. For special inspections required for the investigation of any ordinance
violations.
55.Editor's Note: See § 126-1, Definitions.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 126-36 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-41
126:215
§ 126-41. Homeowner's permit.
A bona fide owner of a single-family residence which is, or will be upon
completion, for a minimum period of six months, his/her own place of
residence and no part of which is used for rental or commercial purposes
nor is now contemplated for such purpose may do his/her own work,
provided that he/she applies for and secures a permit, pays the fee, does
the work himself/herself in accordance with the provisions hereof, applies
for inspections and receives approval of his/her work by the Electrical
Inspection Authority. Failure to comply with these requirements will subject
the owner's permit to cancellation.
§ 126-42. Permit requirements for master electricians.
A. Where business or industrial procedure requires the regular full-time
employment of a person licensed pursuant to this chapter, a person,
firm or corporation may employ a licensed master electrician to actively
supervise the installation of electrical equipment on the premises
restricted to a building or buildings at one location only, owned and
occupied by the person, firm or corporation. The master shall secure all
necessary permits. An affidavit form furnished by the Board shall be
signed by both the employer and licensed master electrician and shall
contain the following:
(1) The name and business address of the person employing the
licensed master electrician.
(2) The name, address and current license number of licensed master
electrician.
(3) The license number and name of the licensing authority.
(4) A statement to the effect that the employer and licensed master
electrician are responsible for exercising the supervision and
control of the electrical operations necessary to secure full
compliance with this chapter, the rules and all other laws and rules
related to the installation of electrical equipment in this
municipality. The master shall be restricted to actively supervise
the job site at one premises only.
B. A licensed master electrician may not represent more than one person,
firm or corporation as the licensee in a business or industrial setting
through an affidavit signed by the employer and the licensee.
C. A licensed master electrician, employed in a business or industrial
setting and his or her employer must notify the Board within 30 days of
any changes in the written affidavit signed between the employer and
the licensee. After a thirty-day period, the affidavit is no longer valid
and must be renewed according to these rules.
§ 126-41 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-42
126:216
§ 126-43. Fraudulent permit applications.
§ 126-44. Revocation of permits for violations.
Any permit issued in violation of the laws of the State of Michigan, these
rules or any other ordinances or as a result of false or fraudulent
information or misinterpretation of conditions shall be subject to revocation
at the direction of the Electrical Inspection Authority. The person holding
the permit shall be notified to appear and show cause why the permit should
not be revoked, and failure to appear shall be deemed sufficient to cause
the permit to be revoked.
§ 126-45. Expiration of permits; reinstatement.
If work for which a permit is issued is not started within six months of the
date of issue or if work is abandoned for a period of six months, the permit
shall lapse and cease to be in effect. The Electrical Inspection Authority may
reinstate an expired permit within one year of its date of issue, but such
reinstatement shall not be obligatory. Permits which have expired, lapsed
or abandoned one year or more may only be reinstated by discretion of the
Electrical Inspection Authority in each case.
§ 126-46. Uncompleted installations.
D. The affidavit becomes invalid immediately after the designated licensed
master electrician ceases to be an employee of the person, firm or
corporation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to present any fraudulent
information in making application for any permit from the Electrical
Inspection Authority. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to use the name
of another person in order to secure an electrical permit unless
regularly employed by and directly authorized by the holder of such
electrical contractor license.
B. It shall be unlawful for an independent electrical contractor to file an
electrical permit for work contracted for or performed or to be
performed by others without specific permission of the Electrical
Inspection Authority.
A. Notification of quitting installation required. Should any person to
whom a permit has been issued for an installation and inspection of
electrical equipment quit the installation for any reason, he/she shall
notify the Electrical Inspection Authority.
B. Inspection of partial installation required. If an installation is partially
completed, the person quitting the installation shall notify the Electrical
Inspection Authority and request an inspection. Acceptance of the
installation or violations against the work installed shall be recorded by
the Inspector on the permit record according to the findings of the
§ 126-42 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-46
126:217
§ 126-47. Refunds.
If electrical work has not been started, a permit holder shall be entitled
to a refund on his/her permit in accordance with established rules of the
municipality.
§ 126-48. Transfer of permits.
§ 126-49. Failure to pass inspection; correction of violation.
If any electrical equipment, alteration or addition does not pass inspection,
the person responsible for installing such equipment should be notified in
writing of the reasons for failure to pass such inspection. Such violation
Inspector. No refund of the permit fee covering electrical equipment
installed and inspected shall be granted to the permit holder.
C. Notification of Electrical Inspection Authority by owner. If a permit
holder quits an installation after the electrical equipment is installed
and fails to notify the Electrical Inspection Authority, the owner or his/
her agent may notify the Electrical Inspection Authority and request
inspection. Upon inspection, the permit grantee shall be sent a notice of
any violation. The owner shall be notified that he/she may secure
another licensed contractor to proceed with the work.
A. Transfer of permit from contractor to contractor. In case the permit
holder gives written permission or appears in person with another
contractor and grants permission, the permit shall be transferred to the
latter licensed contractor, provided that the latter contractor pays the
established transfer fee. If permission is not granted by the original
permit holder, the contractor who completes the installation shall
secure a permit covering the work he/she does, and the latter
contractor shall be responsible in either case for all work done under
his/her supervision.
B. Transfer of permit from owner to contractor. An owner who secured a
permit to make installations of electrical equipment in his/her residence
may transfer his/her permit to a licensed contractor, provided that the
owner notifies the Electrical Inspection Authority of his/her intention,
receives inspection of the work done by him/her and has his/her
contractor pay the established transfer fee to the Electrical Inspection
Authority.
C. Homeowner completing work started by contractor. Before proceeding
with any electrical wiring installation which has been started by any
other permit holder, the homeowner shall request the Electrical
Inspection Authority to inspect any work performed and shall also
obtain a homeowner's permit for the remaining part of the installation.
The original permit holder may, if he/she desires, transfer his/her
permit to the homeowner upon the owner's payment to the Electrical
Inspection Authority of the established transfer fee.
§ 126-46 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-49
126:218
shall be corrected within a reasonable length of time not to exceed 15 days.
Any person failing to make correction of a violation within the time specified
herein shall be denied the right to file any further permits to do electrical
work within the municipality issuing the violation until such corrections are
made, and a letter shall be sent to the Licensing Board of the license holder
requesting that appropriate action be taken against the license holder.
§ 126-50. Requests for inspection.
Only the permit holder or his or her approved representative shall request
inspection unless § 126-46C applies.
§ 126-51. Conformance to requirements of reciprocal
municipalities.
The failure of licensees to conform to the requirements of a municipality
in which they operate may, if necessary, be reported to the licensee's home
licensing board. It is the responsibility of the home municipal electrical
board to consider violations reported by other municipalities and take such
action as prescribed in Article VI of these rules to ensure compliance in
other reciprocal municipalities and areas covered under the jurisdiction of
the State Electrical Administrative Board.
§ 126-52. Joint (combined) Boards.
The Reciprocal Electrical Council, Inc. (RECI), endorses the formation of
joint or combined Boards, provided that:
A. Established standards of licensing and testing are maintained.
B. Arrangements are mutually agreed upon in advance by the municipality
involved.
C. It is understood that a combined Board may limit the assistance
rendered to any municipality.
D. Complete minutes of all meetings shall be recorded and maintained by
each municipality.
E. The home municipality assumes final responsibility for the granting or
denial of licenses.
§ 126-49 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-52
126:219

ARTICLE IV
Licensing and Examination Requirements
§ 126-53. Proof of residency.
Proof of residency in the applicant's municipality shall be by means of:
§ 126-54. Issuance of occupational licenses.
An occupational license shall be issued to an applicant only by the
municipality in which the applicant legally resides.
§ 126-55. Issuance of contractor licenses.
A contractor license shall be issued only by the municipality in which the
contractor has its legal address.
§ 126-56. Application form requirements.
Application forms shall be submitted after they are completely filled out,
with photographs attached with transparent tape, and the applicant's
notarized signature. Written verification of work experience and education
shall be attached. Verification shall be originals, not copies or verified
copies of originals.
§ 126-57. Minimum examination grade.
To qualify for a license as a result of examination, an applicant shall receive
a minimum grade of 75%.
§ 126-58. Certification of exam results and application.
At least three Board members at the meeting shall certify the results of
all examinations, and licenses shall be issued only after the application has
been signed by a minimum of three Board members.
§ 126-59. Payment of license fee.
The license fee shall be paid prior to issuance of the license.
§ 126-60. Filing of approved application.
When the applicant is approved for a license, one copy of the application
shall be sent to the RECI central file and the other retained for municipality
records.
A. A driver's license.
B. Voter registration along with at least one picture identification (ID).
C. Other identification acceptable to the Board.
§ 126-53 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-61
126:221
§ 126-61. Confidentiality of records.
All municipality records shall be secured at all times, and access to a
person's personal records shall be limited to the Electrical Board, the
Electrical Inspector and/or another designated employee of the
Department.
§ 126-62. Language requirement.
All application forms and examinations shall be in English, and all
applicants shall be able to read and write in the English language.
§ 126-63. Journeyman status required prior to application for
master's license.
Applicants for a master electrician license shall have a current journeyman
license in the municipality of residence.
§ 126-64. Examination of Electrical Inspectors and Board members.
Electrical Inspectors and Board members shall not be examined by their
own Board. They shall be examined by either another municipal board or
the State Electrical Administrative Board.
§ 126-65. Examinations.
A. The Department shall conduct an examination at least once each
calendar quarter at a time and place designated by the Department.
B. Notice of the time, place and date of the examination shall be mailed to
those applicants whose applications have been accepted and are on file
in the Department.
C. An applicant who appears for examination shall show proof of
identification, such as a driver's license or other picture ID.
D. The Board shall consider the qualifications of the applicant prior to
examination and fill out the approval block at the top center of the
application.
E. The applicant shall be notified of the Board's findings. Both copies of
the application form and the reasons for denial shall be retained by the
home municipality.
F. The grade, date and exam form used shall be posted to both copies of
the application, and the results of the exam shall be certified by at least
three Board members.
G. The RECI and the Board, acting jointly, shall review and approve the
form and content of the examination or other test.
H. The examination for master or journeyman electrical license, fire alarm
specialty technician license and sign specialist license shall be a written
§ 126-61 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-65
126:222
§ 126-66. Reexaminations.
examination that consists of questions which are designed to test an
individual's knowledge of the following:
(1) This chapter.
(2) Any rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
(3) The current National Electrical Code (NEC) adopted by this
chapter.
(4) The amendments adopted for the current National Electrical
Code.57
(5) The theory relative to the codes and NFPA 72 specified in this
chapter.
(6) Other codes and rules promulgated and/or adopted by ordinance.
I. Oral examinations shall not be given unless the applicant is legally
handicapped and unable to read or write the examination and unless
approved by the Board.
J. All examination fees are not refundable after the scheduled
examination date.
A. Reexamination for master and journeyman electrician, fire alarm
specialty technician and sign specialist.
(1) Applicants requesting reexamination shall notify the Department at
least 15 days prior to the scheduled examination date.
(2) All examination fees are not refundable after the scheduled
examination date.
(3) New application forms are not required if original copies are on file
in the municipality.
(4) When an applicant fails the first examination, he/she will be
ineligible to qualify for another examination for three months.
When an applicant fails the second examination within two years,
he or she will be ineligible to qualify for another examination for
one year. After that year, an applicant may qualify for
reexamination by submitting documentation of the successful
completion of a Board-approved course in electrical code,
fundamentals or theory or other courses relative to the appropriate
license.
(5) All of the following types of courses may be approved by the Board:
57.Editor's Note: See Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 126-65 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-66
126:223
§ 126-67. Issuance of licenses.
(a) University, college and community college courses that are
relative to the appropriate electrical, fire alarm or sign
licenses.
(b) Home study courses such as videotapes, audiocassettes and
correspondence courses.
(c) Private contractor technical courses.
(d) Association programs that are sponsored by professional trade
organizations and inspector organizations.
(e) Training that is sponsored by nationally recognized model code
promulgating organizations.
(f) The Board may approve other educational or training
programs which are offered by a provider and which address
the categories listed in § 126-65H of this chapter.
B. Reexamination for electrical, fire alarm and sign contractor licenses. An
applicant for the electrical, fire alarm or sign contractor examination
who fails to qualify for a license may reapply for examination by making
a request to the Department at least 15 days prior to the examination
date. An applicant for an electrical, fire alarm or sign contractor license
may be examined at the next scheduled examination.
A. The Department shall issue a license only after an applicant has
successfully completed all of the requirements of this chapter, including
receiving the minimum passing grade of 75%, and has paid the license
fee prescribed in the fee schedule for the licensing municipality.
B. An applicant who qualifies for an electrical, fire or sign contractor's
license and who holds the appropriate master electrician license, fire
alarm specialty technician license or the sign specialist license shall be
issued a license upon completion of a form provided by the Department.
C. The examination fee prescribed in the fee schedule shall be paid, except
for transfers and renewals.
D. The license fee prescribed in the fee schedule shall be paid.
E. Transfer applicants shall show proof acceptable to the Board of
residence in the municipality and shall fill out the appropriate
application forms.
F. If a master electrician, fire alarm specialty technician or sign specialist
from Subsection B ceases to represent his/her appropriate contractor,
the contractor shall have 30 days in which to designate another
employee who is properly licensed to qualify for the contractor license.
After the thirty-day period, the contractor license is no longer valid and
shall be renewed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 126-66 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-67
126:224
§ 126-68. Renewal of license.
Both the contractor and the appropriate licensed person who is
employed by the contractor shall notify the Board within 10 business
days of any changes in the employment status of the appropriate
licensed person.
G. No license shall be allowed to be held in abeyance. Journeyman and
master licenses should not be held concurrently.
A. Licenses shall not be renewed unless a valid license has been issued for
the previous year.
B. Except as prescribed in Subsection A of this section, all licenses shall be
renewed before March 1 of each year, upon request and upon payment
of the fee prescribed in the fee schedule for the licensing municipality.
C. In addition to the requirements specified in Subsection A of this section,
prior to or not later than 12 months after the adoption of the code, an
applicant for master or journeyman electrician, fire alarm specialty
technician or sign specialist renewal shall show evidence of completing
an approved course on the code changes for the new code that was
adopted as prescribed in these rules. A certificate of completion as
prescribed in these rules shall accompany the request for renewal.
D. An applicant who fails to complete the requirements in Subsections A, B
and C shall not be issued a license except upon approval by the Board.
E. The applicant shall show proof of residence in the municipality.
F. Application forms shall be submitted with photographs attached by
transparent tape and notarized signature.
G. Board-approved licenses shall only be issued after the license fee has
been paid.
§ 126-67 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-68
126:225

ARTICLE V
Code Update Courses; Instructors; Standards
§ 126-69. Minimum number of hours per course.
§ 126-70. Approval of courses by Board.
The Board shall approve code update courses that are in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
§ 126-71. Licensing of instructors.58
All instructors shall be licensed under Public Act 217 (1956, as amended)
[MSA § 18.204(1) et seq.; MCL § 338.881 et seq.].
§ 126-72. Certificate of completion.
A certificate of completion shall be issued to a person who has successfully
completed the code update class with the required attendance and/or a
passing grade. This certificate shall contain all of the following information:
§ 126-73. Process and approval for courses and instructors.
A. A course shall consist of not less than 15 hours of instruction on
changes in the code.
B. Approved electrical courses in Subsection A shall be acceptable for fire
alarm specialty technician and sign technician renewal requirements as
long as the 15 hours includes changes in the code relative to National
Electrical Code Article 760 and Article 600, respectively.
A. A course approval number as granted by the Board, the RECI Board of
Directors or the State Electrical Administrative Board.
B. The name of the school, college, organization, company or person who
sponsors or administers the course.
C. The date the certificate was issued.
D. The student's name.
E. The instructor's signature certifying that the applicant completed the
course as described in § 126-69B of this chapter.
A. A provider of a code update course shall apply for approval by
submitting information in writing to the Board or the RECI Executive
Board or the State Electrical Administrative Board. The information
shall be evaluated pursuant to the requirements of Article V.
B. An instructor application shall contain all of the following information:
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 126-69 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-73
126:227
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name of the instructor and his or her license number where
applicable.
(3) A copy of the teaching outline for the program.
(4) A determination of the number of contact hours that are required to
conduct the course.
(5) A description of the criteria that is used to identify program
participants who successfully complete the course.
C. Approval of a course shall be evidenced by:
(1) A course identification number.
(2) The name and address of the applicant.
(3) The name of the instructor and license number and municipality.
(4) The date of approval.
(5) Conditions of approval (attendance and/or exam).
(6) The period of approval.
D. A course that has been approved shall not be altered without prior
authorization by one of those Boards listed in Subsection A of this
section.
E. One of the Boards listed in Subsection A of this section shall be notified
if there is a change in instructors.
F. Any one of the Boards listed in Subsection A of this section may
withdraw the approval of a course if the approval was issued in error by
reason of incorrect information or found to be in violation of these rules.
G. An appeal regarding Subsection F of this section shall be processed
pursuant to the provisions of Act 306 of the Public Acts of 1969, as
amended [MSA § 3.560(101) et seq.; MCL § 24.201 et seq.].59
H. Instructors and code update courses that have been approved shall
have reciprocity between the State Electrical Administrative Board and
the RECI Executive Board.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 126-73 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-73
126:228
ARTICLE VI
Investigation of Violations; Sanctions
§ 126-74. Authority to investigate violations.60
The Department, through its Electrical lnspector(s), shall have the authority
to investigate the activities of a person licensed or registered under this
chapter or under state law which are related to the person's licensure
or registration as an electrical, fire alarm or sign contractor, master or
journeyman electrician, fire alarm specialty technician, sign specialist,
electrician apprentice or fire alarm specialty apprentice technician, which
activities include, but are not limited to the grounds described in § 126-75
below. The Department may hold hearings and shall report its findings to
the Board.
§ 126-75. Grounds for Board action.
Grounds for Board action shall be:
§ 126-76. Imposition of sanctions.
A. Fraud or deceit in obtaining a license or registration under this chapter
or under state law.61
B. The willful violation of a code.
C. False advertising.
D. A violation of this chapter or rules or state law, except in the case of a
minor violation.62
E. Failure to produce the identification card for a license or registration
and at least one piece of identification containing the individual's
picture when requested by the Electrical Inspector.
F. Recommendation by the Michigan Electrical Administrative Board or
any other municipal electrical board to suspend or revoke a license or
registration issued by this Board.
A. The Board shall impose one or more of the following sanctions for a
violation in § 127-75 above.
(1) Suspension of the license or registration issued under this chapter.
(2) Denial of the license or registration required under this chapter.
(3) Revocation of the license or registration issued under this chapter.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 126-74 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-76
126:229
(4) Restriction from taking an exam for a minimum of two years.
(5) Restitution.
(6) Fine as listed in § 126-22B and/or the General Rules.63
B. For two violations of this chapter within a period of two years, the
Board may double the fine imposed under this chapter.
C. For three violations of this chapter within a period of three years, the
Board shall revoke the person's license or registration and permanently
deny the person's reapplication for a license or registration of the class
revoked.
D. If restitution is required to be made by a licensee or registrant under
this section, the Board may suspend the license or registration of the
person required to make the restitution until restitution is made.
63.Editor's Note: See Article II, General Rules, of this chapter.
§ 126-76 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-76
126:230
ARTICLE VII
Recommended Guidelines
§ 126-77. Minimum standards for existing dwelling units.
If visual inspection by the authority having jurisdiction reveals that the
wiring system of an existing dwelling unit is inadequate or if code
certification for any reason is required or requested, the following minimum
standards should be complied with:
A. Entrances and exits. Where two or more entrances and/or exits exist, at
least two shall be illuminated by exterior lights. Exterior lights shall be
controlled by interior wall switches, located for convenient and readily
accessible use.
B. Living room. The living room shall be provided with a conveniently
located wall-switch-controlled light or receptacle. The switched
receptacle may be one of the required receptacles in the room. Duplex
receptacles shall be equally spaced around the walls of the room, one
duplex receptacle on each wall, unless the spacing requirements of
Section 210-52(a) of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) are met.
C. Kitchen.
(1) The kitchen shall be provided with illumination. The required
illumination shall be controlled by a wall switch.
(2) A separate kitchen appliance circuit shall be provided, supplying a
minimum of three grounding-type duplex receptacle outlets. The
grounding contacts of these receptacles shall be grounded. Two of
these receptacles shall be readily accessible and spaced for
convenient use of portable appliances. New appliance circuits shall
be twenty-ampere capacity.
(3) Fine print notes (FPN). Ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection
shall not be used as a substitute for grounding with kitchen
receptacles.
D. Bathroom. Bathrooms shall be provided with illumination, controlled by
a conveniently located wall switch. A receptacle separate from a light
fixture shall be provided. All bathrooms shall have ground-fault circuitinterrupter
protection.
E. All other habitable rooms. Habitable rooms shall be provided with a
conveniently located wall-switch-controlled light receptacle. A
minimum of two additional duplex receptacles are required, equally
spaced around the room.
F. Basement. The basement shall have a minimum of one lighting outlet
for general illumination. All enclosed areas that may be walked into
(except coal bins) shall be provided with a lighting outlet.
§ 126-77 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-77
126:231
G. Laundry area. Laundry areas shall be provided with illumination. A
grounding-type duplex receptacle shall be provided adjacent to the
laundry equipment, on a separate circuit. New laundry circuits shall be
twenty-ampere capacity.
H. Space heating system. Heating equipment that requires electricity for
operation of any facet shall be provided with an individual circuit. A
disconnect switch shall be provided on or adjacent to the equipment
(exception: thermopile controlled furnaces).
I. Stairwells. Stairwells shall be adequately illuminated. Lighting outlets
shall be controlled by wall switches. Switches shall not be located
where it is necessary to use darkened stair sections for their operation.
Stairwells connecting finished portions of dwellings shall be provided
multiple-switch control: one at the head; the other at the foot of the
stairwell.
J. Service and/or feeder. The service or feeder to an existing dwelling unit
shall be a minimum of three-wire, one-hundred-ampere capacity.
Service equipment shall be dead front, having no live parts exposed
whereby accidental contact could be made. All plug-type fuses shall be
Type S. (Exception: an existing properly installed fifty-five-ampere
capacity, three-wire service and feeders of thirty-ampere, two-wire are
acceptable if adequate for the load being served.)
K. Existing wiring and equipment. Existing wiring and equipment shall be
in good repair. Circuit extensions made with flexible cord wiring in lieu
of permanent wiring shall be eliminated.
L. New wiring. All new work shall conform to the National Electrical Code,
as amended.
M. Evidence of inadequacy. Any of the following shall be considered
evidence of inadequacy:
(1) Use of cords in lieu of permanent wiring.
(2) Oversizing of overcurrent protection for circuits, feeders or
service.
(3) Unapproved extensions to the wiring system in order to provide
light, heat or power.
(4) Misuse of electrical equipment.
(5) Lack of lighting fixtures in bathrooms, laundry rooms, furnace
room, stairway or basement.
§ 126-77 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-77
126:232
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments to 1996 Edition of National Electrical Code
[Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1099]
§ 126-78. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
§ 126-79. References to state and municipality.
Any reference in the National Electrical Code and in the other standards
adopted herein to "state" shall mean the State of Michigan. Any reference
therein to "municipality" shall mean the City of Roseville, Macomb County,
Michigan. Any reference to the "Municipal Charter" and "local ordinances"
shall mean the Charter and Code of Ordinances of the City of Roseville and
all applicable statutes of the State of Michigan pertaining to home rule city
government.
§ 126-80. Enforcement and administrative agency.
The City of Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection and each of
its employees are hereby appointed as the enforcement and administrative
agency of the National Electrical Code and the other standards adopted in
§ 126-78.
A. The 1996 Edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA-70), as
promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association with Technical
Amendments approved and recommended by the Reciprocal Electrical
Council, Inc., and approved by the Bureau of Construction Codes, is
hereby adopted by reference, except those provisions thereof amended
hereafter in this chapter, and all electrical service, equipment and
facilities designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in the
city shall conform to the requirements of such code, rules and
amendments directly and/or as provided herein. Copies of said code and
rules are on file in the office of the City Clerk, being marked and
designated as the 1996 Edition of the National Electrical Code
(NFPA-70).
B. The Technical Amendments to the 1996 Edition of the National
Electrical Code, being Rules 1 through 9, inclusive, as hereinafter
stated, and as contained in the RECI Manual, 1996 Edition, as proposed
by the Reciprocal Electrical Council, Inc. (RECI), are hereby adopted,
and said Technical Amendments shall hereafter be incorporated in this
Building and Housing Code as part of the ordinances of the City of
Roseville and shall pertain to all electrical service, equipment and
facilities designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained by
the City of Roseville, which shall conform to the requirements of such
rules and the amendments thereto provided in this chapter.
§ 126-78 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-81
126:233
§ 126-81. Fees and charges.
Each and every reference in the National Electrical Code and in the other
standards adopted in§ 126-78 to a fee or charge for a permit shall be and
hereby is deleted, and each such fee or charge for the purpose therein
designated shall be in such amount as may be set by resolution of the City
of Roseville Council from time to time.
§ 126-82. Technical amendments to standards.
A. RULE 1. Circuit interconnection. Section 210-11 as added as follows:
210-11. Circuit Interconnection. Neutral and ungrounded circuit
conductors for two-, three- or four-wire circuits shall originate at the
same outlet or panel. Neutral and/or ungrounded conductors for
circuits shall not be tapped or spliced from different locations in the
wiring system.
B. RULE 2. Service-entrance conductor sets. Section 230-40 is amended to
read as follows:
230-40. Number of Service-Entrance Conductor Sets. Each
service drop or lateral shall supply only one set of service-entrance
conductors.
Exception No. 1: Buildings with more than one occupancy
shall be permitted to have one set of service-entrance
conductors run to each occupancy or to a group of
occupancies.
Exception No. 2: Where two to six service disconnecting
means in separate enclosures are grouped at one location
and supply separate loads from one service drop or lateral,
one set of service-entrance conductors shall be permitted to
supply each of several such service equipment enclosures.
Exception No. 3: Deleted.
C. RULE 3. Grouping of disconnects. Section 230-72(a) is amended to read
as follows:
230-72. Grouping of Disconnects.
(a) General. The two to six disconnects as permitted in Section
230-71 shall be grouped. Each disconnect shall be marked to
indicate the load served.
Exception No. 1: one of the two to six service disconnecting
means permitted in Section 230-71, where used only for a
water pump also intended to provide fire protection, shall
be permitted to be located remote from the other
disconnecting means.
§ 126-81 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-82
126:234
Exception No. 2.- A service disconnect(s) for separately
metered outdoor electric space conditioning equipment for
one- and two-family dwellings shall be permitted to be
located immediately adjacent to the outdoor meter cabinet.
A permanent plaque or directory shall be installed at each
service-disconnect location denoting all other services,
feeders and branch circuits supplying that building or
structure and the area served by each. The feeder or branch
circuit permitted by this exception shall not enter or pass
through the structure or building served.
D. RULE 4. Outside feeder taps. Section 240-21(m) is amended to read as
follows:
240-21. Location in circuit.
(m) Outside Feeder Taps. Outside conductors shall be permitted
to be tapped to a feeder or to be connected at the transformer
secondary, without overcurrent protection at the tap or
connection, where all the following conditions are met:
(1) The conductors are suitably protected from physical
damage.
(2) The conductors terminate at up to six circuit breakers
or six circuit breakers or six sets of fuses, that will limit
the load to no more than 125% of the ampacity of the
conductors. The calculated load shall not exceed the
allowable ampacity of the conductors.
(3) The tap conductors are installed outdoors, except at the
point of termination.
(4) The overcurrent device for the conductors is an integral
part of a disconnecting means or shall be located
immediately adjacent thereto.
(5) The disconnecting means for the conductors are installed
at a readily accessible location either outside of a
building or structure or inside nearest the point of
entrance of the conductors.
E. RULE 5. Raceways as grounding means:
(1) Section 250-91(b) is amended to read as follows:
§ 126-82 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-82
126:235
250-91. Material.
(b) Types of Equipment Grounding Conductors. The equipment
grounding conductor run with or enclosing the circuit
conductors shall be one or more or a combination of the
following: a copper or other corrosion-resistant conductor.
This conductor shall be solid or stranded; insulated, covered
or bare; and in the form of a wire or a busbar of any shape;
(2) rigid metal conduit, (3) intermediate metal conduit, (4)
electrical metallic tubing; (5) armor of Type AC cable; (6)
the copper sheath of mineral-insulated, metal-sheathed cable;
(7) the metallic sheath or the combined metallic sheath and
grounding conductors of Type MC cable; (8) cable trays as
permitted in Sections 318-3(c) and 318-7; (9) cablebus
framework as permitted in Section 365-2(a); (10) other
electrically continuous metal raceways listed for grounding.
(2) Section 350-14 is amended to read as follows:
350-14. Grounding. Flexible metal conduit shall not be
permitted as a grounding means, Where an equipment bonding
jumper is required around flexible metal conduit, it shall be
installed in accordance with Section 250-79.
(3) Section 351-9 is amended to read as follows:
351-9. Grounding. Liquidtight flexible metal conduit shall not be
permitted as a grounding means. Where an equipment bonding
jumper is required around liquidtight flexible metal conduit, it
shall be installed in accordance with Section 250-79.
F. RULE 6. Type NM and NMC cables; uses not permitted. Section 336-5
is amended to read as follows:
336-5. Uses Not Permitted.
(a) Types NM, NMC and NMS. Types NM, NMC and NMS cables
shall not be used:
(1) As service-entrance cable.
(2) In commercial garages having hazardous (classified) locations
as provided in Section 511-3.
(3) In theaters and similar locations, except as provided in Article
518, Places of Assembly.
(4) In motion-picture studios.
(5) In storage battery rooms.
(6) In hoistways.
(7) Embedded in poured cement, concrete or aggregates.
§ 126-82 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-82
126:236
(8) In any hazardous (classified) location, except as permitted
by Sections 501-4(b), Exception, 502-4(b), Exception, and
504-20.
G. RULE 7. Space-heating equipment (other than electric heat). Section
422-21(c) is added as follows:
422-21(c). Space-heating equipment other than electric heat. A
readily accessible disconnect switch shall be mounted on the exterior
of the heating equipment or on a surface adjacent to the heating
equipment.
H. RULE 8. Circuits in anesthetizing locations. Section 517-61(a) is
amended to read as follows:
517-61. Wiring and Equipment.
(a) Within Anesthetizing Locations.
(1) Except as permitted in Section 517-160, each power circuit
within, or partially within, an anesthetizing location as
referred to in Section 517-60 shall be isolated from any
distribution system by the use of an isolated power system.
Exception: An area in a health-care facility which does not
use flammable inhalation anesthetics and is dedicated to
brief, superficial procedures carried out under inhalation
anesthesia or analgesia, such as dental operatories, clinics
and outpatient facilities.
I. RULE 9. Fire alarm supervision. Section 760-16 is added as follows:
760-16. Supervision. All fire-protective circuits shall be electrically
or electronically supervised so that any malfunction of the system,
such as an electrical open, a ground fault or any short circuit fault on
the main power supply, signaling line or alarm initiating devices, will
indicate a visual and audible signal at the alarm panel when proper
alarm operation would be prevented.
Exception: Interconnecting circuits of household firewarning
equipment that are wholly within a dwelling unit.
§ 126-82 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 126-82
126:237
Chapter 127
EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Fire Prevention — See Ch. 27.
Mobile emergency care medical service — See
Ch. 36.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 49.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Hazardous materials and substances — See
Ch. 168.
§ 126-82 ROSEVILLE CODE § 126-82
126:238
ARTICLE I
Arson and Unique Fire Incidents
[Adopted 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. 1227]
§ 127-1. Findings.
§ 127-2. Title.
This article shall be known as and be referred to as the "City of Roseville
Arson and/or Unique Fire Incident Cost Recovery Ordinance."
§ 127-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERANT — A material (usually a liquid) which is highly flammable
and sometimes explosive used to increase the burning rate and hasten and
spread the fire and accelerate burning.
ACCELERANT DETECTION K-9 (also known as "ARSON DOG") — A canine
that has been trained to detect minute traces of accelerants that may have
been used to start a fire.
ARSON — The willful, malicious burning of property with criminal or
fraudulent intent.
A. The City of Roseville Fire Department finds that there are certain
situations where the resources of the City of Roseville Fire Department,
rescue and emergency medical services and other departments within
the City (Police, DPW, Water, etc.) are used disproportionately for the
benefit of parties other than the residents and taxpayers of the City of
Roseville in situations where fairness and equity demand that the
person(s) responsible, not the taxpayers of the City of Roseville as a
whole, pay the costs of Fire Department response.
B. The City of Roseville Fire Department finds that it is equitable to collect
the costs directly in the situations set forth herein, which serves the
life/safety issues of the City of Roseville and its residents to protect the
City of Roseville from extraordinary expenses resulting from responses
to any known arson, suspected criminal activity or fire later determined
to be arson. The expenses/costs being generated by the response,
extinguishment (equipment and manpower), investigation (by both Fire
and Police Departments) and other City departments (if required) shall
be reimbursed to the City of Roseville by the person(s) (unknown or
hired/recruited by), owners and /or operators of any property,
instrumentalities, equipment or vehicles which cause in whole or in
part, or contribute to in whole or in part, through negligent or
intentional acts or omissions to the occurrence.
§ 127-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 127-3
126:239
BURN — To set on fire; to char, scald, heat or destroy by fire; aiding,
counseling, inducing, persuading or procuring another to do such act or
acts.
CITY — The City of Roseville and all departments and units of said City.
COST RECOVERY/EXPENSES OF AN ARSON AND/OR UNIQUE FIRE
INCIDENT —
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The providing, sending and/or utilizing of
firefighting, police, emergency medical and rescue services and/or other
City departments at the request or direction of the City of Roseville for an
incident resulting from known arson, suspected criminal activity or fire later
determined to be arson.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The City of Roseville Fire Department.
FIRE CHIEF — The administrative head of the Roseville Fire Department.
FIRE INSPECTOR/COORDINATOR — An individual/designee named by and
accountable to the Fire Chief.
FIRE MARSHAL/COORDINATOR — An individual/designee named by and
accountable to the Fire Chief.
OWNER — Any person or persons having a vested or contingent interest
in the premises, real property or vehicle involved in the known arson,
suspected criminal activity or fire later determined to be arson, including
but not limited to any duly authorized agent or attorney, purchaser, devisee
or fiduciary or said person having said vested or contingent interest.
Any and all costs incurred by the City of Roseville, and shall include,
but not be limited to expenses attributable to the response.
A.
The costs further include all salaries and wages of City of Roseville
personnel responding to the incident, salaries and wages of City of
Roseville personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and
report preparation regarding said incident, and/or use of the canine
accelerant detection team and all costs connected with the
administration of the incident relating to any prosecution of the
person(s) responsible, including those relating to the production and
appearance of witnesses at any court proceedings in relation thereto.
B.
Costs shall include all City vehicles responding to the incident (charges
for vehicles set by the Macomb County Fire Chiefs Association). Costs
shall also include such items as disposable materials and supplies used
during the response to said incident, rental or leasing of equipment
used for specific response, replacement of equipment which is
contaminated beyond reuse or repair during response to said incident,
medical expenses and hospitalization costs for exposures, injuries or
illnesses resulting from the incident, costs of all meals for all personnel
involved in the incident, extinguishing agents, water purchased from
municipal water systems, special technical services and laboratory
costs and services and supplies purchased for any specific evacuation
relating to said incident.
C.
§ 127-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 127-3
126:240
PERSON — Individuals, firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations,
clubs and all associations or organizations or natural persons, either
incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and
whether acting by themselves or by a servant, contractor, employee, agent
or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and
assigns thereof.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, sole
proprietorship, trust, firm, joint-stock company, limited liability company,
government entity or any other legal entity responsible for the incident
and any owner, tenant, operator, occupant or other person in control of or
responsible for the operation, maintenance and/or condition of any building,
premises, property or vehicle where an incident resulting from known
arson, suspected criminal activity or fire later determined to be arson on
or about said building, premises, property and/or vehicle. The responsible
party shall be required to reimburse the City of Roseville for all costs and
expenses of an incident resulting from known arson, suspected criminal
activity or fire later determined to be arson as further defined in this article.
SENIOR FIRE OFFICIAL — An individual/designee named by and
accountable to the Fire Chief.
SUSPECTED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any event for which a law
enforcement agency or fire department specifically requests the Roseville
Fire Department Fire Marshal Division to respond and/or to provide
services where the law enforcement agency or fire department is
investigating a crime or suspicious incident or where it has been
determined that a fire has been caused by arson, irrespective of whether a
person is convicted of arson.
§ 127-4. Liability for costs and expenses.
A. Any person(s) who is convicted of arson, suspected of criminal activity
or fire later determined to be arson shall be responsible and liable for
all costs incurred by the City of Roseville for such activities.
B. All the costs incurred by the City of Roseville for such activities shall be
invoiced to and paid by the responsible party.
C. In any case where the Roseville Fire Department personnel and
equipment respond to an arson, suspected criminal activity or fire later
determined to be arson, the responsible party or parties shall be liable
to the City of Roseville for all costs of firefighting and extinguishment,
investigating of cause and origin, and/or use of the canine accelerant
detection team, board-up services, any other security procedures
performed by the City of Roseville Fire Department, and/or other costs
and expenses as defined in this article.
D. The expense of the emergency response shall be a charge imposed upon
the responsible party under this article. The charge constitutes a debt
§ 127-3 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 127-4
126:241
§ 127-5. Billing procedures.
§ 127-6. Specific costs to be covered; failure to pay.
Costs to be recovered under this article shall be those costs and expenses as
defined in § 127-4. If the responsible party fails to pay the City of Roseville
for costs incurred within 30 days of the date of the invoice sent by the City
of Roseville to the responsible party, the City of Roseville may institute legal
action to collect the costs due, including expenses, costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred to collect those costs. Any cost recovery under this
article shall be separate from any costs and expenses ordered as restitution.
§ 127-7. Effect on state and federal laws.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with state or federal
laws requiring person(s) responsible for arson, suspected criminal activity
or fire later determined to be arson from engaging in remediation activities
or paying the cost thereof, or both.
§ 127-8. Nonexclusive remedy.
The remedies provided by this article shall be in addition to any other
remedies available in equity or at law and such penalties as provided by law
or ordinance.
of that responsible party and is collectible by the City of Roseville in the
same manner as an obligation under contract, express or implied.
A. Within 10 days of receiving all costs and expenses, an invoice will be
prepared and submitted for payment of said costs and expenses to the
responsible party liable for the expenses and enumerated under this
article. The invoice will be sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested.
B. The invoice shall require full payment within 30 days from the date of
mailing or service of said invoice to the responsible person(s).
C. Any questions or challenges to the invoice should be made prior to the
thirty-day full payment requirement to avoid any legal action by the City
of Roseville.
§ 127-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 127-8
126:242
Chapter 128
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Mayor as conservator of peace in times of
emergency — See Ch. 5, Sec. 5.1.
§ 128-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Emergency Management Ordinance."
§ 128-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words herein are defined as follows:
ACT — The Michigan Emergency Management Act, No. 390 of the Public
Acts of 1976, as amended [MSA § 4.824(11) et seq.; MCL § 30.401 et seq.].64
DEPUTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR — A person
appointed by the City of Roseville to act as liaison between the City of
Roseville and the Macomb County Emergency Management Coordinator.
DISASTER — An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property resulting from natural or human-made
cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm,
tornado, windstorm, wave action, hazardous material spill, water
contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident,
major transportation accident, oil spill, epidemic, air contamination, blight,
drought, infestation, explosion or hostile military action or paramilitary
action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots or
civil disorders.
DISASTER RELIEF FORCE — All agencies of county and municipal
government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees
and all other persons or groups of persons in the Macomb County
Emergency Operation Plan as having duties to perform or those called
into duty or working at the direction of a party identified in the plan to
perform specific disaster or emergency-related task during a local state of
emergency.
DISTRICT COORDINATOR — The Michigan Department of State Police
District Emergency Management Coordinator. The District Coordinator
serves as liaison between local emergency management programs and
the Michigan State Police Emergency Management Division in all matters
pertaining to the mitigation, preparedness response and recovery and
disaster situations.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 127-8 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 128-2
128:243
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR — The person appointed to
coordinate all matters pertaining to emergency management within the
municipality. The Emergency Management Coordinator for the City of
Roseville is the Macomb County Emergency Management Coordinator.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A program established to
coordinate mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery activities for
all emergency or disaster situations within the City of Roseville. Such a
program has an appointed Emergency Management Coordinator and meets
the program standards and requirements as established by the Department
of State Police Emergency Management Division. The City of Roseville
has elected to be part of the Macomb County Emergency Management
Program.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN — The plan developed and maintained
by the county and political subdivisions included in the Emergency
Management Program area for the purpose of responding to all emergency
or disaster situations by identifying and organizing the disaster relief force.
GOVERNOR'S STATE OF DISASTER — An executive order or proclamation
by the Governor that implements the disaster and recovery aspects of the
Emergency Management Plan and applicable local plans of the county or
municipal programs affected.
GOVERNOR'S STATE OF EMERGENCY — An executive order or
proclamation by the Governor that implements the emergency response
and recovery aspects of the Michigan Emergency Management Plan and
applicable plans of the county or municipal programs effected.
LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY — A declaration by the Mayor or City
Manager or other officials designated. This declaration implements the
response and recovery aspects of the Macomb County Emergency
Operations Plan and authorizes certain actions as described in this chapter.
§ 128-3. Appointment of Emergency Management Coordinator.
§ 128-4. Duties of Emergency Management Coordinator.
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall comply with the standards
and requirements as established by the Department of State Police,
A. By the authority of this chapter, the City of Roseville hereby appoints
the Macomb County Emergency Management Coordinator as the
Emergency Management Coordinator for the City of Roseville. In
addition to acting for and at the direction of the Chairperson of the
Macomb County Board of Commissioners, the Emergency Management
Coordinator will also act for and at the direction of the Mayor or City
Manager of the City of Roseville.
B. A line of succession for the Macomb County Emergency Management
Coordinator has been established and is listed in the Macomb County
Emergency Operation Plan.
§ 128-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 128-4
128:244
Emergency Management Division, under the authority of the Act, in
accomplishing the following:
§ 128-5. Deputy Coordinator.
A. Directing and coordinating the development of the Macomb County
Emergency Operations Plan, which shall be consistent in content with
the Michigan Emergency Management Plan.
B. Specifying departments or agencies which must provide an annex to the
plan or otherwise cooperate in its development.
C. Identifying departments and agencies to be included in the Emergency
Operations Plan as part of the relief force.
D. Developing and maintaining a county resource manual.
E. Coordinating the recruitment, appointment and utilization of volunteer
personnel.
F. Assuring that the Emergency Management Program meets eligibility
requirements for state and federal aid.
G. Coordinating or conducting training and exercise programs for the
disaster relief force within the county and testing the adequacy of the
Emergency Management Plan.
H. Through public information programs, educating the population on
actions necessary for the protection of life and property in an
emergency or disaster.
I. Assisting in the development of mutual aid plans.
J. Assisting the City of Roseville Deputy Emergency Management
Coordinator liaison with the development of municipal standard
operating procedures which are consistent with the County Emergency
Operations Plan.
K. Overseeing the implementation of all functions necessary during an
emergency or disaster in accordance with the Emergency Operations
Plan.
L. Coordinating county emergency management activities with those of
municipalities included in the County Emergency Management
Program, other municipalities, the state and adjacent counties.
M. Coordinating all preparedness activities, including maintaining primary
and alternate Emergency Operations Centers.
N. Identifying mitigation opportunities within the county and encouraging
departments/agencies to implement mitigation measures.
A. By the authority of this chapter, the Roseville City Council shall appoint
a liaison for the purpose of assisting the County Emergency
§ 128-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 128-5
128:245
Management Coordinator in coordinating the emergency management
activities within the City of Roseville. The duties of the liaison (Deputy
Coordinator) are as follows:
(1) To coordinate municipal emergency management activities with
those of the county and adjacent jurisdictions.
(2) To assist the County Emergency Management Coordinator with the
development of the County Emergency Operations Plan and the
incorporation of municipal resources to the plan.
(3) To identify municipal departments and agencies to be included in
the Emergency Operations Plan as part of the disaster relief force.
(4) To identify municipal resources and forward information to the
County Emergency Management Coordinator for inclusion in the
county resource manual.
(5) To coordinate the recruitment, appointment and utilization of
volunteer services.
(6) To assist the County Emergency Management Coordinator with
administering training programs.
(7) To coordinate municipal participation in exercises conducted by the
county.
(8) To assist in the development of mutual aid agreements.
(9) To assist in educating the population as to actions necessary for the
protection of life and property in an emergency or disaster.
(10) To encourage departments/agencies within the city to identify and
implement procedures to mitigate the effects of potential disasters.
(11) To assist in the assessment of the nature and scope of the
emergency or disaster and collect damage assessment information
and forward it to the county.
(12) To assist in the coordination of the Vital Records Protection
Program.
(13) To develop municipal standard operating procedures for disaster
response which are consistent with the County Emergency
Operations Plan.
(14) To assist as liaison to the County Emergency Management
Coordinator at disasters, hazardous materials incidents, fires,
floods, ice storms, tornadoes and other disasters.
§ 128-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 128-5
128:246
§ 128-6. Performance and plan review; declaration of state of
emergency.
B. 65In the event of the absence or unavailability of the municipal liaison
(Deputy Coordinator), a line of succession to the position of municipal
liaison shall be as follows:
(1) Fire Marshal.
(2) Fire Inspector.
(3) Fire Chief.
A. On an annual basis, the Mayor and City Manager shall review the
eligibility and performance of the County Emergency Management
Coordinator and make recommendations to the Roseville City Council.
B. The Mayor, City Manager or other designated person shall review the
effectiveness of the Macomb County Emergency Operations Plan as the
plan relates to the municipality once every two years. With the
assistance of the municipal liaison, he/she shall make recommendations
to the County Emergency Management Coordinator of any changes
which may be needed. After this review and incorporation of necessary
changes, the Mayor or City Manager shall certify the plan to be current
and adequate for the City of Roseville for the ensuing two years.
C. When circumstances within the City of Roseville indicate that the
occurrence or threat of occurrence of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property from natural or human-made cause
exists, the Mayor, City Manager or other designated official may
declare a local state of emergency. Such a declaration shall be promptly
filed with the Macomb County Emergency Management Office, which
shall forward it to the Department of State Police, Emergency
Management Division. This declaration shall not be continued or
renewed for a period in excess of seven days, except with the consent of
the Roseville City Council.
D. If the Mayor or City Manager or other designated person invokes such
power and authority, he/she shall, as soon as is reasonably expedient,
convene the Roseville City Council for one or more emergency meetings
in accordance with the Open Meetings Act to perform its normal
legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands and will
report to the body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this
chapter shall be considered as abridging or curtailing the powers of the
Roseville City Council unless specifically provided herein.
E. The Mayor or City Manager or other designated official may do one or
more of the following under a local state of emergency:
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 128-6
128:247
(1) Direct the Emergency Management Coordinator to implement the
Emergency Operations Plan.
(2) Issue directives as to travel restrictions on local roads within the
municipality.
(3) Relieve Roseville city employees of normal duties and temporarily
reassign them to other duties.
(4) Activate mutual aid agreements.
(5) Direct the municipal disaster relief effort in accordance with the
Macomb County Emergency Operations Plan and Municipal
Operations Plan.
(6) Notify the public of the situation and recommend in-place or
evacuation protective measures.
(7) When obtaining normal approvals would result in further injury or
damage, until the Roseville City Council convenes, waive
procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the
following:
(a) For a period of up to seven days, send municipal employees
and resources to the aid of other communities as provided by
mutual aid agreements.
(b) For a period of up to seven days, appropriate and expend funds
from the Disaster Contingency Fund.
(c) For a period of up to seven days, make contracts and obtain
and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for disaster
purposes.
(d) Employ temporary workers.
(e) Purchase and distribute supplies, materials and equipment.
(f) Make, amend or rescind ordinances or rules necessary for
emergency management purposes which supplement a rule,
order or directive issued by the Governor or a state agency.
Such an ordinance or rule shall be temporary and, upon the
Governor's declaration that a state of disaster or state of
emergency is terminated, shall no longer be in effect.
(g) If a state of disaster or emergency is declared by the Governor,
assign and make available for duty the employees, property or
equipment of the City of Roseville within or without the
physical limits of the City of Roseville as ordered by the
Governor or the Director of the Michigan Department of State
Police in accordance with the Act.
§ 128-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 128-7
128:248
§ 128-7. Request for Governor's declaration of state of emergency.
If a disaster or emergency occurs that has not yet been declared to be a
state of disaster or a state of emergency by the Governor and the Mayor
or City Manager or other designated official determines that the situation
is beyond the control of the municipality, he/she may request the Governor
to declare that a state of disaster or state of emergency exists in the
municipality in accordance with the Act. This shall be done by immediately
contacting the Macomb County Emergency Management Coordinator. The
Emergency Management Coordinator shall immediately contact the District
Coordinator. The District Coordinator, in conjunction with the Emergency
Management Coordinator and the Municipal Deputy Coordinator, shall
assess the nature and scope of the disaster or emergency, and they shall
recommend state personnel, services and equipment that will be required
for its prevention, mitigation or relief.
§ 128-8. Appointment of volunteers.
Each municipal department, commission, board or other agency of
municipal government is authorized to appoint volunteers to augment its
personnel in time of emergency to implement emergency functions assigned
in the Macomb County Emergency Operations Plan. Such individuals are
part of the disaster relief force and shall be subject to the rules and
operational control set forth by the respective department, commission,
board or agency through which the appointment was made and shall be
reimbursed for all actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses.
§ 128-9. Disaster Contingency Fund.
A Disaster Contingency Fund is hereby created, with a budget of not less
than $100. Money may be expended from the fund when a local state
of emergency has been declared for the purpose of paying the disaster
relief force, purchase of supplies and services, repair costs or other needs
required specifically for the mitigation of the effects of or in response to the
emergency or disaster.
§ 128-10. Rights of disaster relief force personnel.
In accordance with the Act, personnel of the disaster relief force while on
duty shall have the following rights:
A. If they are employees of the municipality or other governmental agency,
regardless of where serving, the powers, duties, rights, privileges and
immunities and the compensation incidental to their employment.
B. If they are not employees of the municipality or other governmental
agency, the same rights and immunities as provided for by law.
§ 128-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 128-11
128:249
§ 128-11. Temporary seat of government.
The Roseville City Council shall provide for the temporary movement and
reestablishment of essential government offices in the event that existing
facilities cannot be used.
§ 128-12. Liability.
As provided for in the Act and this chapter, the municipality, or the agents
or representatives of a municipality, shall not be liable for personal injury or
property damage sustained by the disaster relief force engaged in disaster
relief activity. No person shall be liable in a civil action for damages
resulting from an act or omission arising out of and in the course of the
person's good faith rendering of that activity, unless the person's act or
omission was the result of that persons gross negligence or willful conduct.
The right of a person to receive benefits or compensation to which he or
she may otherwise be entitled to under the Workers' Compensation Law,
any pension law or act of Congress will not be affected as a result of said
activity. As provided for in the Act, any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants
the municipality the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any
part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons
or for any other disaster-related function during a declared local state of
emergency or during an authorized practice disaster exercise shall not be
civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real
estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for
loss of or damage to the property of such person.
§ 128-13. Violations and penalties.66
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any
emergency services forces in the enforcement of accomplishment of any
rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to do any act forbidden
by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in
this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or
display an emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member
of the emergency services forces of the City of Roseville unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. Convictions for
violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.67
Chapter 133
FEES
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
67.Editor's Note: Former § 24-14, Review of provisions, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 128-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-1
128:250
§ 133-1. Schedule established. [Amended 11-9-1999 by Ord. No.
1128]
Fees for licenses, permits, certificates, inspections and services provided
by the City as well as the amount of any bond required to be posted or
insurance required to be carried in order to obtain any license or permit
required by the City, as set forth in the Code of the City of Roseville, are
hereby consolidated into a schedule which shall be known as the "General
Fee Schedule of the City of Roseville," which schedule shall supersede any
fees or costs previously set forth in this chapter and which schedule may
be amended from time to time by interlineation after resolution by the City
Council approving same without the necessity of reenacting the Schedule
in its entirety, to be effective upon publication in a newspaper of general
circulation (daily or weekly newspaper) in the City of Roseville. Excepted
from this schedule are library and Parks and Recreation Department fees,
fines and charges. Library fees, fines and charges are established pursuant
to state law. Parks and Recreation Department fees, fines and charges are
established by the Parks and Recreation Department pursuant to the City
Charter, Sec. 7.14.
§ 133-2. Preservation of fees and charges not covered.
Any and all fees and charges authorized and directed to be collected
pursuant to the codified ordinances, resolutions and authorized directives,
as well as by state statute which are not expressly included in this chapter
are declared to continue in existence and remain in full force and effect
unless otherwise in conflict with this chapter.
§ 133-3. Annual report.
The City department heads shall annually review the Schedule of Fees in
October, and any recommended changes therein shall be reported to the
City Council on or before its first meeting in November.
§ 133-4. Copy of Fee Schedule to be made available.
The City Clerk shall maintain for public inspection in the office of the Clerk
a copy of the Schedule of Fees most recently adopted by the City Council.
§ 133-5. Assessing Department fees. [Amended 10-9-2001]
The fees of the Assessing Department shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Field Sheet $2 per parcel
Copies of Plat Map pages $3 per page
Miscellaneous single copies $1 per page
List of businesses in the City $25 flat fee
Labels for mailing lists $1 per page
§ 133-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-5
128:251
Type Fee
Property split per resulting parcel or property
combination per parcel combined [Added
9-27-2005; amended 4-25-2006]
$200
§ 133-6. Department of Buildings and Inspection fees. [Amended
11-23-1999]
The fees of the Department of Buildings and Inspections shall be as follows:
A. Mechanical permit and registration fees:
Type Fee
Contractor registration [Amended
12-14-2004]
$15
Commercial permit application fee [Added
10-10-2006;amended 1-24-2012]
$50
Minimum permit fee [Amended 2-10-2017] $60
Inspections
Reinspection fee $30
Overtime inspections Refer to overtime
language in union
contract
Special inspections, such as investigation of
work started or done without obtaining
required permits [Amended 1-24-2012]
$60, plus all
required permit fees
Periodic inspections $30
Certificate of occupancy inspections
[Amended 9-27-2005]
$50
Refrigeration, air conditioning and heat
pumps [Amended 1-24-2012]
Self-contained systems
3 horsepower or less $30
Over 3 horsepower $35
Remote systems
7-1/2 horsepower or less, each $35
Over 7-1/2 horsepower, each $50
Alterations to each refrigeration system $30
Ductwork [Amended 1-24-2012]
Single family $30
Multiple family
Per living unit $30
§ 133-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:252
Type Fee
Alteration of ductwork (all types) $30
Fire dampers (each) $10
Exhaust, stacks and ventilation
Combustion air ventilation $5
Dryer vent, residential [Added
11-26-2002; amended 1-24-2012]
$5
Exhaust (bath vent, etc.) [Amended
11-26-2002]
Residential $5
Commercial
0 to 500 cfm [Amended 1-24-2012] $15
501 to 5,000 cfm $20
5,001 and higher cfm $30
Kitchen hood and welded exhaust [Added
11-26-2002]
$40
Make up air and duct [Added
11-26-2002]
$40
Stacks, liners and B vents $10
Ventilation, air intake $5
Welded exhaust $30
Heating
Prefabricated gas fireplace [Added
9-27-2005]
$30
Prefabricated wood fireplace with chimney
[Added 9-27-2005]
$30
Special equipment (one-inch) [Added
9-27-2005; amended 1-24-2012]
$30
Each additional $5
Commercial laundry dryer (each) [Added
12-14-2004; amended 9-27-2005]
$5
Chimney [Added 9-27-2005]
8-inch or less [Amended 1-24-2012] $15
9-inch to 14-inch $20
Over 14-inch $30
Furnace, unit or radiant heater, conversion
unit, space heater, woodstove, gas log
fireplace [Amended 12-14-2004;
1-24-2012]
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-6
128:253
Type Fee
First 5 units 0 to 100,000 BTUs, each $30
Each additional unit over 5 $20
First 5 units 100,001 to 500,000 BTUs,
each
$40
Each additional unit over 5 $25
Over 500,000 BTUs $50
Boiler [Added 1-24-2012]
0 to 100,000 BTU $35
Each additional 500,000 BTU over
100,000 BTU
$10
Note: Electrical permits required for wiring, extension of wiring
and reconnection of wiring to heating, air conditioning and
refrigeration equipment.
Humidifiers
When installed with furnace $5
Separate installation $25
Hot water tank $30
Note: Saddle valves for plumbing connection are not
acceptable.
Piping (Gas, hydronic, process, steam)
[Amended 12-14-2004]
Extensions up to 10 feet, included in cost of
unit
Residential $25
Commercial
First 100 feet $40
Each additional 100 feet or fraction
thereof
$20
Openings, per opening [Added
12-14-2004]
$5
Commercial gas piping, per opening [Added
9-27-2005]
$5
Specialty piping (hydronic, process, steam,
etc.) [Added 9-27-2005]
First 100 feet $40
Each additional 100 feet $20
Each opening $5
Miscellaneous and special equipment [Added
12-14-2004; amended 1-24-2012]
$30
§ 133-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:254
Type Fee
Inspection repairs [Added 11-24-2009] $30
B. The following permits are issued by the Department of Buildings and
Inspections but are under the jurisdiction of the Fire Department:
Type Fee
Fire-suppression systems:
Up to 10 heads $25
Each additional group of 10 or fraction
thereof
$5
Alteration to system $25
Fire-suppression standpipes:
4-inch pipe $40
6-inch pipe $60
Fire pumps and connections, each $100
Jockey pumps, each $100
Hood/duct fire-suppression systems:
Each establishment system $40
Each additional system, same location $15
Halon fire-suppression system $60
Each additional system, same location $35
Commercial, industrial and multiple dwellings
permit to install or repair oil, gasoline or
storage tanks:
1,001 to 5,000 gallons $25
5,001 to 30,000 gallons $40
30,001 to 40,000 gallons $70
Residential, commercial or industrial permit to
install or repair L.P. gas storage up to 500
gallons (water capacity):
501 to 1,000 gallons $30
Over 1,000 gallons, each additional 500
gallons or portion thereof
$10
Residential permit to install or repair oil
storage tank
275 gallons (above ground, limit 2 tanks
each)
$25
Up to 500 gallons (underground) $25
C. Department of Buildings and Inspections zoning and permit fees:
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-6
128:255
Type Fee
Zoning Administration Fees
Site plan review [Amended 12-14-2004;
1-24-2012; 2-10-2017]
Multiples $1,000
Commercial, industrial (new) $1,000
Commercial or industrial addition $300
When Planning Commission approval is
required
$500
Developer meeting at office of planning
consultant
$100
Zoning verification letter $50
Variance
Residential variances: [Amended 11-24-2009]
Residential variance or issues not regulated
by Roseville Zoning Ordinance
$50
Residential variance for issues regulated by
Roseville Zoning Ordinance, Residential
District (R-1)
$150
All other districts $300
Lot split $200
Subdivision approval $1,000
Planning Commission special use approval
[Amended 1-24-2012]
$1,200
City Council approvals [Amended 1-24-2012] $300
Vacation of streets/alleys $750
Rezoning $1,000
Administrative fee for all services performed on
private property for maintenance issues, snow
removal, debris removal, grass cutting, etc.
[Added 11-24-2009]
$80
Special Zoning Board of Appeals meeting
[Added 11-24-2009]
$300
Transfer certificate of occupancy request
[Added 11-24-2009; amended 2-10-2017]
$25
Landscape plans (when reviewed by the
Planning Commission on projects that are
normally not subject to its review) [Added
12-14-2004]
$100
Recording fee for basements without
emergency egress form [Added 12-14-2004]
$40
§ 133-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:256
Type Fee
Licenses
Home occupation [Amended 10-10-2006]
First time $50
Annual renewal68 $20
Open air sales
Permit $100
Escrow deposit (if not the property owner) $300
Non-owner-occupied housing [Added
9-27-2005; amended 7-10-2012;
2-10-2017]
Initial registration, single-family residence
(initial inspection included in registration
fee)
$150
Registration of additional unit at same
location (single-family residence)
$50
Initial registration, multi-family residence,
including apartments (initial inspection
included in registration fee)
First unit $100
Each additional unit in the same building $50
Initial registration, condominium (initial
inspection included in registration fee)
Per unit $100
Each additional unit in the same building $50
Reinspection due to failure to appear at
prearranged time
$25
First inspection fee due to issuance of
notice of violation
No fee
Any additional inspections after first
reinspection
$25
Transfer of ownership $25
Appeal $300
Building application fee (exceptions: pool,
shed, privacy fence) [Added 10-10-2006;
amended 2-10-2017]
$50
Builder permit fees [Amended 9-27-2005;
2-10-2017]
68.Editor's Note: The entry for bed-and-breakfast, which immediately followed this fee, was
deleted 12-14-2004.
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-6
128:257
Type Fee
Minimum fee $75
Value
Percent of
Construction Cost*
First $100,000 1%
For the next $500,000 .75%
For any value in excess of $600,000 .5%
*Construction cost calculated from current International Building
Code valuation data report. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No.
1184; 11-27-2007]
Note: These fees apply to permits for commercial, industrial,
signs, multiple and residential.
Type Fee
Sheds and privacy fence permits
Sheds $30
Privacy fences $30
Swimming pool permits $30
Moving of buildings [Amended 10-10-2006;
1-24-2012]
Moving house through City $700
Moving house in or out of City $1,200
Moving garage $500
Vacant structure and certificate of occupancy
inspections
Inspection requested by owner, owner's
representative, or third party, per trade
[Amended 9-27-2005]
$50
Reinspection (may be charged when, in the
opinion of the Department of Buildings and
Inspections, the job is not ready when
inspection is requested)
$30
Overtime inspections Refer to overtime
language in union
contract
Special inspections (Special investigation such
as work started or done without required
permit. Additional time on inspections, per
hour, plus all required permit fees.) [Added
11-26-2002; amended 2-10-2017]
$100
Reinspection fee [Added 2-10-2017] $30
Plan examination fees
§ 133-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:258
Type Fee
Residential alterations, additions and minor
industrial and other nonresidential alterations
$25
Signs for which engineered-sealed drawings
are required [Amended 2-10-2017]
$50
Residential, new $50
Commercial and industrial addition or
alteration: [Amended 9-27-2005;
11-27-2007]
For project valued at $50,000 or less $100
For project valued at $50,001 to $100,000 $200
For project valued over $100,000 $400
New commercial, industrial or multifamily
[Amended 9-27-2005]
$400
Garages [Added 12-14-2004] $25
Note: Plan review fees must be paid prior to review.
Engineering fees
Administrative fee for weed cutting69 $80
Grade stake [Amended 1-24-2012]
Residential, new $100
Garage $75
Improvement guaranties
Demolish garage [Added 9-27-2005] $100
Demolish house [Added 9-27-2005] $1,000
Demolish commercial or industrial [Added
9-27-2005]
$2,000 or 5%
Swimming pool $25
Garages $50
Additions, dormers and alterations $100
Residential, new $500
Signs that require engineer's seal $300
All other signs $50
Commercial and industrial interior alterations
requiring an architect's seal
$500
All other interior renovations [Amended
10-10-2006]
$100
69.Editor's Note: The fee entries for soil erosion, which immediately followed this fee, were
deleted 12-14-2004.
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-6
128:259
Type Fee
Commercial, industrial and multiple family
(additions and new construction)
0.5% of construction
value, minimum of
$500
Administrative fee 20% of original
improvement
guaranty per year
Stormwater credit review fee [Added
1-22-2019]
$30
Stormwater engineering inspection fee [Added
1-22-2019]
$30
Stormwater Board of Appeals application fee
[Added 1-22-2019]
$50
Note: Amount of improvement guaranty may be greater than
0.5% of value pursuant to Section 2021 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
D. Electrical permit and registration fees:
Type Fee
Licensing, registration and examination fees
[Amended 12-14-2004]
Journeyman license $10
Master, sign specialist and fire alarm
technician license
$20
Contractor license $50
Contractor registration $15
Permit fees (Permits shall be secured before
work commences.)
Commercial permit application fee
[Amended 1-24-2012; 2-10-2017]
$75
Transfer of permits $30
Additional permit for equipment installed and
inspected but not included in open permit date.
Permit application must be marked "addition to
permit #."
Combination rates
shall apply additions
Reinspection permit
When code violation is not corrected on first
notice
$30
Special inspections
§ 133-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:260
Type Fee
Special investigation, such as work started or
done without required permit; additional time
on inspections, per hour, plus all required
permit fees
$50
Repairs
Repairs and alterations not specifically
covered in this schedule
$30
Motion picture apparatus; each machine $30
Carnivals, festivals, circuses
(Additional fees shall be charged for all time
over 2 hours.)
Actual employee
costs wages and
including fringes
Carnival bond $5,000
Theatrical road show inspection [Amended
1-24-2012]
$100
Mobile homes/trailer park (move in) $30
Periodic inspections (certificates)
Certificate of occupancy and compliance
(each request must be made in writing by
owner) [Amended 9-27-2005]
$50
Periodic inspections $30
Overtime inspections Refer to overtime
language in union
contract.
Circuits [Amended 1-24-2012]
First circuit (new, extended or reconnected) $15
Each additional $15
Lamps or tubes [Amended 1-24-2012]
First 25 lamps, tubes or fraction thereof $15
Each additional 25 or fraction thereof $10
(1) Floodlights or lamps of 1,000 watts capacity each or over shall be
considered as power units.
(2) Each cluster of floodlights consisting of lamps, each 1,000 watts or
over, shall be considered as one power unit of sum of lamp wattage.
(3) Each neon type gas-tube lamp shall be counted as one unit.
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-6
128:261
Type Fee
Application fee [Added 10-10-2006]
Refrigeration/air conditioning up to 5 ton
[Added 12-14-2004; amended
10-10-2006; 1-24-2012]
$35
Interruptible service for A/C unit [Added
9-27-2005]
$30
Air conditioner reconnect [Added
1-24-2012]
$30
Wiring: windmill/solar array [Added
1-24-2012]
$50
Furnace wiring/reconnect [Added
12-14-2004; amended 10-10-2006;
1-24-2012]
$30
Standby generator (any occupancy)
0 to 30 total KW or KVA $35
Over 30 total KW or KVA $70
Motors of less than 1/4 HP on other than
heating units
Based on the
number of circuits
Electrical ranges, ovens, dryers and water
heaters
First unit [Amended 10-10-2006;
1-24-2012]
$25
Each additional unit $5
Swimming pool, spa, hot tub [Added
10-10-2006]
$30
Data, AV, Comm, CATV [Added
10-10-2006]
$40
Feeders [Amended 1-24-2012]
First 100 feet or less $20
Each additional 100 feet $10
Underfloor, raceways, headers for cellular
floors, bus ducts, feeders, etc.
First 100 feet or less $20
Each additional 100 feet $10
Service [Amended 9-27-2005;
1-24-2012]
100 amps or less $25
100 to 400 amps $35
401 amps to 600 amps $45
§ 133-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:262
Type Fee
Over 600 amps $60
Service cable replacement (only) $25
Temporary service up to 200 amps, plus
charge of each circuit in use
$30
Temporary service over 200 amps $50
Signs: (exterior, indoor window and outline
tubing) [Amended 10-10-2006;
1-24-2012]
Circuits (new or extended)
First circuit $25
Each additional circuit $10
Connections/reconnections
First sign $25
Each additional sign $10
Neon outline tubing
First 50 feet $25
Each additional 50 feet $10
Note: A connection permit will not be required for an
approved indoor/window portable sign. Signs supplied with
a flexible cord approved for this use and not over six feet
in length and connected to a properly installed receptacle
within six feet of sign.
Type Fee
Sign tag inspection (A separate form shall
be used for sign tag inspections.)
$100
Temporary wiring
Connections, displays, exhibits, etc.,
including lighting, motors and other
electrical equipment:
Up to 100,000 square feet of display
area
$40
Over 100,000 to 200,000 $80
Over 200,000 to 300,000 $110
Over 300,000 to 400,00 $150
Over 400,000 $175
Temporary outdoor lighting $25
Temporary outdoor decorative displays $25
Fire alarms
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-6
128:263
Type Fee
For any one permit for fire alarm systems
(Permits for fire alarm systems shall be
on a separate permit form listing only fire
alarm items.)
Not less than $30
False alarms
First and second No charge
Third and fourth $25
Fifth and subsequent $50
City pull box (game well), each box $10
Drill and pull station
First station $10
Each additional station $5
Fire alarm signal devices (horn, bell or
voice), each device
$5
Fire door holders and detector units,
each
$5
Heat or smoke detectors, each detector $5
House master panel, each panel $20
Sub-panel annunciator, voice or sound
signal, each panel
$10
Exitway door electrically unlocking
system, each door
$10
Sprinkler system
Wet only, each $15
Wet and dry, each $25
Status indicator (elevators, dampers,
etc.), each
$10
Alterations or additions to existing systems are considered new
work, and the above fees apply to all items, old or new, on the
system.
All existing systems being connected to the Roseville Fire
Department Central System will be treated as new work.
Electric motors, circuits, fixtures, heater units, service changes,
etc. will be charged at the rates established by this applicable fee
schedule.
Inspection repairs [Added 11-24-2009] $30
E. Plumbing permit and registration fees:
§ 133-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:264
Type Fee
Commercial permit application fee [Added
10-10-2006; amended 1-24-2012]
$50
Minimum permit fees [Amended 2-10-2017] $75
Underground special inspection $25
Special inspection, work started early
[Amended 1-24-2012]
$60
Reinspection fee [Amended 2-10-2017] $30
Certificate of occupancy [Amended
9-27-2005]
$50
Overtime inspections Refer to overtime
language in union
contract.
Water distribution system
3/4” [Amended 1-24-2012] $15
1” [Amended 1-24-2012] $20
1 1/2” [Amended 1-24-2012] $25
2” $30
2 1/2” $40
3” $50
4” $55
Exceeding 4” $60
Building storm drains and sewers
Up to 6” $20
Up to 8” $25
Up to 10” $30
Up to 12” $40
Up to 14” $50
Fixtures [Amended 12-14-2004]
First fixture or stack [Amended 1-24-2012] $30
Each additional fixture or stack [Amended
1-24-2012]
$10
Baths $5
Conductor, first [Added 1-24-2012] $30
Each additional $10
Dishwashers $5
Drinking fountains $5
Floor drains $5
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-6
128:265
Type Fee
Food waste grinders $5
Humidifiers $5
Interceptors (oil, sand, grease, etc.)
[Amended 1-24-2012]
$30
Laundry standpipes $5
Laundry trays $5
Lavatories $5
Lift pumps [Amended 1-24-2012] $10
Medical gas bulk storage [Added
9-27-2005; amended 1-24-2012]
$30
Roof sumps [Added 1-24-2012] $10
Shower traps $5
Sinks (three-compartment/prep sink) $15
Slop sinks $5
Soda fountains, bars $5
Specialty piping (medical gas, vacuum, air,
etc.) [Added 9-27-2005]
First 100 feet $40
Additional 100 feet $20
Sumps $10
Urinals $5
Vacuum pump, air compressor [Added
9-27-2005; amended 1-24-2012]
$30
Water closet $5
Water heaters $30
Waste openings $5
Water treatment devices [Amended
1-24-2012]
$40
Special equipment (vending machines,
commercial washers, dry cleaning machine,
etc.) [Amended 9-27-2005; 1-24-2012]
$30
Commercial laundry equipment (each) $10
Each additional special equipment $10
Crock to iron/fernco (building sewer
connection)70 [Amended 11-26-2002]
$30
Backflow preventers [Added 11-26-2002]
70.Editor's Note: The fee entries for sprinkler heads, which immediately followed this entry,
were repealed 1-24-2012.
§ 133-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-6
128:266
§ 133-7. City Clerk's office fees.
The administration fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Clerk's office fees:72
Precinct map [Added 12-14-2004; amended
10-10-2006]
$2.50
City of Roseville Annual Budget $10
City of Roseville Audit $10
Type Fee
One-inch [Amended 1-24-2012] $30
Two-inch [Amended 1-24-2012] $35
Three-inch $40
Over three-inch $50
Underground (sub-soil, sanitary, storm)
[Added 12-14-2004]
Medical gas, vacuum, compressed air, etc.
First 100 feet
Each additional 100 feet
Vacuum pump, air compressor
Registration of contractor's license [Added
12-14-200471]
$10
F. Miscellaneous fees.
Type Fee
Zoning Map [Added 12-14-2004; amended
10-10-2006]
$10
Zoning Ordinance Book [Amended
10-10-2006]
$18
Roseville Master Plan [Added 11-27-2007] $25
Collection boxes [Added 6-11-2019]
Initial permit or any permit issued
following expiration of revocation
$100 per box
Renewals, timely submitted prior to
expiration
$50 per box
71.Editor's Note: This entry replaced the former entries for registration of masters' license of
journeyman.
72.Editor's Note: The former entry for the Roseville Code of Ordinances, which followed
herein, was repealed 11-23-1999. The former entry for the Roseville Master Plan, which
followed herein, was repealed 11-27-2007.
§ 133-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-7
128:267
Type Fee
Business license [Amended 11-23-1999;
10-10-2006]
Annual $25
After December 1 $12.50
Transfer of license $5
Late fee, per month after June 1 $15
Xerox copies, per page for nonresidents $1
Audio CD copies of Council meetings, per
meeting [Amended 10-10-2006; 11-24-2009;
1-24-2012]
$10
Freedom of information
First page $2
Each additional page (hourly rate of lowest
clerical person in office)
$0.25
Colored copies, per page [Added 11-24-2009] $0.50
Campaign aids [Added 11-27-2007]
Voter labels [Amended 11-24-2009;
1-24-2012]
$10 set-up plus $0.50
per label sheet
Voter printout $10 set-up plus $0.03
per printed page
Voter information on CD/Disk [Amended
11-24-2009; 1-24-2012]
$20
Notary fee, nonresident [Added 11-24-2009;
amended 1-24-2012]
$10
Gas stations and motor lubricants [Amended
10-10-2006]
Yearly license $25
Additional, first nozzle [Amended
11-27-2007]
$7.50
Additional, each additional nozzle [Amended
11-27-2007]
$3
Application to establish Industrial Development
District and/or for industrial facilities exemption
certificate [Amended 8-14-2012]
$1,000
Application to establish Commercial
Rehabilitation District and/or for commercial
rehabilitation exemption certificate [Added
8-14-2012]
$1,000
Going-out-of-business license [Added
10-14-2003; amended 10-10-2006]
§ 133-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-7
128:268
Type Fee
First application (for a period of 30 days) $150
Renewals (30 days each)
First renewal $75
Second renewal $7573
§ 133-8. Engineering fees. [Amended 11-23-1999; 10-9-2001]
Engineering fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Sidewalk
Residential $25
Commercial $40
Plus $0.20 per foot over 100 feet
Approach
Residential $25
Commercial $50
Curb cut
Residential $10
Commercial $25
Road patch $50
Note: For sidewalk, approach and curb cut, the permit fee includes
the initial inspection and one reinspection. If additional inspections
are required, they will be charged at the same rate as the initial
permit fee.
Storm sewer
Residential $50
Commercial $100
Plus inspection escrow
Right-of-way permit
(bond required) [Amended 10-10-2006] $50
Inspection escrow (based upon work being
performed) [Added 10-10-2006]
$50/hour regular
time; $80/hour
overtime
Plan review (first two reviews) [Amended
10-10-2006]
$500
Each additional review thereafter $200
73.Editor’s Note: Film permit fees, added 7-14-2009, as amended, which immediately
followed this fee, were moved to § 133-19, Office of City Manager, 6-24-2014.
§ 133-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-8
128:269
Type Fee
Plus $25 per acre after the third acre $25
Note: The right-of-way will require restoration within 60 days, and if
not complied with, the City will perform the restoration and obtain
funds from the bond for the cost incurred.
Work completed without required permit and
inspection will be charged at double the permit fee
when the permit is obtained. [Added 12-14-2004]
Garage and house grades: [Added 12-14-2004;
amended 1-24-2012]
Garage grade $75
House grade $100
§ 133-9. Fire Department fees.
The fees of the Fire Department shall be as follows:
A. Fire and ambulance reports: [Amended 10-28-2014]
(1) Medical report (up to five pages), in person requests: $6.
(2) Medical report (up to five pages), mail requests: $23.42.
(3) Medical report additional pages: $1.
(4) Fire report (up to six pages): $6.
(5) Fire report additional pages: $1.
B. Reimbursement incidents involving persons operating a motor vehicle
under the influence of alcoholic beverages or operating while visually
impaired: fire-fighting and rescue services as actually incurred
pursuant to the terms of Article X of Chapter 340 of the Code of the City
of Roseville or any successor ordinance as a result of accident and
incidents involving persons operating a motor vehicle under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or while visually impaired, while using
drugs or other provisions as set forth in said Article X of Chapter 340.
C. Hazardous material incidents: the actual costs for personnel, apparatus
and other costs incurred by the Fire Department in responding to a
hazardous material incident as otherwise provided for in Article I of
Chapter 142 of the Code of the City or Roseville or any successor
ordinance or amendment thereto.
D. Fire inspections. [Added 11-26-2002; amended 10-10-2006;
10-28-2014; 2-10-2017
(1) Fire inspection: $25
(2) Fire reinspection: $80.
§ 133-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-9
128:270
(3) Second reinspection and any additional inspections thereafter:
$110.
(4) After hours, weekend and overtime/emergency inspections shall be
charged at the cost of overtime incurred for the man hours
expended.
E. Required witnessed certification test for restaurant suppression
systems and commercial spray booth suppression systems. [Added
11-26-2002; amended 2-10-2017
(1) First test: $25
(2) Second retest: $50.
(3) Third and additional retest: $100.
(4) After hours, weekend and overtime/emergency inspections:
[Added 10-10-2006]
(a) Any inspections made during other than normal working hours
will be at the rate of 1 1/2 of times the rates indicated in
Chapter 133, Fees.
(b) To cover the cost of man-hours for after hours, weekend and
overtime/emergency inspections refer to overtime language in
Fire Union contract.
F. Copies of fire investigation photographs. [Added 11-26-2002;
amended 12-14-2004; 11-24-2009; 10-28-2014]
(1) Eight-inch-by-ten-inch digital photo: $5 each.
(2) Digital photos (up to six per page) on eight-inch-by-ten-inch photo
paper: $6.
G. Ambulance fees. [Added 12-14-2004; amended 1-25-2005;
11-24-2009; 10-28-2014; 2-10-2017
(1) BLS: basic calls (requiring oxygen/transport only):
(a) BLS emergency: $540.
(b) BLS nonemergency: $425.
(2) ALS1: advanced calls with limited care (IVs/oxygen/monitor/
dextrose/transport):
(a) ALS emergency: $660.
(b) ALS nonemergency: $600.
(3) ALS2: advanced calls with extensive care (invasive care/three
medications): $800.
§ 133-9 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-9
128:271
(4) BLS treatment/no transport: $397.
(5) ALS treatment/no transport: $425.
(6) Mileage: $14 per mile.
(7) Oxygen fee: $50.
(8) Extrication $600.
(9) Returned check fee: $45.
H. Sprinkler system and alarm system inspections. [Added 10-10-2006;
amended 2-10-2017]
(1) First inspection for final: $35.
(2) Second reinspection for final: $75.
(3) Third and additional reinspection: $100.
(4) Any inspection made during other than normal business hours will
be at the rate of 1 1/2 times the rates indicated in Chapter 133,
Fees.
I. Gas station (UL-1254) inspections. [Added 10-10-2006; amended
2-10-2017]
(1) First inspection and/or annual inspection for final: $35.
(2) Second inspection for final: $75.
(3) Third and additional reinspection: $100.
(4) Any inspection made during other than normal business hours will
be at the rate of 1 1/2 times the rates indicated in Chapter 133,
Fees.
J. Special inspections. [Added 10-10-2006]
(1) Investigations of work started or completed without obtaining
proper plan reviews or required permits: $100.
(2) Any inspection made during other than normal business hours will
be at the rate of 1 1/2 times the rates indicated in Chapter 133,
Fees.
K. Hazardous materials. [Added 11-24-2009]
(1) For businesses that use, store or generate below the specified
quantity threshold: $100.
(2) For businesses that use, store or generate at or above the specified
quantity threshold: $150.
(3) Late filing fees: $75.
§ 133-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-9
128:272
§ 133-10. Information Services fees.
§ 133-11. Planning Commission fees.74
(Reserved)
§ 133-12. Community Development Department fees. [Amended
10-14-2003; 10-28-2014; 2-10-2017]
L. False alarm fees. [Added 10-28-2014]
(1) False alarms, first and second responses: no charge.
(2) False alarms, third and fourth responses: $50.
(3) False alarms, fifth and subsequent responses: $100.
M. Miscellaneous. [Added 10-28-2014]
(1) Fire door drop inspections, per visit: $25.
(2) Special request fire inspection (i.e., occupancy changes,
emergency plan review, fire drills, emergency drills, etc.): $50.
(3) Special tent and trailer inspections (i.e., carnivals, haunted houses,
outdoor sales, band, other occupancies, etc.): $50.
(4) Special inspections for valid occupancy complaint and/or code
violations, after hours: weekend and emergency inspection cost of
overtime for the employee per union contract.
(5) Flash drive (MG) with digital pictures: $75.
(6) Fire administrative mailing/billing fee: $5. [Added 2-10-2017]
(7) Hazardous materials below specified quantity: $100. [Added
11-28-2017]
(8) Hazardous materials above specified quantity: $250. [Added
11-28-2017]
(9) Hazardous materials late filing fee: $75. [Added 11-28-2017]
A. Fees for Information Services shall be as follows: [Amended
11-26-2002; 11-27-2007]
(1) Data files: $74 each.
A. Industrial development district amendment fee (for industrial facilities
tax exemptions certificate application), P.A. 198 of 1974, as amended):
$1,000.
74.Editor's Note: Former §§ 133-11, Library fees, and 133-12, Parks and Recreation
Department fees, were repealed 11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 1128. This ordinance also
renumbered §§ 113-13 through 133-20 as 133-11 through 133-18, respectively.
§ 133-9 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-12
128:273
§ 133-13. Police Department fees.
Fees of the Police Department shall be as follows:
B. Commercial rehabilitation exemption district amendment fee, P.A. 210
of 2005: $500.
C. Commercial redevelopment certificate exemption application fee, P.A.
255 of 1978, as amended: $1,000.
D. Commercial redevelopment certificate district amendment fee, P.A. 255
of 1978, as amended: $500.
A. General fees.
Type Fee
Accident reports [Amended 1-24-2012] $10
Incident reports [Amended 10-10-2006;
11-24-2009; 1-24-2012]
First page through 10th page $5
Per page after 10 $1
Fingerprint cards [Amended 10-10-2006;
11-24-2009]
Roseville resident [Amended 1-24-2012] $15
Nonresident $25
Records check [Added 10-10-2006]
Roseville resident [Amended 1-24-2012] $7
Nonresident $10
False alarm fees [Amended 11-27-2007]
First two alarm runs Free
Third alarm run $25
Fourth alarm run $50
Fifth alarm run $75
Six or more $100 each run
Gun purchase permit75 [Amended
11-27-2007; 9-1-2013]
$10 each
$20 notarized
Prisoner property release [Added
9-1-2013]
$15
Vehicle impound release [Added 9-1-2013] $50
75.Editor's Note: The former entry for gun purchase permits, copies, as amended, which
immediately followed, was repealed 11-24-2009. The former entry for CCW application,
which followed herein, was repealed 11-26-2002.
§ 133-12 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-13
128:274
Type Fee
Court-ordered preliminary breath tests
[Amended 11-27-2007; 11-24-2009]
$10
Defective equipment inspection fees
Resident/Roseville ticket [Amended
1-24-2012]
$5
Nonresident/other department tickets $10
Animal (dog/cat)
Give-up fee [Amended 3-27-2001;
12-14-2004; 10-10-2006; 1-24-2012;
9-1-2013]
$30/resident; $40/
nonresident
Owner request to euthanize an animal
[Added 9-1-2013]
$100/resident; $125/
nonresident
Ten-day quarantine of an animal [Added
9-1-2013]
$225/resident; $250/
nonresident
Five-day hold on stray animal [Added
9-1-2013]
$100/resident; $125/
nonresident
Dog released from truck [Added
10-10-2006; amended 1-24-2012]
$20/with Roseville
license; $30/not
licensed; $40/
nonresident
Animal trap deposit (14 days) $20
Refunded when trap returned [Added
12-14-2004]
$10
Trap not returned [Added 12-14-2004;
amended 1-24-2012]
$100/possible
criminal charges
Impoundment with transport to local holding
area [Added 12-14-2004]
$20
Impoundment with return prior to transport
to county or local holding area [Added
12-14-2004]
$10
Photographic fee schedule
8 x 10 photos on a CD [Amended
1-24-2012]
$15
Polaroids $7.50
35mm black and white $3
35mm color $5
Polaroids copied (6 per sheet)76 $3
Videotape/DVD [Amended 11-27-2007] $45
76.Editor's Note: The former entry for contact strip, which followed herein, was repealed
10-9-2001.
§ 133-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-13
128:275
Type Fee
Audio/video CD [Amended 11-27-2007] $35
Reimbursement: incidents involving persons
operating a motor vehicle while under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances, or operating while visibly impaired
for police services actually incurred pursuant to
the terms of Article X of Chapter 340 of the City
of Roseville Code of Ordinances [Added
1-8-2019]
$0.93 per minute
B. Licenses issued by Police Department.
License Type Fee
Expiration
Date
Auction $50 Good for 30 days
Auctioneer [Amended
10-9-2001]
$20 Good for 30 days
Bicycle [Amended
10-10-2006]
$1 Ownership of bicycle
(Roseville resident
only)
Carnival [Amended
11-27-2007]
First 11 days $400 + $1,000
bond
For 12th day $50
Day 13 and onward $25
Booths/concessions
First 11 days, each $30
12th day $10
Day 13 and onward $5
Christmas tree lot and grave
blankets [Amended
4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1109; 11-27-2007]
$100 + $500
escrow
12/31
Dog licenses [Amended
3-27-2001; 12-14-2004;
10-10-2006]
Same as rabies
vaccination
expiration date
Spayed/neutered
[Amended 11-24-2009;
1-24-2012]
$5/1-year; $6/
2-year; $7/
3-year
§ 133-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-13
128:276
License Type Fee
Expiration
Date
Not spayed/neutered
[Amended 11-24-2009;
1-24-2012]
$13/1-year;
$20/2-year;
$27/3-year
Duplicate license, spayed/
neutered
$5
Duplicate license, not
spayed/neutered
$5
Animal (dog/cat)
Expired by more than 30
days
$10
Drive-in restaurant
[Amended 10-10-2006;
11-24-2009]
$40 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Fireworks sales [Amended
10-9-2001; 11-27-2007;
1-24-2012]
$500 For period of sales,
must have City
business license
Handbill and bill posters
[Amended 11-24-2009]
For 1 year $100
For 3 months $50
For 1 week $30
For 1 day $20
Junkyard/used auto parts
[Amended 10-10-2006;
11-24-2009]
$150 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Kennel license [Amended
12-14-2004; 10-10-2006]
$175 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
Annual inspection $25
LCC Investigations
[Amended 11-27-2007]
SDM/SDD [Amended
1-24-2012]
$1,000
Class B, Class C or Private
Club [Amended
1-24-2012]
$1,500
Drop/add names of
immediate family (mother,
father, natural or adopted
child, brother or sister)
$150
§ 133-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-13
128:277
License Type Fee
Expiration
Date
Pawnshops [Amended
10-9-2001]
$500 annually 5/1
Parking lot/storage lot
[Amended 10-10-2006]
$50 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Precious metals and gems
dealers [Amended
10-9-2001; 10-10-2006]
$50 annually;
$20 per month
late fee after
license due date
Must also get City
license
Each employee [Amended
11-24-2009; 1-24-2012]
$30 annually
Skating rink [Amended
10-10-2006; 11-24-2009]
$50 1/15; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Solicitor/canvasser
[Amended 10-9-2001;
11-27-2007; 11-24-2009;
9-10-2013]
$200 2/1
Nonprofit and interstate No fee Must register with
Department
Solicitor bond $2,000
Transient merchant bond $2,000
Tattoo parlor [Amended
10-9-2001; 10-10-2006;
11-27-2007; 1-24-2012]
$250 2/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Each employee $50 + physical
Therapeutic massage
[Amended 10-10-2006;
1-24-2012]
$250 2/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Massage therapist [Amended
10-9-2001; 11-27-2007;
1-24-2012]
$50 2/1
Truck/trailer rental
[Amended 10-10-2006;
11-24-2009]
$50 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Used car/truck sales
[Amended 10-9-2001;
10-10-2006; 11-24-2009]
$50 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Valet/parking lot [Amended
10-10-2006]
$100 12/31; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
§ 133-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-13
128:278
License Type Fee
Expiration
Date
Catering [Amended
10-9-2001; 10-10-2006]
Truck $35 5/1 (must be
inspected); $20 per
month late fee after
license due date
Truck driver $20 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Helper $5 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Ice cream sales [Amended
10-9-2001; 10-10-2006]
Truck $35 (must be
inspected)
5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Truck driver $20 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Helper $5 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Bike driver $5 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Public vehicle driver
[Amended 10-9-2001;
10-10-2006; 11-24-2009]
$30 5/1; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Renewal [Amended
11-24-2009]
$25
Taxicabs
Bond plates [Amended
10-9-2001]
5/1 and 11/1 (pay
annual fee in May)
Each cab [Amended
1-24-2012]
$40
Original permit $2
Renewal, each $1
§ 133-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-13
128:279
License Type Fee
Expiration
Date
Meter rates [Amended
5-23-2000 by Ord. No.
1138; 12-14-2004;
12-26-2007 by Ord. No.
1209; 2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 1240]
Per mile [Amended
7-22-2014 by Ord. No.
1268]
$2.70
Waiting/traffic delay time $36
Flag throw $3
Flag throw surcharge: A surcharge fee of $0.90 shall be permitted
to be added to the flag throw in the event, at the time of its biannual
inspection, the cost of regular gasoline is $3.00 or greater per gallon
as determined by the AAA Fuel Gage Data for the State of Michigan
average. The surcharge shall last until the next biannual inspection,
unless the rate of regular gasoline remains at or above $3.00 per
gallon.
C. Vending and amusement devices. [Amended 10-10-2006]
Type Fee
Expiration
Date
Arcade 12/31; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Owner Type I
New $500 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
Renewal $250 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
Owner Type II 12/31; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Fewer than 4 amusement
machines
$25 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
Distributor $100 12/31; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
§ 133-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-13
128:280
§ 133-14. Department of Public Works fees.
The fees of the Department of Public Works shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Expiration
Date
Machine tags 12/31; $20 per month
late fee after license
due date
Amusement $50 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
Musical $5 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
Vending [Amended
1-24-2012]
$10 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
Penny $3 $20 per month late
fee after license due
date
A. Brush/chipper service fee: $70 per hour (minimum 1/2 hour charged:
$35). [Amended 10-10-2006]
B. Posted/noncomplying refuse and materials placed at curbside: property
billed at the cost of collection and disposal at per hourly labor,
equipment and disposal costs and charges from the hauler.
C. Residential street purchase and planting (Fall/Spring Program):
[Amended 10-10-2006]
(1) Actual cost of tree when purchased from nursery.
(2) When planted from DPW tree nursery: $75 per tree.
D. Right-of-way tree removal and replacement:
(1) Less than 24 inches DBH: $500. [Amended 10-10-2006]
(2) Twenty-four inches DBH and greater: $650. [Amended
10-10-2006]
E. Collection of posted/noncomplying refuse and materials placed
curbside: property is billed the cost of collection and disposal as per
hourly labor, equipment and disposal costs and charges.
F. Replacement recycling bin: $10. [Amended 10-14-2003]
§ 133-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-14
128:281
§ 133-15. Treasurer's office fees. [Added 10-9-2001]
Fees of the Treasurer's Office shall be as follows:
§ 133-16. Water and Sewer Department fees. [Amended 12-21-1999]
The fees of the Water and Sewer Department shall be as follows:
G. Split wood, 1/2 face cord: $20 (when available). [Added 10-14-2003;
amended 10-10-2006]
H. Residential rubbish/recycling cart fees: [Added 3-27-2018]
(1) Replacement cart: $75 per cart.
(2) Rental cart deposit: $75 per cart.
(3) Rental cart delivery/pickup: $15.
I. Shopping cart storage and return fee: [Added 3-27-2018]
(1) First collection:
(a) Up to three carts: $25.
(b) Each additional cart on same collection: $5 each.
(2) Second and subsequent collections:
(a) Up to three carts: $50.
(b) Each additional cart on same collection: $10 each.
A. Copies of tax bills or tax related documents: $2 per page.
B. Nonsufficient check fee: $40. [Added 10-14-2003]
A. Water installation charges.
(1) Tap charges. [Amended 12-14-2004]
Tap Size
(inches) Deposit
3/4 $2,500
1 $2,500
1 1/2 $2,500
2 $3,000
(2) All new construction will be charged a minimum fee of $50 for
residential and $100 for commercial water usage.
(3) Meter charges are in addition to the above costs.
§ 133-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-16
128:282
(4) All taps over 2 inches installed by contractor with inspection fee of
$50 and meter costs.
B. Meter well conversions:
(1) Meter well conversion: $1,000. [Amended 12-14-2004]
(2) Curb box replacement: $1,000. [Amended 12-14-2004]
(3) Meter charges are in addition to above costs.
C. Sewer tapping fees.
(1) All sewer taps will be done by a contractor with an inspection fee of
$50.
Sewer Connection Privilege
Size
(inches) Fee
3/4 $250
1 $400
1 1/2 $750
2 $1,200
3 $2,250
4 $3,750
6 $7,500
8 $12,000
(2) Apartments, duplexes, multiple dwellings and trailer parks are
charged $250 per unit.
(3) Hospitals, nursing homes or anything comparable shall be charged
as follows:
(a) Each three lavatories shall be considered as one unit and
charged at the rate of $250 per unit.
(b) Each complete bathroom shall be charged as a single unit at
the rate of $250 per unit.
(4) Hotels and motels: $250 for each four units within the complex.
D. Security deposits. A minimum charge of $150 or two times the average
quarterly billings, whichever is the greater amount.77
77.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Water and Sewer rates, which subsection immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 1178. This ordinance also
provided for the redesignation of former Subsections F through H as Subsections E
through G, respectively.
§ 133-16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 133-16
128:283
§ 133-17. Zoning Board of Appeals fees.
(Reserved)
§ 133-18. Miscellaneous fees.
(Reserved)
§ 133-19. Office of Manager. [Added 6-24-2014]
§ 133-20. Stormwater utility fees. [Added 5-22-2018; amended
6-26-2018]
E. Turn-on fee for delinquent water. There will be a turn-on fee of $40 for
all water that has been turned off for nonpayment. [Amended
1-24-2012]
F. Cleaning of sewers on private property.
(1) During regular working hours: $50.
(2) Nonworking hours, including nights, weekends or holidays: $200.
G. Fire hydrant permits: A refundable security deposit of $25 will be
charged for use of fire hydrant hoses.
Plus cost of water, sewer treatment and local operating maintenance
fee in effect at time of use will be charged based on cubic feet of water
used. The minimum charge will be $50.
H. Water meter test: $50. [Added 1-24-2012]
I. Water service disconnect for demolition: [Added 1-24-2012]
(1) Residential: $250.
(2) Commercial or industrial: $500
(3) Sanitary sewer lead televising: $50.
(4) Red-tagged homes: $40.
A. Film and video permit fees:
(1) One-day permit fee: $75, each additional day: $50.
(2) Street closure fee: $100 per hour.
(3) Parking lot fee: $100 per parking lot.
(4) Sidewalk usage fee: $15, and $10 each additional day.
(5) City services billed at current hourly rate.
A. Residential utility fees.
§ 133-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 133-20
128:284
Chapter 134
FENCES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Buildings and
Inspection — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Fences around junkyards — See Ch. 179,
§ 179-8.
Climbing on park fences — See Ch. 215,
§ 215-2B.
Fencing of parking areas at fast-food
restaurants — See Ch. 240, § 240-14.
Fences around swimming pools — See Ch.
300.
§ 134-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Fence Ordinance."
§ 134-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-14-1995]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth in this section:
FENCE — A hedge, structure or partition erected for the purpose of
enclosing a piece of land or to separate two contiguous pieces of property.
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
minimum front yard setback line as required by the Zoning Ordinance.78
Residential Quarterly Fee
Class A $11.21
Class B $14.39
Class C $27.19
Class D $36.48
Class E $44.94
Class F $66.99
B. Non-single-family residential unit (commercial, industrial, etc.)
calculations are based on a runoff potential multiplied by the equivalent
stormwater unit (ESWU). The current fee for an ESWU is $14.39.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 133-20 FENCES § 134-2
134:285
LANDSCAPE TREATMENTS — A non-sight-obscuring decorative wooden or
metal structure used to enhance, accent or protect the landscaping of the
site.
PRIVACY SCREEN — A decorative structure, often sight obscuring, erected
adjacent to or around a patio, deck, courtyard or swimming pool designed to
screen the area behind it or within its confines from observation by persons
outside its perimeter.
REAR YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear
yard may be opposite either street frontage.
SIDE YARD — An open space between a main building and the side lot line,
extending from the front yard to the rear of the main building, the width of
which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line
to the nearest point of the main building. Where a side yard abuts a street,
it shall be considered an exterior side yard.[Amended 2-24-1998 by Ord.
No. 1104]
§ 134-3. Hedges, shrubs and trees. [Amended 3-14-1995]
Hedges, ornamental shrubs, trees, bushes and all kinds of plants shall be
considered fences for the purpose of this chapter when placed in a manner
or position to serve as such.
§ 134-4. Barbed-wire fences. [Amended 3-14-1995]
§ 134-5. Location; height. [Amended 3-14-1995]
A. No person, their lessee or agent shall construct or maintain a barbedwire
fence, fences with sharp or pointed tops, affixed spikes, projecting
nails, other pointed instruments of any kind or fences which carry
electrical current.
B. Barbed-wire or similar approved material may be installed in
commercial or industrial zoning districts on those sides abutting
nonresidential uses.
A. No fence shall be installed on any public right-of-way.
B. No fence shall be permitted in the front yard area of a residential
district except on the exterior lot line of a corner lot. For a corner lot, a
fence no higher than three feet above the established grade level of the
public sidewalk will be allowed. Landscape treatment, as defined in
§ 134-3, shall be permitted in any front yard areas, provided that they
do not exceed three feet in height above the public sidewalk, 32 feet in
total length, 16 feet in one continuous direction and are erected at least
one foot from the public sidewalk. Any such plantings shall be
maintained to conform to these restrictions at all times. [Amended
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1130]
§ 134-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 134-5
134:286
§ 134-6. Construction; maintenance. [Amended 3-14-1995]
§ 134-7. Privacy and/or screening fences. [Amended 6-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 954; 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 1066]
C. Privacy screens are permitted in the rear yard, provided that they do
not exceed six feet in height and are located no closer than three feet
from any lot line.
D. No fence may be constructed that will obstruct the view from a
driveway within six feet of either side at the point where the driveway
crosses any sidewalk, alley, street or public way.
E. No fence in a residential district shall be higher than four feet, except
for privacy fences as provided for in § 134-7 of this chapter. The heights
of fences in all other districts shall be no higher than eight feet and
shall not be installed in the front yard setback area unless approved by
the Building Director, Police Chief and Fire Chief, or their designees.
F. No snow fence shall be erected without approval of the Director of
Public Works.
G. The City shall not be responsible for the enforcement of any agreement
relative to mutual or separate payment for the cost of construction of
fences, nor shall the City be responsible for the determination of the
location of any fence to be constructed on lot lines.
A. No fence shall have an opening of less than the size of the material
used, and no fence material shall be greater than four inches in width,
except privacy fences, which may be totally obscuring.
B. All fence posts must be sunk in the soil to a depth of three feet and shall
be no further than 10 feet apart.
C. All fences shall be maintained in a safe condition so as not to become a
nuisance. [Amended 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 1173]
D. Fences shall be constructed of wood, metal or masonry and other
acceptable materials. Only new material or material which is as
structurally sound as new material shall be used.
A. Privacy fences are defined as privacy screens that are less than three
feet from the property line. These fences consist of material
constructed to inhibit light, ventilation and sight through the fence.
Privacy fences will be allowed in a residential district when the
following conditions are met: [Amended 12-20-1995 by Ord. No.
1075; 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 1104; 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 1173]
(1) Upon payment of applicable fees, an installation permit shall be
obtained from the Roseville Department of Buildings and
Inspections.
§ 134-5 FENCES § 134-7
134:287
(2) In case of a corner lot, approval must first be obtained from the
Director of Buildings and Inspection, Chief of Police and City
Manager, or their designees after, review.
(a) If abutting the City right-of-way, no privacy fence or screen
shall be closer than twenty-five feet from the City right-of-way.
[1] Exception. For each one foot the privacy fence is away
from the adjacent property line, the privacy fence may
encroach upon the twenty-five-foot required setback by
one foot.
(b) Privacy fences may not be installed within the required front
yard setback area of an abutting property owner, unless first
obtaining written permission from said property owner.
(3) No fence shall be higher than six feet.
(4) All fences are to be of an ornamental type.
(5) All fences shall be installed and supported independent of any
other fence or structure and must be supported fully, from top to
bottom.
(6) All fences shall be continually maintained in the original conditions
as approved for installation by the Roseville Department of
Buildings and Inspections.
(7) Unless the following requirements are waived by the abutting
property owner on a form prescribed by the City of Roseville, the
following are required:
(a) No fence shall be installed closer than two feet from an
existing property line unless any existing fence is removed.
(b) Fences are to be installed four inches above the ground.
(c) The support posts of the fence are to be installed facing the
permit applicant's property.
(d) No fence shall be installed in a side yard, as defined in § 134-2.
(8) Hedges, shrubs and/or any combination of such plant growth
serving as a screening fence shall not be permitted closer than two
feet from an existing lot or property line unless a written waiver is
received from the owners of the adjoining property to which said
screening fence is closer than two feet.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to erect, construct, alter or
maintain any privacy and/or screening fence or cause or permit the
same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the conditions of
this section, and any violator shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in § 134-11 of this chapter.
§ 134-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 134-7
134:288
§ 134-8. Unlawful construction. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No.
117379]
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to erect, construct, alter or
maintain any fence or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or
in violation of any of the conditions of this chapter, and any violator shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter.
§ 134-9. Nonconformance. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 1173]
Effective with the adoption of this section, any fence previously installed
and any hedge, shrubs or trees or any combination thereof used as a
screening fence may continue to be maintained, repaired and/or trimmed,
but may not be enlarged to a height in excess of six feet or allowed
to encroach upon adjoining properties. In the event a fence previously
installed or any hedge, shrubs, trees or any combination thereof used as
a screening fence are destroyed more than 50% or more than 50% must
be replaced, said repair or replacement must be in conformance with all
sections of this chapter and shall no longer be deemed a nonconforming
fence.
§ 134-10. Variances. [Amended 3-14-1995]
C. Effective with the adoption of this section, any privacy fence previously
installed and any hedge, shrubs or trees or any combination thereof
used as a screening fence may continue to be maintained, repaired and/
or trimmed, but may not be enlarged to a height in excess of six feet or
allowed to encroach upon adjoining properties. [Added 12-20-1995
by Ord. No. 1075]
A. Applications for variances to this fence ordinance shall be made to and
granted by the Roseville Zoning Board of Appeals upon a showing that
the strict application of the regulations of this chapter would result in
peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional undue
hardships upon the applicant, provided that such relief may be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and substantially
impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance,
the Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location,
character and other features of the proposed fence as it may deem
reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter.
B. The concurring vote of five members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of the
Building Director or to decide in favor of the applicant for variance to
this fence ordinance.
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 134-8 and
134-9 as §§ 134-10 and 134-11, respectively.
§ 134-7 FENCES § 134-11
134:289
§ 134-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-1995;
12-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1075; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125;
2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 1173]
Any person, firm or other business entity violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to fines and costs up to
$500 and/or 93 days in jail. Each day of noncompliance shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 135
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
§ 135-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and may be cited as the "City of Roseville Film
Permit Ordinance."
§ 135-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CHARITABLE FILMS — Commercials, motion pictures, television, video
recordings, or other photography produced by a nonprofit organization
which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as
a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a
profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the
films, recordings, or photos.
FILMING — The act(s) of undertaking, producing, or creating a video
recording or motion picture film. The term also includes the setup and
dismantling of all related equipment.
FILM OFFICE — The film production office designated by the City Manager
of the City of Roseville.
NEWS MEDIA — The filming or video recording for the purpose of
spontaneous, unplanned, or on-scene television news broadcasting by
reporters, photographers, or camera operators, but not including magazine
or documentary programs filmed, edited, and prepared for commercial
purposes.
PERSONAL FILM — A video recording or film for private or family use,
including but not limited to family event videos.
§ 134-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 135-2
134:290
STUDENT FILM — A motion picture film or video recording production by a
student of a public or private school or college where the production is for
school or college credit and for which no profit is taken.
VIDEO RECORDING — The creation of a motion picture or film, whether by
the act of filming, undertaking a video recording production, or otherwise.
VIDEO RECORDING PRODUCTION — The use of video recording
equipment to capture motion-picture images, whether by videotape, digital
media, or any other means.
§ 135-3. Permit required.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person
to engage in the business or activity of filming at any place within the City,
other than at or in an established motion-picture or television studio or
entirely within an enclosed structure or building (with no outside storage
of filming equipment) without a film permit from the City. Any person
interested in filming within the City shall complete in full a film permit
application that shall be submitted to the City of Roseville. A film permit
does not constitute or grant permission to use or occupy property not
owned, leased, or controlled by the City.
§ 135-4. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers, or
camera persons in the employment of a newspaper, news service,
broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of
news events;
B. Education, government and public access and local origination
programs and productions for cable television systems franchised
within the City;
C. The filming of competitive athletic events, parades, or other similar
events of a public nature, when in attendance as a member of the public
and a spectator;
D. Private events filmed or photographed for noncommercial purposes,
such as private parties or weddings;
E. The creation of a student film, unless the filming activities adversely
impact public ways or are conducted outdoors in residential areas;
F. Local commercials (video or still photography) produced entirely on
private property for purposes of advertising local businesses and
merchants, so long as the equipment, personnel, and subject connected
with the commercials do not interfere in any way with the public rightof-
way or impact neighboring private property;
§ 135-2 FENCES § 135-4
134:291
§ 135-5. Application contents; fees.
The applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall supply the
following information on the application:
G. The filming or video recording of motion pictures and activities
associated therewith which occur upon property which is owned or
leased for more than six months by the enterprise or individual
conducting the filming or video recording and none of the activities are
open to view by the general public. However, this exemption shall not
be construed to authorize the use of residential properties for
commercial enterprises that violate any laws, the City Code, or the
City's Zoning Ordinance;
H. Films produced entirely for training of employees or personnel that are
produced within the employer's property and do not utilize or adversely
impact any public ways and are not produced outdoors in residential
areas; and
I. Any other activity deemed to be in the public interest by the City
Manager.
A. Name, mailing address and telephone number of the applicant. If an
association, the applicant shall provide its full name. If a corporation,
the applicant shall provide the full name and the official address thereof
with the date and state of incorporation, the full name and address of
the resident agent, and attach to the application a copy of the
certificate from the state of incorporation indicating that the
corporation is in good standing. If a limited liability company, the
applicant shall provide the full name and the official address thereof
with the date and state of organization, the full name and address of the
resident agent, and attach to the application a copy of the certificate
from the state of organization indicating that the company is in good
standing;
B. Name, address, and telephone number of the person in charge of the
location and responsible for the applicant's and applicant's employees'
conduct. The Film Office may also require that the applicant provide the
names and related information of association members, corporate
directors, partners, or others in a position of responsibility with the
applying entity;
C. Name, address, and twenty-four-hour telephone number of at least two
persons to be contacted in the event of emergency situations which
might alter the conditions of the film permit;
D. Name (or working title) of the film or project, a statement of the kind,
character, and type of proposed motion picture, television, radio, and/or
photographic production;
E. Approximate number of individuals in the cast and crew;
§ 135-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 135-5
134:292
§ 135-6. Accompanying plans.
Each application for a permit required by this chapter shall be accompanied
by a detailed explanation, including plans, drawings and diagrams where
applicable, of the prospective permittee's plans to provide for the following:
F. List of types and numbers of vehicles and other equipment;
G. Special conditions or requests by the applicant, including requests for
special assistance at the location such as street closure, traffic control,
and emergency services;
H. If the applicant intends to use either wild animals, chemicals,
explosives, or fire, or intends to engage in any other hazardous activity
as deemed by the City Manager, a statement to the effect and a
description of such activities with specificity;
I. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as follows:
(1) A processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council to reimburse the City for the staff time required to evaluate
the application and establish conditions of approval. The
processing fee shall be waived for charitable and nonprofit
organizations which qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the United
States Internal Revenue Code. The processing fee is
nonrefundable.
(2) A daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution of
the City Council to compensate the City for the use of the public
property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes
resulting from the filming activity.
(3) A monitoring fee to reimburse the City for staff time required to
monitor the filming activity, and for reasonable costs for other City
services or equipment approved for use during such activities, in an
amount as to be determined at the time of the City's review of the
permit application.
(4) The processing fee shall be waived for the following if, in the
discretion of the City Manager, the City will benefit by doing so:
(a) Productions conducted by a cable television company
operating under a franchise granted by the City which are not
conducted on public property, do not interfere with public
rights-of-way, and which involve fewer than two motor
vehicles; and
(b) Productions for wholly charitable or educational purposes and
from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly;
and
(c) A student film.
§ 135-5 FENCES § 135-6
134:293
§ 135-7. Investigation of application.
Upon receipt by the City Manager, or his/her designee, copies of the
application for a permit required by this chapter shall be forwarded to the
Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Official, and to such other appropriate
public officials as the City Manager, or his/her designee, deems necessary.
Such officers, departments, and officials shall review and investigate
matters relevant to the application and within four business days of receipt
thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the City
Manager, or his/her designee.
§ 135-8. Liability provisions.
The requirements of this chapter are applicable whenever a permittee's
operations will utilize or impact City facilities or property as determined by
the City Manager.
A. The size or area of the property to be used, including a sketch of the
filming site showing placement of work trucks and production vehicles;
B. A sketch of the base camp, if any, showing any off-street locations for
crew, parking, honeywagon, catering and nonessential production
vehicles;
C. A traffic control plan of the exact filming location, listing roads or lanes
to be closed, if any;
D. A description of the duration of the proposed activities and daily hours
of operation;
E. The facilities for cleanup and waste disposal with written plans and
specifications thereof;
F. A letter of notification of, and signatures from, businesses/
neighborhoods impacted by filming or related activities, if required by
the Film Office; and
G. Insurance and bonding arrangements.
A. Liability insurance. As a condition of issuing such a filming permit, the
permittee shall furnish insurance with the City as a named insured in an
amount to be determined by the City Manager, but in no event in an
amount less than $1,000,000 to protect the City against claims of third
persons for personal injury, wrongful death and/or property damage to
indemnify the City for damage to the City property arising out of the
permittee's activities. An additional minimum of $5,000,000 of such
general liability insurance coverage shall be required in the event
motor vehicles, aircraft, helicopters, explosives, or pyrotechnics are
used in the activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard
general special endorsement form or the certificate of insurance (public
liability) form provided by the City Manager, or his/her designee. The
§ 135-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 135-8
134:294
§ 135-9. Issuance of permit.
In processing an application for a permit required by this chapter, the City
Manager, or his/her designee, shall issue a permit as provided for in this
chapter when from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may be otherwise obtained, he/she finds that:
applicant shall also submit verification that adequate workers'
compensation insurance coverage is maintained.
B. Hold harmless and indemnity agreement. An applicant shall execute a
hold harmless and indemnity agreement as provided by the City prior to
the issuance of a permit.
C. Faithful performance bond. Before the issuance of a permit, the
permittee shall deposit a sum of money in the form of a cash bond, in an
amount determined by City Council resolution. The bond shall be in a
form approved by the City Attorney, conditioned upon the permittee's
faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter
and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall
indemnify the City, its agents, officers, and employees and the City
Council against any and all loss, injury, or damage whatever arising out
of or in anyway connected with the filming activity and which shall
indemnify the owners of the property adjoining the filming site for any
costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other
waste resultant from the filming activity.
D. Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at its own expense such
security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the
adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants
at the location of the filming activity and for the preservation of order
and protection of property in and around the site of the filming activity.
No permit shall be issued unless the Police Chief, or his/her designee, is
satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be
provided by the permittee for the duration of the assembly.
A. The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the use and
enjoyment of neighboring property or unduly interfere with traffic or
pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will
be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time.
Adequate advance notice of any street closure shall be given to the
Police Chief, or his/her designee.
B. The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal
governmental or City operations or threaten to result in damage or
detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or
expenditures in either money or personnel not deposited in advance by
the applicant.
C. The activity does not propose to include obscene matter or an obscene
performance and will not involve conduct in violation of state, local, or
§ 135-8 FENCES § 135-9
134:295
§ 135-10. Grounds for denial.
A filming permit, required by this chapter, may be denied if:
§ 135-11. Appeal.
The decision of the City Manager, or his/her designee, to issue, conditionally
issue, or deny a permit shall be final, unless appealed in writing within
five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing before the City
Council at the next available meeting. Where conditions are imposed as
prerequisites to the issuance of a permit and where the permit is denied,
notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail within five
days of such action. In case of a permit denial, the reasons therefor shall be
stated in the notice.
§ 135-12. Contents, posting and transferability.
A permit required by this chapter shall specify the name and address of
the permittee, the kind and location of the filming activity, the maximum
number of attendants permissible, the duration of the permit and any
other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises of the filming activity and shall not be
transferred to any other person or location.
federal laws, rules, or regulations, as defined in 1984 PA 343, being
MCL §§ 752.361 to 752.374.
D. At the determination of the City Manager, or his/her designee, as well
as the City of Roseville Police, Fire and Building Departments, that the
condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other
type of hazard and all property safety precautions will be taken as
determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their
designees.
E. The permit shall not authorize the production of a film that in any
manner requires the use of property owned by or under the control of
the City of Roseville in violation of 2008 PA 84, prohibiting the
production of a film that includes obscene matter or an obscene
performance or that requires that individually identifiable records be
created and maintained for every performer as provided in 18 U.S.C.
§ 2557.
A. The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this
chapter (including those set forth in § 135-9), or with any and all
conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter, or with any other
applicable provision of state, local, or federal laws, rules, or
regulations.
B. The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement in the application or in any supporting document.
§ 135-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 135-13
134:296
§ 135-13. Restoration.
A permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous
attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of the area,
and the cleanup of all trash and debris. The area shall be cleaned of trash
and debris within two hours of the completion of the activity, or within
such other time established in the permit to the City's satisfaction. The
applicant shall be responsible for restoring any area damaged or disrupted
before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the City's
satisfaction, the City Manager, or his/her designee, shall have the necessary
restoration and/or repairs performed, and the applicant shall reimburse the
City for such work within 10 days of completed filming. In the event the
applicant fails to reimburse the City, the City may secure its reimbursement
from the deposit or the bond that was posted by the permittee during
the application process. The amount of the bond shall no way limit the
permittee's liability or responsibility for the costs of repairs or restoration
in the event these costs exceed the bond amount.
§ 135-14. Filming hours.
§ 135-15. Parking and street closures.
A. Permitted hours. It is prohibited for any person to commence or
conduct, or permit the commencement or conducting of, any filming in
residentially zoned neighborhoods, and any other neighborhoods within
a three-hundred-foot radius of a residential zone, except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; 8:00 a.m.
through 10:00 p.m., Saturday; and 9:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m.,
Sunday; and City-specified holidays.
B. Exception; extended hours. Filming activity in residentially zoned
neighborhoods, and other neighborhoods located within a threehundred-
foot radius of a residential zone, shall be permitted beyond
those hours set forth in this chapter if the permittee submits signatures
of approval from one adult resident of at least 70% of the dwelling units
located within a three-hundred-foot radius of the filming, at least 48
hours prior to the scheduled start time of the filming. However, this
signature requirement may be waived by the City Manager if he
determines that the filming will not have any adverse effect upon the
owners or occupants of such dwelling units.
A. No person shall close any City street or alley, unless first authorized by
the City.
B. No person shall park a vehicle or place equipment associated with
filming on any street or alley, except where parking is lawfully
permitted.
C. The permittee shall post "No Parking" signs, as required by the City
Manager, at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled start time of the
filming.
§ 135-13 FENCES § 135-16
134:297
§ 135-16. Revocation of permit; violations and penalties.
A. Any film permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:
(1) Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or
has failed to comply with any of the terms or conditions of the film
permit;
(2) Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or
has failed to comply with any ordinances, resolutions, or applicable
regulations;
(3) Where it has been determined that the film permit was granted
pursuant to false or fraudulent information contained in the film
permit application or verbally provided to City officials;
(4) Where it has subsequently been determined that filming activity
will fail to meet the criteria enumerated in this chapter for granting
a film permit; or
(5) Where it has been determined that the preservation of the public
health, safety, and general welfare demand revocation of the film
permit.
B. A notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee, by certified
mail, stating the grounds for revocation and advising the permittee of
the appeal rights afforded by this chapter.
C. City officials with the authority to revoke a permit include the City
Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, or his/her designee.
D. Revocation of a film permit shall be effective for a period of one year. No
permits shall be issued to any individual or entity found to be in
violation of this chapter for the subsequent one-year period of time.
Thereafter, film permits may be granted on a restricted or conditional
basis to ensure that the offender does not violate this chapter again.
E. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the terms and
conditions of a film permit shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1
of the City Code. In addition, it shall be a misdemeanor to:
(1) Provide false or fraudulent information to the City during the
permit application process;
(2) Provide any false or fraudulent information after the permit has
been issued, including but not limited to the possession or
existence of consent or permission from property owners when
required; or
(3) Fail or refuse to cease any film activities when ordered to do so by a
City official due to violations of any code, ordinance, or this
chapter.
§ 135-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 135-17
134:298
§ 135-17. Nuisance violations.
Any filming, video recordings, or related activity conducted contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be an
unlawful action and a public nuisance. The City Council may authorize
the commencement of an action at law or in equity in the name of the
City in any court of competent jurisdiction against the permittee to ensure
compliance with the terms of this chapter. All remedies prescribed herein
will be cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the City
shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, nor shall the City's delay or failure to exercise
any remedy result in a waiver of same.
Chapter 136
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting — See Ch. 174.
Locking up firearms — See Ch. 197, Art. II.
Possession of firearms in parks — See Ch.
215, § 215-5.
§ 135-17 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 135-17
136:299

ARTICLE I
Firearms
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 136 of the 1984 Code]
§ 136-1. Drawing of firearms prohibited; exceptions.80
No person, except an officer in the discharge of his duty or a citizen in selfdefense,
shall draw, handle or flourish a revolver, pistol or gun in or upon
any public places or places open to the public, except at a licensed shooting
range or licensed business selling firearms.
§ 136-2. Prosecution of violations.
In any prosecution for the violation of any acts of the state relative to use,
licensing and possession of pistols or firearms, the burden of establishing
any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in such act shall
be upon the defendant, but this does not shift the burden of proof for the
violation [MSA § 28.1274(1)].
§ 136-3. Possession of handgun by minors prohibited; possession of
BB gun.
§ 136-4. Permission required to fire cannons.
No person shall fire a cannon in either of the public or private spaces
hereinbefore mentioned without first having obtained written permission
from the Mayor, which said permission shall only be granted when it shall
appear to the Mayor that such firing is to be done under the supervision
of experienced gunners, but no such permission from the Mayor shall be
construed to incur on the part of the city any liability for damage by reason
of any accident caused by such firing.
§ 136-5. Use or discharge of firearms, BB guns and bows and
arrows. [Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 1046]
No person shall use or discharge any firearm of any description within
the city, nor fire any air rifle or any handgun designed and manufactured
exclusively for propelling BB's not exceeding .177 caliber, by means of
A. No person under the age of 16 years shall bear or have upon his or her
person while in or upon any of the public or private places aforesaid any
revolver or pistol.
B. No person under 21 years of age shall use or possess any handgun
designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling BB's not
exceeding .177 caliber by means of spring, gas or air, outside the
curtilage of his domicile, unless he or she is accompanied by a person
who is either the lawful parent or legal guardian.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-1 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 136-5
136:301
spring, gas or air, outside the curtilage of his or her domicile. No person
shall discharge any arrows, other than target arrows, within the city, and
no person shall discharge such arrows other than at either a properly zoned
indoor shooting range meeting all federal, state and local approvals or at
an approved location on public property in conjunction with a program
administered through the Parks and Recreation Department of the city and
in a manner following regulations promulgated by the Parks and Recreation
Department or in the basement of a building in a manner so as to avoid the
arrow exiting from the building.
§ 136-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-26-1991 by Ord. No.
100681]
Any violation or failure to comply with any provision or requirement of
this article shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 136-6
136:302
ARTICLE II
Knives and Darts
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 360 of the 1984
Code]
§ 136-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DART — A pointed weapon or stick thrown by hand.
SWITCHBLADE or SELF-OPENING KNIFE — A knife containing a blade or
blades which can be opened by depressing a button, pressure on the handle,
release of a spring or other mechanical contrivance.
§ 136-8. Sale or possession of switchblade knives; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, keep, possess,
use or loan any switchblade or self-opening knife as hereinabove defined,
provided that the prohibition of this section shall not apply to any onearmed
person in possession of such a knife in connection with his living
requirements.
§ 136-9. Sale of darts to and possession by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or loan
to any minor under the age of 21 years, or for any such minor to be in
possession of, any dart as hereinabove defined, in any of the streets, alleys,
parks, boulevards or playgrounds or in any other public property or schools
in the city or in any private property generally frequented by the public.
§ 136-10. Knives with blades over three inches.
§ 136-11. Possession of knives by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
possession of any knife of any description in any of the streets, alleys, parks,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a knife with a
blade more than three inches in length in any of the streets, alleys,
parks, boulevards or other public property or schools in the city or in
any dance hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or
other private property generally frequented by the public for purposes
of education, recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport or shopping.
B. The prohibition contained in Subsection A hereof shall not apply to any
person in possession of any such knife when it is used or carried in good
faith as a tool of honest work, trade, business, sport or recreation when
the person in possession of such knife is actively engaged therein or
actively engaged in going to or returning from such honest work, trade,
business, sport or recreation.
§ 136-7 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 136-11
136:303
boulevards or other public property or schools in the city or in any dance
hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or other private
property generally frequented by the public for purposes of education,
recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport or shopping, provided that the
prohibition of this section shall not apply to any such person under 21 years
of age being in possession of any such knife when it is used or carried in
good faith as a tool of honest work, trade, business, sport or recreation or
when used or carried in good faith as equipment related to and required for
any legitimate sport, recreation or youth character-building program (Boy
Scouts, etc.) when actively engaged therein or actively engaged in going to
or returning from such honest work, trade, business, sport, recreation or
youth character-building program.
§ 136-12. Violations and penalties.82
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 136-12
136:304
ARTICLE III
Dangerous Weapons
[Adopted 9-25-1984 by Ord. No. 908 (Art. II of Ch. 360 of the 1984
Code)]
§ 136-13. Carrying or concealment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry in any public street, highway,
alley, park, building or any other place open to the public, or to have
concealed or otherwise in any vehicle operated or occupied by him or her,
an air pistol, BB gun, starter gun, pellet gun, blank cartridge gun, rifle,
shotgun, blackjack, slingshot, sandclub, sap bag, metal or plastic knuckles,
karate sticks, nightstick or any other dangerous or deadly weapon, except
as otherwise permitted by law.
§ 136-14. Violations and penalties.83
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-13 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 136-14
136:305
Chapter 139
FIRE HYDRANTS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10. Department of Water and Sewers — See Ch. 7,
Sec. 7.12.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Fire Prevention — See Ch. 27.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Blocking of hydrants — See Ch. 144.
Fire hydrants in subdivisions — See Ch. 294,
§ 294-26B.
Planting trees near fire hydrants — See Ch.
324, § 324-5C.
Taking water from hydrants — See Ch. 354,
§ 354-18.
§ 139-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Fire Hydrant Ordinance of the
City of Roseville" and will be referred to herein as "this chapter."
§ 139-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE FLOW — The amount of water, measured in gallons per minute,
that would be required to control a fire in the building or buildings being
considered, as determined by the Fire Marshal, using standard formulas. In
no case shall it be less than 500 gallons per minute.
USE GROUP — The classification of a building or structure for which it is
designed, used or intended to be used, as defined in the Michigan Building
Code, 2000 Edition, and incorporated herein by reference.[Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1184]
§ 139-3. Installation and location.
Fire hydrants shall be approved by the Water and Sewers Department
and the Fire Prevention Bureau. In any new development, or wherever
and whenever new water mains are being installed, fire hydrants shall
be installed at each intersection, with additional hydrants being installed
wherever the distance between hydrants is more than 500 feet. When any
new building is erected, other than one- or two-family dwellings, or when
any existing building is changed to a new use group, the owner shall provide
hydrants located so as to provide the required fire flow at any part of
the exterior of the building with no hose line exceeding 500 feet. Where
there is limited access for Fire Department apparatus, this distance shall be
§ 136-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 139-3
139:306
reduced to 200 feet. No fire hydrant shall be installed on less than an eightinch
water main.
§ 139-4. Location on private property; protection.
Fire hydrants on private property shall be located and installed as directed
by the Fire Marshal, after consultation with the Chief of the Fire
Department. Hydrants shall be located about 50 feet from the building
being protected. Where this is impossible, they shall be so located that
the possibility of damage from falling walls, heat or smoke is minimal. In
no case shall the hydrant be located closer than a distance equal to the
height of the exterior wall of the building being protected. Whenever, as
determined by the Fire Marshal, any hydrant is exposed to danger from
traffic of any kind, the owner of the property shall provide such protection
as the Fire Marshal shall specify.
§ 139-5. Modification of requirements.
The specific requirements of this chapter for existing uses of new
developments may be modified by the authority of the Fire Marshal. Such
modification will secure as nearly equivalent safety from fire as is practical,
but in no case shall the modification afford less safety to life than
compliance with this chapter.
§ 139-6. Tampering with fire hydrants or appliances.84
Any person who shall, without authority of the City Water and Sewers
Department, open any fire hydrant except for the purpose of extinguishing
a fire, or who shall wantonly injure or impair same, or who shall, without
the authority of the owner, willfully break, injure, destroy or disturb any
auxiliary fire-fighting appliance, including fire extinguishers, sprinkler
systems, standpipe systems and the like, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in § 139-10 of this chapter.
§ 139-7. Permit required to use hydrant.
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the Fire Chief and the water company
having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants
by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water
company having jurisdiction.
§ 139-8. Recommendations for hydrants and water mains.
The Fire Chief shall recommend to the chief administrative official of the
municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and
the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 139-3 FIRE HYDRANTS § 139-8
139:307
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Chief.
§ 139-9. Maintenance of hydrants and fire appliances.
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs or when permitted by the Fire Chief. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced
or repaired as directed by the Fire Chief.
§ 139-10. Violations and penalties.85
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
minimum fine of $100 and maximum penalties as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 140
LOCK BOX SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of fire prevention — See Ch. 27. Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have their meanings set forth in
this section:
LOCK BOX — A high-security key vault system approved by the Fire
Marshal Division of the Roseville Fire Department for secure containment
of access keys, material data safety sheets, and pertinent site information
which may assist the Fire Department personnel in a fire or emergency
response.
§ 140-2. Lock boxes required.
A lock box approved by the Fire Marshal Division of the Roseville Fire
Department shall be installed and maintained for the following facilities:
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 139-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 140-2
140:308
§ 140-3. Application for lock box.
Application for a lock box shall be made on forms provided to the owner or
occupant of the building or site by the Fire Marshal Division of the Roseville
Fire Department. Such owner and/or occupant shall be responsible for the
cost to purchase, install and maintain the lock box. Applications may be
obtained from the Fire Marshal Division of the Roseville Fire Department.
§ 140-4. Location of lock box.
The location of the lock box shall be approved by the Fire Marshal Division
of the Roseville Fire Department and shall comply with the following
criteria:
A. Except for buildings occupied 24 hours a day, all new buildings and/or
new occupancies of existing buildings or existing occupancies served by
an automatic fire detection or suppression system, or any other type of
alarm system, including security systems, connected to a central
monitoring station facility or person that would initiate an emergency
call to the Roseville Fire Department or Emergency Dispatch.
B. All multiple-story occupancies that have elevators serving upper floors.
C. In all building classified as H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, as described and
pursuant to the Michigan Building Code, 2000 Edition (Chapter
23-Hazardous Materials) of the Michigan Building Code, 2000 Edition,
and in all buildings classified as 302 sites (S.A.R.A. Title 3). [Amended
10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1184]
D. In any premises with manual- or power-operated gates necessary to be
opened for Fire Department access and where security personnel are
not on the premises to permit access when the facility is closed.
E. In all existing buildings and occupancies that are to be renovated to
include an automatic fire detection or suppression system or any other
type of alarm system that sends a fire signal to a monitoring company or
person that would initiate an emergency call to the Roseville Fire
Department or Emergency Dispatch.
F. In all existing buildings and occupancies that are to be renovated and/
or will be required to substantially update the building, electrical and
plumbing systems, and have added or have an existing automated fire
detection or suppression system or any other type of alarm system that
sends a fire signal to a monitoring company or person that would
initiate an emergency call to the Roseville Fire Department or
Emergency Dispatch.
A. The lock box shall be located at or near the recognized main public
entrance on the exterior of the structure. When the occupancy is
serviced by a fire sprinkler system, the lock box may be located above
the Fire Department connection.
§ 140-2 LOCK BOX SYSTEM § 140-4
140:309
§ 140-5. Lock box installation.
§ 140-6. Lock box contents.
The lock box shall contain keys that are labeled and identified to open all
doors/rooms that are specified by the Fire Marshal Division of the Roseville
Fire Department and other pertinent information that is specified by the
Fire Marshal Division.
§ 140-7. Compliance.
§ 140-8. Violation and penalties.
B. The lock box shall be located at a height of not less than four feet and
not more than eight feet above normal grade.
C. The lock box may be connected to the NFPA 72A fire alarm control
panel where provided. Wiring for the connection shall be supervised as
required by NFPA 72A. The lock box shall be connected in such a
manner that tampering or opening of the box shall produce an alarm
signal.
A. No lock box shall be installed, voluntarily or otherwise, without first
obtaining the approval of the Fire Marshal Division of the Roseville Fire
Department.
B. An application for installation of a lock box shall be submitted to the
Fire Marshal Division of the Roseville Fire Department by the owner or
occupant of the building/site.
C. Buildings that choose to connect a lock box to an NFPA 72A fire alarm
system can only obtain lock box installation authorization through
licensed fire alarm contractors.
A. All new or remodeled structures must comply with the requirements of
this chapter prior to occupancy. Required approvals and specifications
shall be obtained during the plan review process.
B. Existing structures must comply with this chapter within three years of
the chapter adoption. The Fire Marshal Division of the Roseville Fire
Department shall provide notice of the lock box requirements to all
applicable existing structures.
C. The Fire Marshal Division shall issue no certificate of occupancy prior
to installation of a lock box and after inspection, as required.
A. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time, and where not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 140-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 140-8
140:310
Chapter 142
FIRE PREVENTION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Fire Prevention — See Ch. 27.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 69.
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Open burning — See Ch. 94.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Emergency management — See Ch. 128.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 139.
Conduct at fires — See Ch. 144.
Fireworks — See Ch. 146.
Self-service gasoline stations — See Ch. 158,
Art. I.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who violated the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 per violation and/or 93 days in
jail.
§ 140-8 LOCK BOX SYSTEM § 140-8
140:311

ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 142 of the 1984 Code]
§ 142-1. Adoption of standards by reference; amendments.
[Amended 3-25-1986 by Ord. No. 937; 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 986;
8-22-1989 by Ord. No. 997; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1019; 7-27-1999
by Ord. No. 1125; 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1184; 4-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 1198; 11-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1206; 1-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1301]
§ 142-2. Enforcement. [Amended 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1019]
This article and the code adopted as aforementioned shall be enforced by
the Fire Marshal for the City of Roseville and any designated assistant.
§ 142-3. Definitions.
As used in this article and the Fire Prevention Code, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Fire Marshal.
A. Pursuant to the provision of Section 3(k) of Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL
§ 117.3(k)], the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, and all
appendixes thereto, as promulgated by the International Code Council,
Inc., and as amended in the future, is hereby adopted by reference by
the City for the purpose of safeguarding life and property from the
hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use
of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions
hazardous to life or property and the use or occupancy of buildings or
premises. If a conflict occurs between the provisions of such fire code
and this article, this article shall prevail. Complete printed copies of the
fire code adopted in this section are available for public use and
inspection at the office of the City of Roseville City Clerk.
B. Section 101.1. Insert: City of Roseville.
C. Section 107.3 is hereby amended to provide as follows: All inspection
and maintenance reports required to be furnished to the Fire
Department by the Code shall be electronically forwarded to the Fire
Department using the IROL System (inspectionreportsonline.net). Any
company doing inspection and maintenance shall be required to
register with IROL, as well as all occupancies that have a fire protection
system installed.
D. Section 109.4. Insert: $500 and/or 93 days in jail, or both.
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015
International Fire Code are hereby established at the borders of the
City of Roseville in their entirety and in conformance with the City of
Roseville Zoning Ordinance.
§ 142-1 LOCK BOX SYSTEM § 142-3
140:313
JURISDICTION — The City of Roseville.
LEGAL OFFICER — The City Attorney and his or her assistants.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building that the public enters or is invited to
enter, whether it is publicly or privately owned.
§ 142-4. Modification of provisions. [Amended 6-25-1991 by Ord.
No. 1019]
This article and the code adopted as aforementioned shall be enforced by
the Fire Marshal for the City of Roseville and any designated assistant.
§ 142-5. Protective enclosure required for certain gas tanks.
Any liquefied petroleum gas tank of 500 gallons' water capacity or greater
shall be provided with a protective enclosure as specified by the Fire
Marshal.
§ 142-6. New materials, processes and occupancies. [Amended
3-25-1986 by Ord. No. 937; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1019; 10-28-2003
by Ord. No. 1184]
The Fire Chief and the Fire Marshal shall act as a committee to determine
and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any
new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in
addition to those now enumerated in the International Fire Code, 2000
Edition. The Fire Marshal shall post such lists in a conspicuous place in his
or her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.86
§ 142-7. Display of street address numbers.
A. The owner of or all persons having control of any building within the
City of Roseville shall display street address numbers in accordance
with the following:
(1) Numbers on residential buildings shall be displayed on, at or near
the front door, readily visible to passersby.
(2) Numbers on commercial buildings shall be displayed in such a
manner as to be readily visible to occupants of vehicles
immediately in front of such buildings during all hours of normal
daylight.
B. Numbers on residential buildings shall be at least three inches in height
and on commercial buildings shall be at least four inches in height.
C. The color of the numbers for both residential and commercial buildings
shall be in contrast to the immediate background upon which they are
mounted.
86.Editor's Note: Former § 142-7, Setting fire to places of public abode unlawful; notice to be
posted, which immediately followed this section was deleted 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125.
§ 142-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 142-7
140:314
§ 142-8. Lighted tobacco in elevators.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry lighted tobacco in any elevator.
§ 142-9. Additional technical details to be considered part of code.
[Amended 3-25-1986 by Ord. No. 937, 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1019]
Technical details regarding processes, methods, specifications, equipment
testing and maintenance, design standards, performance, installation, life
safety or other pertinent criteria as contained in those standards and codes
by the National Fire Protection Association and known as the "National Fire
Code, 1991," shall be considered a part of this code.
§ 142-10. More restrictive requirements to apply.
Whenever there is a conflict between sections of this article and other
ordinances or where separate provisions of this article dealing with the
same features are applicable to any given situation, the more restrictive of
the differing requirements shall apply.
§ 142-11. Fire extinguishers on catering trucks with cooking
equipment. [Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1019]
Any catering truck equipped with cooking equipment producing greaseladen
air, such as a grill, deep fryer or broiler, shall be equipped with
a fire extinguisher near the driver's seat which shall have a rating of at
least 40b:C. An extinguisher with an A:B:C: rating shall not be accepted for
grease fire.
§ 142-12. Sale of defective fire extinguishers.
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind
of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Chief or which is
not in proper working order or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the Fire Chief. The requirements of this section shall not
apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment
for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked with a
permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
§ 142-13. Violations and penalties.
D. This section shall be construed to mean that if the numbers are hidden
by an awning or other appurtenance, the owners of such building or
persons having control thereof shall provide supplementary numbers in
such a manner as to comply with this section.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement or specifications of plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from
§ 142-7 LOCK BOX SYSTEM § 142-13
140:315
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with
such order within the time fixed herein shall, severally, for each and
every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it
to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and where not
otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 142-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 142-13
140:316
ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 276 of the 1984 Code]
§ 142-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LISTED — Equipment included in a list published by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., indicating that the equipment has been tested under
their Standard No. 217.
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device capable of detecting abnormal amounts
of smoke in the atmosphere by means of an ionized chamber or by
photoelectric beam.
§ 142-15. Smoke detectors required in certain buildings.
All dwelling units, with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings,
including apartments, condominiums, efficiency apartments and all other
sleeping rooms in hotels, motels, lodging houses, dormitories and all other
sleeping quarters which are leased, rented or occupied by their owners,
together with the means of egress from such rooms to the outside of
the building, shall be equipped with one or more listed smoke detectors,
mounted as specified in the manufacturer's instructions and in accordance
with NFPA Standard 74.
§ 142-16. Power source.
In all existing units where a smoke detector is required by this article, a
direct-wired power source or a primary-monitored battery source of power
will be required to meet the above standards.
§ 142-17. Enforcement.
The Fire Prevention Bureau and the Department of Buildings and Inspection
of the City of Roseville shall have authority to inspect and approve the
installation of smoke detectors as required by this article and to issue
citations for violation of this article.
§ 142-18. Compliance required; time limit.
The owner of any property in which a smoke detector is required by this
article shall comply with its provisions within three months of the effective
date of this article.
§ 142-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
§ 142-14 LOCK BOX SYSTEM § 142-19
140:317
imposition of a fine of not less than $100 nor more than the penalties as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 142-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 142-19
140:318
Chapter 144
FIRES, CONDUCT AT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 139. Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
§ 144-1. Purpose.
There are hereby adopted by the City of Roseville the fire control measures
and regulations as herein set forth for the purpose of controlling conditions
which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
§ 144-2. Powers of Fire Chief at fires and other emergencies.
The Fire Chief or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at
the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/
or property, are empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary
to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other
hazardous conditions or situations or to take any other action necessary in
the reasonable performance of their duty. The Fire Chief may prohibit any
person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or
cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which
may impede or interfere with the operations of the Fire Department. The
Fire Chief may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object
from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall
do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so
by the Fire Chief.
§ 144-3. Interference with Fire Department operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel
of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any
Fire Department operation.
§ 144-4. Disobeying orders of Fire Department officer.87
Any person who, while in the vicinity of any fire, willfully disobeys any
reasonable order or rule of the officer commanding any Fire Department at
87.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 142-19 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 144-4
144:319
such fire, when such order or rule is given by the commanding officer or a
fire fighter there present, is guilty of a misdemeanor (MSA § 28.438).
§ 144-5. Vehicles crossing fire hose.
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department, when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive
or any other vehicular roadway, without the consent of the Fire Chief in
command of said operation.
§ 144-6. Authorized emergency vehicles.
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are
defined and authorized under the laws of the State of Michigan.
§ 144-7. Operation of vehicles on approach of emergency vehicles.
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the
same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or
curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles
shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Chief or a police
officer.88
§ 144-8. Tampering with emergency equipment.
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire Chief in
charge of said Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire Department
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the
siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon or manipulate or
tamper with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective
clothing on or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
§ 144-9. Damaging emergency vehicles or injuring personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface or attempt or
conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle
at any time or to injure or attempt to injure or conspire to injure Fire
Department personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ 144-10. Operation of emergency vehicles.
A. The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in § 144-6 of this
chapter, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on
or disobey any existing traffic regulations, except when said vehicle is
88.Editor's Note: Former § 144-8, Following fire apparatus unlawful, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 144-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 144-10
144:320
§ 144-11. Blocking hydrants and connections; removal of
obstructions.89
§ 144-12. Violations and penalties.91
Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon
returning from, a fire. Tactical strategies, such as but not restricted
to move-ups, do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an
emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
B. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary
and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle.
A. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department
connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including
fire hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on
public or private streets and access lanes or on private property.
B. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Chief shall
proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of
necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate
of the Fire Chief and with the approval of the chief administrative
official, and the legal authority of the municipality shall institute
appropriate action for the recovery of such costs.90
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 139, Fire Hydrants.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 144-18, Definitions, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 144-10 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 144-12
144:321
Chapter 146
FIREWORKS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9. Fire Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Hazardous materials and substances — See
Ch. 168.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Nuisances — See Ch. 203.
Fireworks and explosives in parks — See Ch.
215, § 215-6.
Fireworks as unacceptable waste — See Ch.
285, § 285-3.
§ 144-12 ROSEVILLE CODE § 144-12
144:322
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 146-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT — The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act 256 of 2011, MCL
§ 28.451 et seq.
APA STANDARD 87-1 — APA Standard 87-1, standard for construction
and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical
pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of
Bethesda, Maryland.
ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC — Pyrotechnic devices for professional use that
are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction
but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer
fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or
UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101.
BUREAU — The Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs' Bureau of
Fire Services.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Firework devices that are designed to produce
visible and audible effects by combustion, that are required to comply
with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission
under 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA Standard
87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks are often commonly known
as, but not limited to, sky rockets, bottle rockets, missile-type rockets,
helicopters, aerial spinners, roman candles, mine and shell devices, aerial
shell kits, firecrackers, chasers, and certain multiple tube fireworks devices.
"Consumer fireworks" does not include low-impact fireworks.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS CERTIFICATE — The certificate issued by the
Department which allows a person to sell consumer fireworks in accordance
with the Act.
DEPARTMENT — The Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks devices that are explosive
materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as
provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA Standard 87-1, 4.1.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Fire Marshal of the City of Roseville or his or her
designee.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a
flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist
§ 146-1 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-1
144:323
of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks, and special effects.
LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS — Ground and handheld sparkling devices as
that phrase is defined in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and
3.5. Low-impact fireworks are often commonly known as, but not limited
to, sparklers, cylindrical fountains, cone fountains, illuminating torches,
wheels, ground spinners, flitter sparklers, certain toy smoke devices,
certain wire sparklers/dipped sticks, and certain multiple-tube fireworks
devices.92
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association headquartered at 1
Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts.
NOVELTIES — The term "novelties" shall have the same meaning as set
forth in APA Standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5, often
commonly known as, but not limited to, party poppers, snappers, toy smoke
devices containing not more than 5g of pyrotechnic composition, snakes,
glow worms, wire sparklers/dip sticks containing not more than 100g of
pyrotechnic composition, and all of the following:
PERMANENT BUILDING or PERMANENT STRUCTURE — Any building
or structure that is affixed to a foundation on a site that has fixed utility
connections and that is intended to remain on the site for more than 180
consecutive calendar days, including stores and Consumer Fireworks Retail
Sales Area (CFRSA) facilities, as defined by NFPA 1124 (2006 edition).
PERSON — An individual, agent, association, charitable organization,
company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal
representative, partnership, unincorporated organization, or any other legal
or commercial entity.
Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or
individual caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive
content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive
content per cap.
A.
Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns
in which toy caps as described in Subsection A are used, that are
constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when
in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or
be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.
B.
C. Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter.
Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with
not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's
name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box;
and toy smoke devices.
D.
92.Editor's Note: The former definition of “national holiday,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 1307.
§ 146-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 146-1
144:324
RETAILER — A person who sells consumer fireworks or low-impact
fireworks for resale to an individual for ultimate use.
RETAIL LOCATION — A facility listed under NFPA 1124, 7.1.2.
SPECIAL EFFECTS — A combination of chemical elements or chemical
compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the
atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual,
mechanical, or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio,
television, theatrical, or opera production or live entertainment.
TEMPORARY FACILITIES — A building or structure not meeting the
definition of permanent building or structure, at which consumer and lowimpact
fireworks are sold, including the following: consumer fireworks
retail stands, tents, canopies, trailers, storage units, and membrane
structures.
WAREHOUSE — A permanent building or structure used primarily for the
storage of consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks.
WHOLESALER — Any person who sells consumer fireworks or low-impact
fireworks to a retailer or any other person for resale. Wholesaler does not
include a person who sells only display fireworks or special effects.
§ 146-1 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-1
144:325

ARTICLE II
Sale of Fireworks
§ 146-2. Consumer fireworks certificate; applicable codes and
standards.
A. No person, business, corporation, or other entity shall sell, offer for
sale, or permit to be sold any consumer fireworks without first having
obtained an annual consumer fireworks certificate from the
Department, as required by the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act.
Violations of this subsection shall be prosecuted as civil infractions
punishable as provided in the Act. [Amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No.
1307]
B. The issuance of a consumer fireworks certificate does not itself
authorize the sale of fireworks at the certified retail location. Consumer
fireworks shall not be sold at a retail location until the Bureau verifies
compliance with Section 5 of the Act, NFPA 1124, and all applicable
administrative rules promulgated by the Department. Verification can
be accomplished by either a site inspection of the retail location by the
Bureau, or by submission of a notarized affidavit signed by the person
filing the certificate application stating that the certified retail location
will be in compliance with Section 5 of the Act, NFPA 1124, and the
applicable administrative rules, and that plans have been submitted in
accordance with the administrative rules, including submission of a
copy of the plans to the Fire Department for use in pre-incident review
and planning, prior to selling consumer and low-impact fireworks.
C. The holder of a consumer fireworks certificate shall prominently display
the original or copy of the certificate in the retail location. Each day the
consumer fireworks certificate is not displayed is a separate violation. A
person who violates this subsection is responsible for a civil fine of
$200, to be cited and prosecuted as a municipal civil infraction.
[Amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 1307]
D. Consumer fireworks shall only be sold from a retail location if all of the
following applicable conditions are met:
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2), a retail location satisfies the
applicable requirements of NFPA 101 and NFPA 1124 not in
conflict with the Act.
(2) Beginning January 1, 2013, a permanent building or structure shall
be equipped with a fire suppression system in compliance with
NFPA 1124.
(3) The retailer at that retail location is licensed under the General
Sales Tax Act.
(4) The retailer has a valid federal taxpayer identification number
issued by the Federal Department of the Treasury, Internal
§ 146-2 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-2
144:327
Revenue Service. However, this requirement does not apply to a
retailer that is a sole proprietorship.
E. A person that knows, or should know, that he or she is required to
comply with Subsection D and who fails or neglects to do so is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of
$2,500 for each violation. Each day that a person is in noncompliance
constitutes a separate violation. In the event of more than one violation,
that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Amended 2-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 1307]
F. During periods when consumer fireworks are sold, each retail location
selling consumer fireworks either shall be added as an additional
insured, or public liability and product liability insurance coverage shall
be obtained and maintained, in an amount not less than $10,000,000
per occurrence. A person that knows, or should know, that he or she is
required to comply with this subsection and who fails or neglects to do
so is liable for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of not
more than $500; each day that a person is in noncompliance constitutes
a separate violation. Proof of the insurance required by this subsection
shall be in writing, be current, and available for inspection upon
request.
G. A person shall not sell low-impact fireworks unless he or she registers
with the low-impact fireworks retail registry not less than 10 days
before selling the fireworks in each calendar year. A person who sells
low-impact fireworks at retail and who fails to register shall cease the
sale of low-impact fireworks until the person complies with this
subsection.
H. Retailers, wholesalers, and manufacturers are subject to the following
codes and standards that are adopted by reference in the applicable
administrative rules adopted by the Department, except as specifically
amended therein: NFPA 1 (2006 edition); NFPA 101 (2009 edition);
NFPA 1123 (2010 edition); NFPA 1124 (2006 edition); NFPA 1126 (2011
edition); and APA Standard 87.1 (2001 edition).
I. Nothing within these requirements shall exempt retailers who have
obtained a consumer fireworks certificate and/or registered online for
the sale of low-impact fireworks from ensuring that the proposed site is
in compliance with all property maintenance regulations and other
applicable City ordinances, or from submitting to the City all
applications and supporting documentation required by any other
provisions of the City Code and/or the City's Zoning Ordinance
pertaining generally, without specific reference to fireworks, to retail
sales, permanent or temporary structures, temporary sales, and land
use regulations.
J. A retailer shall provide with every purchase of consumer fireworks a
notice listing the dates and times permitted under this act for the
ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks. The notice shall
§ 146-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 146-2
144:328
§ 146-3. Age of majority required for purchase. [Amended
2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 1307]
Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to persons under the age of 18. A
person who violates this section shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of not
more than $1,000, or for a second or subsequent violation of this section, a
civil fine of not more than $2,500.
§ 146-4. Safety review.
The Fire Marshal may, at any time, undertake a review of any fireworks
sales or storage area for which a consumer fireworks certificate has been
issued or is required, or any discharge of fireworks, to determine whether
any violations of state law or local ordinance are occurring which might
endanger the public health, safety, and welfare, or which might warrant
revocation of the certificate or permit.
§ 146-5. through § 146-10. (Reserved)
begin with the following statement: "State law permits, under MCL
§ 28.457, the ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks at
the following times." The retailer may provide the notice in a form
and manner determined by the retailer, including, but not limited to,
printing or stamping the notice on, or affixing the notice to, a receipt,
bag, or the product being purchased, or a printed handout provided at
the time of purchase. Posting the notice on a wall, window, display, or
otherwise, at the retail location, does not satisfy the requirements of
this subsection. A retailer who fails to provide the notice required by
this subsection is responsible for a civil fine of $100 for each day on
which one or more violations occur. [Added 2-12-2019 by Ord. No.
1307]
§ 146-2 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-5
144:329

ARTICLE III
Manufacture and Storage of Fireworks
§ 146-11. Prohibited acts.
No person shall manufacture any fireworks within the City.
§ 146-12. through § 146-14. (Reserved)
§ 146-11 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-12
144:331

ARTICLE IV
Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Displays
§ 146-15. Ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks.
A. A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on
public property, school property, church property, or the property of
another person without that organization's or person's express
permission to use those fireworks on those premises. "Property of
another person" includes hotel and motel property, apartment property,
and condominium property, where an owner, management company, or
association has or retains authority and control over the use of the
property or common areas. A person who violates this subsection is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a
civil fine of not more than $500. [Amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No.
1307]
B. An individual who uses, ignites, or discharges consumer fireworks or
low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a
controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a
controlled substance is responsible for a civil infraction and may be
ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $1,000. As used in this
subsection: [Amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 1307]
(1) "Alcoholic liquor" means that term as defined in Section 1d of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL § 257.1d.
(2) "Controlled substance" means that term as defined in Section 8b of
the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL § 257.8b.
C. An individual who violates the smoking prohibition under NFPA 1124,
7.3.11.1 (smoking within 50 feet of a consumer fireworks retail sales
area) is responsible for a civil fine of $1,000. [Amended 2-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 1307]
D. Permitted days and hours; use. [Amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No.
1307]
(1) Persons only shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks, or
aid or abet in, permit, or allow the ignition, discharge, or use of
consumer fireworks on the following days after 11:00 a.m.:
(a) December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1;
(b) The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial
Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days;
(c) June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days;
(d) July 5, if that day is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.;
(e) The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day
until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
§ 146-15 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-15
144:333
(2) An individual who violates Subsection D(1) shall be responsible for
a civil fine of $1,000 for each violation of the subsection. Up to onehalf
of the fine collected under the penalty provision above shall be
remitted to the local law enforcement agency responsible for
enforcing this section.
(3) When using any fireworks within the City, a person shall not use
them in a manner inconsistent with or contrary to the
manufacturer's directions for use, or in a manner which could
reasonably be foreseen to cause, or which actually causes, harm to
another or to property, or within or upon public roads, walks, or
rights-of-way, or within or upon private roads or private property of
another without express permission, or which causes, creates, or
perpetuates a violation of any provision of the City Code, including
but not limited to:
(a) Disturbing the public peace;
(b) Violating the City's Noise Ordinances;
(c) Violating the City's Nuisance Ordinances; or
(d) Creating or depositing litter in violation of the City's Littering
Ordinances.
(4) All other City ordinances not adopted pursuant to the Act and not
directly or specifically targeted at the use of consumer fireworks
shall continue to apply and may be enforced at any time of the year,
even on the day before, day of, or the day after a national holiday.
E. No person shall ignite fireworks or novelties other than in a manner
prescribed by the manufacturer's directions for use, or in the absence
of directions, by the use of any ignition device other than a match, punk,
or lighter. A "punk" is defined as a long, thin piece of wood covered in a
substance that burns very slowly, producing only heat, with no flame.
Blowtorches, open flames, bonfires, grills, and other sources of heat
and fire and ignition with flames larger or stronger than those of a
match or lighter are prohibited as sources of ignition for fireworks and
novelties. No person under the age of 18 shall ignite consumer
fireworks.
F. No person shall discharge fireworks or novelties other than in a manner
prescribed by the manufacturer's directions for use, and no person shall
discharge consumer fireworks while within a building or enclosed
space; within 50 feet of a flame or flammable surface; within 20 feet of a
property line; within any public roadway or public right-of-way; within,
upon, or from a motor vehicle; at any person, vehicle, or conveyance;
within 500 feet of a gasoline service station; during weather conditions
involving wind speeds in excess of 10 miles per hour; from any location
not at ground level; from any surface that is not flat and level; without
keeping a bucket of water or garden hose ready to address accidents;
within 25 feet of a building; from within any type of container or other
§ 146-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 146-15
144:334
§ 146-16. Display fireworks and pyrotechnic special effects; permit
required.
No person shall discharge any display fireworks without a permit issued
by the City Council. Pyrotechnic special effects shall not be discharged or
displayed without a permit issued by the Fire Marshal. Permit applicants
object that could reasonably be foreseen to impede the aerial progress
of the firework, or to cause a fire or explosion, after its ignition; or
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
G. An owner, occupant, or other person with control of the real property
shall not allow, permit, or otherwise consent to the possession or
display of fireworks on the property. An owner, occupant, or other
person with control of the real property shall be presumed to have
consented to the possession or display of fireworks on the property if
law enforcement or fire officials observe and document the existence of
unlawful fireworks on the premises, or the existence of the remnants of
unlawful fireworks on the premises indicative of the use or display of
such fireworks.
H. Any individual who violates the restrictions in Subsection E, F, or G, or
who aids, abets, perpetuates, participates in, or otherwise promotes the
actions of the individual that violates said restrictions, may be cited and
prosecuted for the applicable ordinance violation(s) and/or shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction. [Amended 2-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 1307]
I. A law enforcement officer and/or fire official may confiscate and
impound all fireworks and fireworks paraphernalia involved in causing
a violation of this article or which are found to be within the access and
control of the violator(s). If the impounded items are lawful to possess,
they may be retained as evidence until any court proceedings or
citations have been adjudicated and any probationary periods have
been completed. If the impounded items are unlawful to possess, the
Police Department or Fire Department shall dispose of or destroy the
items in accordance with evidence protocols that will still allow for
effective prosecution of the charged offenses without actual retention
of the items. If any fireworks are retained by the City, they shall be
stored in compliance with the Act and rules promulgated under the Act.
The person from whom fireworks are seized under the Act or this article
shall pay the actual costs of storage and/or disposal of the seized
fireworks. The Police Department may dispose of the seized fireworks
by providing them to a disposal organization approved by the Chief of
Police or designee, or by allowing them to be used by City police, fire,
and code enforcement agencies for training purposes.
J. Unless otherwise specified herein, novelties are not subject to any of
the regulations in this article, except that they may not be utilized in
such a manner as to cause, create, or perpetuate a violation of any
other section of the City Code of Ordinances.
§ 146-15 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-16
144:335
shall follow the procedures set forth in §§ 146-21 through 146-125 of this
chapter. Permits are not transferable and shall not be issued to a minor.
§ 146-17. Responsibility.
§ 146-18. through § 146-20. (Reserved)
A. An owner, occupant, or other person with control of real property shall
not allow, permit, or otherwise assent to the possession or display of
display fireworks on the property or an adjacent public way if such
possession or display is in violation of this subdivision.
B. An owner, occupant, or other person with control of real property shall
be presumed to have assented to the possession or display of display
fireworks on the property or adjacent public way in violation of this
subdivision if law enforcement or fire officials observe and document
the existence of unlawful fireworks on the premises or the adjoining
public way, or the existence of the remnants of unlawful fireworks on
the premises or adjoining public way indicative of the use or display of
such fireworks.
C. A person who pleads to or is found responsible for a violation of
Subsection A shall clean up any fireworks remnants on or adjoining the
person's property, or pay the City's costs for such cleanup, and
reimburse the City's actual costs for destruction of any unlawful
fireworks and materials impounded by law enforcement or fire officials
during investigation of the unlawful activity under Subsection A.
D. A violation of Subsections A or C is a municipal civil infraction. If the
unlawful activity does not cease after issuance of a municipal civil
infraction citation, the owner, occupant, or other person with control of
the real property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 146-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 146-18
144:336
ARTICLE V
Permit Procedures
§ 146-21. Application; renewal.
A. Every applicant for a permit to use or discharge display fireworks and/
or pyrotechnic special effects shall submit to the Fire Department, with
a nonrefundable application fee, a current and fully completed
application on a form provided by the Fire Department.
B. The fees shall be set by the City's Fee Resolution in an amount to cover
the cost of investigation, review, and inspection by the City of the
premises which will be used for the use or discharge of display
fireworks and/or pyrotechnic special effects.
C. A permit shall not be issued to a nonresident person, firm, or
corporation for ignition of articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks until
the person, firm, or corporation has appointed in writing a resident
member of the bar of this state or a resident agent to be the legal
representative upon whom all process in an action or proceeding
against the person, firm, or corporation may be served.
D. All applications shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, residence address, and telephone number of a resident
agent who is a natural person (No post office boxes will be accepted
as legal addresses.);
(2) The name, residence address, and telephone number of the
applicant:
(a) If the applicant is a corporation, the name, residence address,
and telephone number of each of the officers and directors of
the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than
10% of the stock of the corporation if that individual is or will
be involved in the management and/or operation of the
business. The applicant shall also provide the name, residence
address, and telephone number of each individual who will be
involved in the management and/or operation of the business,
as well as documentation that the corporation is in good
standing in the state of incorporation;
(b) If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the partnership
and the name, residence address, and telephone number of
each of the partners having at least a ten-percent ownership
interest, as well as any individual who is or will be involved in
the management and/or operation of the business;
(c) If the applicant owns stock or has a financial interest in any
other business which sells or manufactures fireworks, the
name, address, and telephone number of the corporation and
§ 146-21 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-21
144:337
the name, address, and telephone number of each such
business;
(3) The address and legal description of the property where the
fireworks will be displayed, or where pyrotechnic special effects
will be displayed;
(4) Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct a safety inspection of the premises where
fireworks will be displayed, or where pyrotechnic special effects
will be displayed. The applicant shall give such additional
information and identification necessary to discover the truth of the
matters required to be set forth in the application; and
(5) The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant.
E. Permits. In addition to the other conditions set forth in this section,
permit applications shall be subject to background investigations to
determine whether the applicant has ever been involved in criminal or
fraudulent activities, or has ever had a license or permit suspended or
revoked for cause.
(1) If, as a result of the investigation, the Fire Marshal or Chief of
Police has reasonable cause to believe that the applicant may cause
or present a danger to public safety if granted a fireworks display
permit, the City Council may deny the application.
(2) If, as a result of the investigation, the Fire Marshal or Chief of
Police has reasonable cause to believe that the applicant may cause
or present a danger to public safety if granted a pyrotechnic special
effects display permit, the Fire Marshal may deny the application.
F. Applicants for a permit to use, discharge, or display fireworks or
pyrotechnic special effects must demonstrate financial responsibility in
the form of a bond or insurance policy in an amount, character, and
form deemed necessary by the City Council for the protection of the
public.
G. Before granting a permit to use, discharge, or display fireworks, the
City Council shall rule on the competency and qualifications of the
operator of the display as required under NFPA 1123, and the time,
place, and safety aspects of the display.
H. Cost of policing. Fireworks displays vary in size and scope, and displays
of large magnitude cause the City to incur significant additional
expenses for police, fire, and emergency services. Therefore, in
addition to the nonrefundable application fee, an applicant for a permit
to use, discharge, or display fireworks shall deposit with the City, as a
condition of enjoying the privileges inherent in receipt of a permit, an
amount reasonably calculated to reimburse the City for the cost of
additional police and emergency services. The City shall hold such
amount, to be determined by the City Council at the time the permit
§ 146-21 ROSEVILLE CODE § 146-21
144:338
§ 146-22. Investigation and inspection; processing of application.
application is considered, in escrow until after the fireworks display.
In determining the amount, the City Council may utilize its past
experiences and the experiences of other communities. The City shall
itemize its additional police and emergency services expenses incurred
as a result of the fireworks display and may draw from the escrowed
funds to achieve full reimbursement. Remaining funds shall be returned
to the permit applicant. In the event that the escrowed funds are
insufficient to cover the City's actual costs under this Subsection H, the
City shall serve an invoice upon the permit applicant with a demand
for payment. Failure of a permit applicant to comply with any of the
provisions of this Subsection H shall be a misdemeanor.
I. Term permits for the use or discharge of display fireworks or
pyrotechnic special effects are valid only for the date(s) and time(s)
stated on the permit itself. Each subsequent use or discharge of display
fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects shall require a new permit, and
the applicant shall follow the application process set forth in this
article.
J. Display permit conditions. The issuance of a permit for the use or
discharge of display fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects shall be
conditioned upon compliance with all of the terms and conditions of this
article, as well as the provisions of Chapter 33 of the International Fire
Code. In addition, the issuance of such a permit shall be conditioned
upon the following:
(1) The applicant and property owner must execute a written
agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to allow police,
fire, and emergency personnel designated by the City to be present
on the premises before, during, and after the fireworks or
pyrotechnic special effects display for purposes of supervising and
inspecting the display and surrounding conditions for public safety
hazards and violations of City codes and ordinances; and
(2) The applicant and property owner must execute an indemnification
agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to indemnify
the City for any and all liability or damages incurred by any person
or entity as a result of the fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects
display.
A. Upon receipt of the fully completed application, fees, and such other
information as may be required or requested by the Fire Department,
the Fire Marshal shall schedule a safety inspection to examine the
premises where fireworks will be displayed, or where pyrotechnic
special effects will be displayed.
B. If the Fire Marshal finds reasonable cause to believe that other code
violations exist which are not firesafety related, the Fire Marshal may
refer the application to the Building Official, or his or her designated
§ 146-21 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-22
144:339
§ 146-23. Refusal, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of permit.
A permit issued under this article may be refused by the Fire Marshal or
suspended, revoked, or not renewed by the City Council for cause. The term
"cause" as used in this article shall include the doing or omitting of any act
or permitting any condition to exist on the premises for which a permit is
issued, which act, omission, or condition is contrary to the health, safety,
and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular, or fraudulent in nature, is
unauthorized or beyond the scope of the permit issued, or is forbidden by
this article or any applicable law. "Cause" shall include but not be limited
to:
representative, who shall cause a thorough inspection of the premises
to be made to ensure that the premises are in compliance with all
pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinances. The results of
such inspections shall be returned to the Fire Marshal within 30 days
of the date the application was referred.
C. For fireworks display permits, the Fire Marshal shall forward his or her
recommendation to the City Council for consideration of the permit
application within 120 days of receipt of the properly completed
application. For pyrotechnic special effects display permits, the Fire
Marshal shall issue a decision to grant or deny the permit within 60
days of receipt of the properly completed application.
A. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application;
B. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the operation of the business or
during a safety inspection;
C. Any material violation of this article or of the regulations authorized
herein;
D. Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance which creates a
risk to the health, safety, or welfare of the community;
E. Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with
the premises for which a permit is issued. For purposes of this article,
"nuisance" shall be given its normal and customary meaning and shall
include the nuisances found within Chapter 203 of this Code, as well as,
but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing,
zoning, health, fire, or other applicable regulatory codes;
(2) A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is in violation of the
law and/or interferes with the health, safety, and welfare of the
properties in the area.
§ 146-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 146-23
144:340
§ 146-24. Procedure for nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension.
§ 146-25. Denial; hearing.
F. Failure by the owner or operator to permit inspection of the premises by
the City's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of
this article;
G. Failure to pay personal property taxes, other City obligations and real
property taxes by February 14 of each year.
A. Before any action is taken concerning revocation or suspension of a
permit, the City shall serve the holder of the permit by personal service
or first class mail, served or mailed at least 10 days prior to a hearing,
with notice of hearing before the City Council or a hearing panel
designated by the City Council to conduct a hearing and forward a
recommendation to the City Council, which notice shall contain the
following:
(1) Date, time, and place of the hearing;
(2) Notice of the proposed action;
(3) Reasons for the proposed action;
(4) Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify;
(5) A statement that the holder of the permit may be represented by
legal counsel, present evidence and testimony, and confront and
cross-examine adverse witnesses;
(6) A statement requiring the holder of the permit to notify the City
Attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if he,
she, or it intends to contest the proposed action and to provide the
names of witnesses known at that time who will testify on his, her,
or its behalf.
B. Upon completion of the hearing, and after a decision by the City
Council, the City shall submit to the holder of a permit a written
statement of the findings and determination of the City Council within
30 days.
C. Revocation may occur prior to a hearing if there is an immediate and
significant risk of harm to persons or property as determined by the
Fire Marshal, or his or her designee.
A. Any person whose initial request for a pyrotechnic special effects
display permit is denied by the Fire Marshal shall have a right to a
hearing before the City Council, provided a written request for such a
hearing is filed with the City Manager within 10 days following such
denial. The City Council shall have the right to affirm and sustain any
refusal to issue a permit or the City Council may grant any such permit.
§ 146-23 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-25
144:341
§ 146-26. through § 146-30. (Reserved)
B. In addition to the information required in this article, an applicant
whose permit under this article was denied by the Fire Marshal should
be prepared to submit and discuss any additional information required
by the City Council for the appeal hearing.
§ 146-25 ROSEVILLE CODE § 146-26
144:342
ARTICLE VI
Penalties and Enforcement
§ 146-31. Violations and penalties.
§ 146-32. Persons authorized to enforce. [Added 9-25-2012 by Ord.
No. 1255]
Any and all provisions of the ordinances under this chapter shall be
enforced by the members of the City of Roseville Police Department, Fire
Department, Building Department, or Code Enforcement Department. Each
of the aforementioned public servants may issue and serve appearance
tickets with respect to any violations of the offenses herein.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, if a person knowingly,
intentionally, or recklessly violates this chapter, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of not more than $500, or both.
B. In addition to any other penalty imposed for the violation of the Act or
this chapter, a person who tenders a plea of guilty, no contest, or
responsible to a violation of this chapter shall be required to reimburse
the City for the costs of storing and disposing of seized fireworks that
the City confiscated for a violation of the Act or this chapter.
§ 146-31 FIRES, CONDUCT AT § 146-32
144:343
Chapter 151
FOOD PRODUCTS
§ 151-1. Products regulated by Health Department.93
Food products, including meat, fish, fowl, vegetables, fruit, berries, bread,
baked goods, butter, condiments and confections, kept or offered for sale
are regulated by the Macomb County Health Department pursuant to MCL
§ 287.801 et seq. and MSA § 12.895(1) et seq.
Chapter 158
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Prevention Bureau — See Ch. 27.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Gasoline price signs — See Ch. 264.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 146-32 ROSEVILLE CODE § 151-1
151:344
ARTICLE I
Self-Service Stations
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 158 of the 1984
Code; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 158-1. Compliance required.
All service stations or garages providing for the self-service dispensing of
flammable liquids by persons other than the owner, lessee, tenant, agent,
servant or authorized employees shall comply with the following provisions:
§ 158-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. An Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved fixed-pipe dry chemical
extinguishing system, provided with both automatic and manual
controls, shall be installed at each pump island where self-service is
utilized. Such extinguishing system shall be approved by the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
B. The manual control shall be clearly identified, easily accessible and
installed at the control console (remote control).
C. All employees shall be trained as to the location and use of the remote
control manual operation of the system.
D. Each extinguisher head shall be installed in such a manner that the
accumulation of ice or snow shall not adversely affect the operation of
the system.
§ 158-1 GASOLINE STATIONS § 158-2
158:345
Chapter 163
GROUNDWATER WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Sewers — See Ch. 256.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Water — See Ch. 354.
§ 163-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1094]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare in connection with the use of groundwater within
certain portions of the City of Roseville. It has been determined that
groundwater within the restricted zone (as defined in § 163-2 below)
contains hazardous substances at concentration levels which the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality has determined would be unsafe for
consumption and certain other use. It is further recognized that protection
of residents of the City of Roseville from consumption and other use of
groundwater containing hazardous substances which may be injurious to
human health may in certain cases be fostered by the adoption of
restrictions in certain areas with regard to the installation and/or use of
wells.
§ 163-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth below:
RESTRICTED ZONE — An area legally described and incorporated within
this chapter.
WELL — An opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of removing
fresh water through nonmechanical or mechanical means for any purpose
other than the obtaining of groundwater samples as part of a remedial
activity consistent with the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act of 1994, as amended.
§ 163-3. Restricted zones.
The following described area is the restricted zone as defined under the
terms of this chapter: An area commencing at the easterly boundary of
the intersection of the exit from eastbound Interstate 94 (toward Gratiot
Avenue) to 13 Mile Road, and then west along 13 Mile Road to Alabama
Street, then south along Alabama Street to Maryland Street, then west
along Maryland to Tennessee Street, then south along Tennessee Street to
Iowa Street, then east along Iowa Street to the east boundary of the rightof-
way of Interstate 94, then northeast and north along Interstate 94 and
§ 158-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 163-3
163:346
the exit from eastbound Interstate 94 to Gratiot Avenue to the point of
beginning.
§ 163-4. Prohibition of installation and use of wells within
restricted zones.
No person or legal entity shall allow or permit or provide for the installation
or utilization of a well on any property on which they have any ownership
interest or control within the restricted zone. Property within the restricted
zone shall be serviced only by public water supply. Notwithstanding
anything contained in this § 163-4, a well may be installed and utilized
for the sole purpose of dewatering property to the extent required during
construction activities, provided that all laws and regulations concerning
groundwater discharge are complied with at all times.
§ 163-5. Violations and penalties; injunctive relief.94
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. In addition,
the city may seek injunctive relief to restrain any person from violating
this chapter, including the collection of costs and attorney fees associated
with such enforcement action. Any well in violation of this chapter shall
be declared and deemed a nuisance, subject to abatement, and shall be
immediately taken out of service and lawfully abandoned.
§ 163-6. Notification of state in event of amendment or repeal of
chapter.
At least 30 days prior to any amendment or repeal in whole or in part of
this chapter, the City of Roseville shall notify the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality of its intent to so act.
Chapter 165
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Littering — See Ch. 189.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 219.
Signs — See Ch. 264.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 163-3 HANDBILLS § 165-1
165:347
§ 165-1. Purpose.
To protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to the
promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial
handbills, as herein defined, with the resulting detriment and danger to
public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity
requires the regulation thereof, and to that end the purposes of this chapter
are specifically declared to be as follows:
§ 165-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BILLPOSTER — Includes any person engaging in the business for hire
of posting, fastening, nailing or otherwise affixing any sign containing a
message or information of any kind whatsoever, to any outdoor billboard
or to or upon any bridge, fence, pole, post, sidewalk or tree or to or
upon the exterior of any other structure, except that the terms of this
definition shall not apply to nor include any such sign mounted on, fastened
to or suspended from the outside of any building or other structure, in
accordance with and authorized by any provision of an ordinance or statute,
either for any public convenience or use, or regulating the construction
or use of so-called "outdoor display signs," whether such display signs are
illuminated or not.95
A. To protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of
dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing
themselves as solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors, by
requiring the registration of all such solicitors, canvassers or handbill
distributors, together with the names of their employers, and by
regulating the business of handbill and advertising distribution through
the imposition of reasonable license fees.
B. To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers
or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if
they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited
by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising
matter.
C. To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the
expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the
promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and
commercial handbills.
D. To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and
disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of
decency and good morals and public order, by distinguishing between
the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and
commercial circulars and the right to deliver noncommercial handbills
to all who are willing to receive the same.
§ 165-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 165-2
165:348
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper or booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature which:
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Includes any person engaging or engaged in
the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial
handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and
any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution
of such handbills.
NEWSPAPER — Includes any newspaper of general circulation as defined
by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal
Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law, and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per
year and sold to the public.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales;
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this definition
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind when
either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with
the dissemination which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of
decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order, provided
that nothing contained in this definition shall be deemed to authorize
the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under any
ordinance of this city;
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; or
D.
E. Is not covered by the definition of "sign."96
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 165-2 HANDBILLS § 165-2
165:349
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any printed or written matter,
any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine or paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid
definition of a "sign" or a "commercial handbill" or a "newspaper."
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Includes any dwelling house, building or other
structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes,
alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
plazas, grounds and buildings.
SIGN — Any written, painted or printed matter of any kind, or other form or
reproduction thereof.97
§ 165-3. Posting of notices or placards.
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the
same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster,
advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention
of the public to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone or
flagstone or any other portion or part of any public way or public place
or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph or telephone or trolley line pole
or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box or upon the piers,
columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge
or viaduct or other public structure or building or upon any pole, box or
fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be
authorized or required by the laws of the United States or this state or the
ordinances of the city.
§ 165-4. Distribution of handbills in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast
any commercial handbill in or upon any public place within this city, and it
shall be also unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall
not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to
the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any
person willing to accept such noncommercial handbill.
97.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 165-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 165-5
165:350
§ 165-5. Placing handbills on vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be
deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any
noncommercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile
or other vehicle, who is willing to accept the same.
§ 165-6. Distribution on vacant private premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant.
§ 165-7. Distribution on posted premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any
premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed
on said premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a
sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents" or "No
Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or to have their
right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such
premises.
§ 165-8. Distribution on inhabited private premises.
No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or any other
person, shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises
which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill
directly to the owner, occupant or any other person then present in or
upon such private premises; provided, however, that in the case of inhabited
private premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, the
aforesaid licensee or other person, unless requested by anyone upon such
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon
such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited
as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about
such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be used when
so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.
§ 165-9. Billposters and handbill distributors.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
billposter for hire or as a handbill distributor for hire, or for any person
to distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills, without first
complying with the terms of this chapter and all other relevant laws and
regulations, provided that nothing contained herein shall apply to any
§ 165-5 HANDBILLS § 165-9
165:351
§ 165-10. Exemptions to provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers as defined in
this chapter.
person advertising the business or activity upon his or her own
premises if such business or activity is regularly established at a
definite location in the city and, also, if a license has been obtained
therefor if such license is required under the terms of any applicable
law or ordinance.
B. Any person desiring to engage, as principal, either in the business of a
billposter for hire or in the business of distributing commercial or
noncommercial handbills for hire, shall make application to and receive
from the Roseville Police Department a license in the manner and for
the period prescribed by the terms of this chapter and by all relevant
provisions of this Code. Such applicant shall make written application
to the Roseville Police Department upon a form or forms provided for
such purpose by such Department. Such form shall contain, among
other things that may be required, the name, the business address and
a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the
applicant and the probable number of agents and employees so to be
engaged, together with a request for a license for the period for which
the applicant seeks to engage in such business.
C. Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the City Council,
or official so empowered by law, may revoke any license obtained under
an application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly
made by the applicant with intent to obtain a license by means of false
or fraudulent representations or for violation of this chapter or for any
other grounds specified by law. Such application shall be accompanied
by the fee hereinafter provided for in this chapter. No license issued
under this chapter shall be transferable, and if such license shall be
surrendered by the licensee therein named or shall be revoked for
cause, neither the licensee named in such license nor any other person
shall be entitled to any refund of any part of such fee.
D. License fees under the terms of this chapter, and for such purpose, shall
be as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, provided that persons acting for
licensees, as agents or employees, in the posting or distributing of any
such signs or handbills shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a
fee, but each such person shall comply with each and all of the other
provisions hereof and shall be subject thereto.98 [Amended 7-22-1986
by Ord. No. 944]
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 165-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 165-11
165:352
§ 165-11. Posting of prohibited handbills.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of premises
to permit any person, whether licensed or acting under the terms of this
chapter or otherwise, to post, affix or otherwise attach to any building,
structure or fixture located upon such premises, whether such fixture is
natural or artificial, any poster or handbill containing any matter prohibited
by the terms of this chapter.
§ 165-12. Distribution of unlawful or offensive handbills.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit
any sign or any commercial or noncommercial handbill, which:
§ 165-13. Effect on other ordinances.
This chapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance
ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or licensing canvassers,
hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants or any person using the public
streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial
sales, not covered herein.99
§ 165-14. Violations and penalties.100
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.101
A. May reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder or which
advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the Government of the
United States or of this state by means of any artifice, scheme or
violence or which urges any unlawful conduct or encourages or tends to
encourage a breach of the public peace or good order of the community.
B. Is offensive to public morals or decency or which contains blasphemous,
obscene, libelous or scurrilous language.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Licensing; Ch. 219, Peddling, Soliciting and Transient
Merchants.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
101. Editor's Note: Former § 165-15, Distribution on Sundays and holidays, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 165-11 HANDBILLS § 165-14
165:353
Chapter 168
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71.
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Emergency management — See Ch. 128.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Groundwater wells — See Ch. 163.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 225.
Sewers — See Ch. 256.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 284.
Solid waste — See Ch. 285.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Wastewater system — See Ch. 350.
Water — See Ch. 354.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 165-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 165-14
165:354
ARTICLE I
Incident Cost Recovery
[Adopted 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 1218]
§ 168-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 168-2. Title.
This article shall be known and referred to as: "Hazardous Materials and/or
Substances Incident Cost Recovery Ordinance."
§ 168-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATEMENT — To put an end to; to reduce in degree, intensity, volume or
amount.
CITY — The City of Roseville and all departments and units of said City.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The providing, sending and/or utilizing of
fire-fighting, police, emergency medical and rescue services and/or other
City departments or by a private industrial entity, corporation or other
assisting government agency operating at the request or direction of the
City of Roseville for an incident resulting in a hazardous materials and/or
A. The City of Roseville Fire Department, Fire Marshal Division, finds that
due to the number of major roadways and interstate highways that
dissect the City of Roseville and the number of high-risk major
businesses found within our City boundaries, the potential exists for
response to incidents involving the release or threatened release of
hazardous materials and/or substances. Such incidents create a
likelihood of personal injury and/or property damage. The control and
abatement of such incidents places a significant financial and
operational burden upon the City's fire-fighting, rescue and emergency
medical services and other departments within the City (police, DPW,
water, etc.). It is necessary to adopt an article to establish the liability
for such incidents and to establish a policy and methods which will
allow the City to seek recovery of all City of Roseville costs associated
with emergency responses to hazardous materials and/or substance
incidents from the responsible parties.
B. The purpose is to protect the City of Roseville from extraordinary
expenses resulting from the utilization of City resources in response to
an incident involving the spill, release or discharge of hazardous
materials and/or substances, or the threatened release of hazardous
materials and/or substances or the improper handling or storage of
hazardous materials and/or substances by authorizing the imposition of
charges to recover actual costs incurred by the City in responding to
such incidents.
§ 168-1 HANDBILLS § 168-3
165:355
substances release, or threatened release, or the cleanup or abatement of
same.
COST RECOVERY/EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE — Any
and all costs incurred by the City of Roseville, or by a private person,
corporation or other assisting government agency, whether direct or
indirect, and shall include, but not be limited to, expenses attributable to
the response.
FIRE CHIEF — The administrative head of the Roseville Fire Department.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The City of Roseville Fire Department.
FIRE INSPECTOR/COORDINATOR — An individual/designee named by and
accountable directly and solely to the Fire Chief.
"Costs and expenses" shall also mean costs and expenses involving
entities operating at the request or direction of the City of Roseville
when making an emergency response to the hazardous materials and/
or substances incident, including the costs of providing fire-fighting,
police, rescue services and emergency medical services, containment
storage, cleanup and abatement of all hazardous conditions at the
scene of the incident.
A.
The costs further include all salaries and wages of City of Roseville
personnel responding to the incident, salaries and wages of City of
Roseville personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and
report preparation regarding said incident, all salaries and wages of
personnel of assisting government agencies operating at the request
or direction of the City of Roseville, and all costs connected with
the administration of the incident relating to any prosecution of the
person(s) responsible, including those relating to the production and
appearance of witnesses at any court proceedings in relation thereto.
B.
Costs shall include all City vehicles responding to the incident (charges
for vehicles set by the Macomb County Fire Chiefs Association). Costs
shall also include such items as disposable materials and supplies
used during the response to said incident, the rental or leasing of
equipment used for the specific response, vehicle and/or equipment
repair, replacement of equipment which is contaminated or damaged
beyond reuse or repair during the response to said incident, medical
expenses and hospitalization costs for exposures, injuries or illnesses
resulting from the incident, costs of all meals for all personnel involved
in the incident, extinguishing agents, water purchased from municipal
water systems, costs incurred by area fire and police departments
requested through mutual aid agreements with the City of Roseville or
its agents, special technical services and laboratory costs and services
and supplies purchased for any specific evacuation relating to said
incident. Costs shall also include all expenditures for storm sewer
cleaning, maintenance, repair or replacement, whether performed by
the City and/or contractors retained by the City.
C.
§ 168-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 168-3
165:356
FIRE MARSHAL/COORDINATOR — An individual/designee named by and
accountable directly and solely to the Fire Chief.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND/OR SUBSTANCES —
Those elements, materials, substances, wastes or by-products in any
quantity or form, including, but not limited to, chemicals, combustible
liquid, corrosives, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammable gas,
explosives, flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers,
pyrophorics, radioactive materials, unstable reactive matter, water
reactive matter, petroleum or petroleum products, antifreeze,
polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, which are or are potentially
harmful to the environment or human or animal life or which pose an
unreasonable or imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or
property or to the ecological balance of the environment as determined
by the Fire Chief, his or her designee or Senior Fire Official of the City
of Roseville in charge at the scene.
A.
These elements, substances, wastes or their by-products include those
which are contained in the list of hazardous substances adopted by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (the EPA); or which
are contained in the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or
the EPA; or which are defined as hazardous, toxic, pollutant, infectious,
flammable, combustible, explosive or radioactive by any other federal,
state or local statute, law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, order or
decree regulating, relating to, or imposing liability or standards of
conduct concerning any hazardous, toxic or dangerous waste substance
or material, as now or at any time hereafter in effect.
Specifically included, without limitation, as federal and state laws,
rules and regulations are:
Act No. 307 or the Public Acts of 1982, as amended, MCLA
299.601 et seq.;102
(a)
The Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 9601
et seq.;
(b)
The Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, as amended, 15
U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.;
(c)
The Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.;
(d)
The Federal Hazardous Material Transportation Act, as
amended;
(e)
(f) The Federal Clean Air Act, as amended;
(1)
B.
102. Editor's Note: MCLA 299.601 to 299.607 were repealed by P.A. 1994, No. 451, § 90101,
effective 3-30-1995. See now MCLA 324.20102 et seq.
§ 168-3 HANDBILLS § 168-3
165:357
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND/OR SUBSTANCES INCIDENT OR
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency
where a release of hazardous materials and/or substance occurs or is
reasonably imminent and where the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, has
(g) The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended;
(h) The Federal Superfund Amendment;
Hazardous substances, as defined in the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of
1980, Public Law 96-510, 94 State, 2767, as amended;
(i)
Hazardous substances, as defined in Part 201 of Act No. 451
of the Public Acts of 1994 of the State of Michigan, as
amended;103
(j)
Hazardous waste, as defined in Part 111 of Act No. 451 of the
Public Acts of 1994 of the State of Michigan, as amended;104
(k)
Petroleum, as described in Part 213 of Act No. 451 of the Public
Acts of 1994 of the State of Michigan, as amended;105
(l)
Oxidizing material, as regulated by the United States
Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49
CFR, 173.151;
(m)
Poisons (liquid or gas), as regulated as poison class A by the
United States Department of Transportation through
regulations found in 49 CFR 173.326;
(n)
"Radioactive material" shall mean any material required by
the United States Department of Transportation to have type
A packaging or other special protections or closed transport
vehicles, under regulations found in 49 CFR 173.425;
(o)
Compressed gas, as regulated by the United States
Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49
CFR 173.300.
(p)
Any similar or successor statute or law, or rules and regulations of
the EPA, or any other state or federal department, board or agency,
or any other agency or governmental board or entity having
jurisdiction.
(2)
Hazardous materials and/or substances specifically include, without
limitation, petroleum products, automotive antifreeze, polychlorinated
biphenyls and asbestos.
C.
103. Editor's Note: See MCLA 324.20101 et seq.
104. Editor's Note: See MCLA 324.11101 et seq.
105. Editor's Note: See MCLA 324.21302 et seq.
§ 168-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 168-3
165:358
so declared such activity, accident or emergency a hazardous materials and/
or substances incident or emergency.
IMPOUNDED VEHICLE(S) — If a vehicle or vehicles involved in a hazardous
materials and/or substances incident is found to be unsafe or in violation
of motor carrier regulations or poses an unreasonable or imminent risk to
life, health or safety of persons or property, or to the ecological balance
of the environment, as determined by the Fire Chief, his or her designee
or the Senior Fire Official of the City of Roseville in charge at the scene,
said vehicle will be impounded to a suitable place until repair or cleanup/
decontamination and investigation can be made. Upon correction of the
conditions, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall be notified and shall
reinspect the vehicle; if found to be in compliance with all acts and rules
governing this type of incident, and all reasonable impounding and repair
or cleanup/decontamination expenses have been paid, the vehicle will be
released to the owner or the legal representative of the owner.
OWNER — Any person or persons having a vested or contingent interest in
the premises, real property, container or vehicle involved in the hazardous
substances and/or materials incident, including but not limited to any duly
authorized agent or attorney, purchaser, devisee or fiduciary or said person
having said vested or contingent interest.
PERSONS — Individuals, firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations,
clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either
incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and
whether acting by themselves or by a servant, contractor, employee, agent
or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and
assigns thereof.
RELEASE — Any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping
or disposing of a hazardous substance or material into the environment,
including, but not limited to, the air, soil, groundwater and surface water,
or the improper handling or storage thereof, or the abandonment or
discharging of barrels, containers or other receptacles containing a
hazardous substance or material.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, sole
proprietorship, trust, firm, joint stock company, limited-liability company,
government entity or any other legal entity responsible for the incident,
or any owner, tenant, operator, occupant or other person in control of or
responsible for the operation, maintenance and/or condition of any building,
premises, property or vehicle where an incident arises which involves the
release or threatened release of hazardous substances and/or materials on
or about said building, premises, property and/or vehicle. The responsible
party shall be required to reimburse the City of Roseville for all costs and
expenses of an emergency response to said hazardous materials and/or
substances incident as further defined in this chapter. Where more than
one person or legal entity is a responsible party, such liability shall be joint
§ 168-3 HANDBILLS § 168-3
165:359
and several as to all involved persons or entities with a person or entity
retaining a right of contribution from remaining persons or entities.
SENIOR FIRE OFFICIAL — An individual/designee named by and
accountable directly and solely to the Fire Chief.
THREATENED RELEASE — Shall mean any imminent or impending event
or circumstance potentially causing but not resulting in a release, which
causes the City of Roseville to undertake emergency response.
UTILITY — Any public or private utility company, person, individual, firm,
corporation, association, authority, partnership, commercial entity,
consortium, joint venture, government entity or other legal entity, including,
but not limited to, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, electric, gas,
lighting and other fuel providers.
UTILITY INCIDENT — Any event requiring an emergency response by the
City of Roseville that involves any public or private utility property and
requires the emergency responders to remain at the incident to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public until the utility responds to the
incident and takes corrective measures. Any public or private utility whose
activities or facilities necessitate an emergency response shall be liable for
the expense of the emergency response.
§ 168-4. Response by City.
§ 168-5. Responsibility for abatement, control and costs.
A. In the event that City of Roseville employees are dispatched and
respond to a hazardous materials and/or substances incident, the City
employee in charge shall notify the responsible parties, including (if
necessary) appropriate local, county, state and federal agencies, as
soon as possible. Personnel shall take the necessary action to address
and contain the dangers of contamination and/or fire from any
hazardous materials and/or substances incident or imminent threat
from such substances. If necessary, arrangements shall be made for
evacuation of persons in the affected area.
B. If additional manpower and equipment is required for containment of
said incident, the fire official in charge of the incident shall contact and
utilize the fire-fighting, police, emergency medical and rescue services
of other City of Roseville departments or, by mutual aid agreement,
neighboring City departments or private industrial entities,
corporations or other assisting government agencies operating at the
request or direction of the City or Roseville for an incident resulting in a
hazardous materials and/or substances release or threatened release or
the cleanup or abatement of same.
C. All City of Roseville personnel shall take appropriate steps for a
hazardous materials and/or substances response that conform to their
level of training and as appropriate to the supplies and equipment to
them, in accordance with established protocols and procedures.
§ 168-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 168-5
165:360
§ 168-6. Liability for expense of emergency response; charge
imposed to constitute collectible debt.
§ 168-7. Billing procedure.
A. Any person who accidentally, negligently or intentionally causes or is
responsible for any release, spill or improper handling or storage of any
hazardous materials and/or substances in the City of Roseville shall be
responsible and liable for the abatement, control, capture, removal and
proper storage or disposal of such hazardous materials and for all costs
associated therewith. In addition, any responsible parties shall also be
responsible and liable for costs as set forth above, which include, but
are not limited to, owners, landlords, tenants, operators or occupants of
buildings, premises, property or vehicles where an incident arises
involving the release or threatened release of hazardous materials and/
or substances on, within or about said buildings, premises, property
and/or vehicles. Such responsible party shall have the option to secure
and hire a firm qualified to abate, control, capture, properly store and
dispose of these materials or to request the City of Roseville to do so;
provided, however, that if in the opinion of the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, of the fire department responding to the release of hazardous
materials and/or substances immediate action is necessary to reduce
the risk of danger of harm to persons, property or the environment, the
Fire Chief, or his or her designee, may direct the appropriate response
activities be immediately undertaken.
B. All the costs and expenses of an emergency response for such activities
shall be invoiced to and paid by the responsible party as further set
forth in this chapter.
A. The responsible party shall be required to reimburse the City of
Roseville for all costs and expenses of an emergency response to said
hazardous materials and/or substances incident.
B. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge imposed upon
the responsible party under this article. The charge constitutes a debt
of that responsible party and is collectible by the City of Roseville in the
same manner as an obligation under contract, express or implied.
A. Following the conclusion of the hazardous materials and/or substances
incident, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, will gather from all
departments, fire-fighting, police, emergency medical and rescue
services and/or other City departments or private industrial entities,
corporations or other assisting government agencies a detailed listing
of all known expenses incurred.
B. Within 10 days of receiving these costs and expenses, an invoice will be
prepared and submitted for payment of said costs and expenses to the
responsible party liable for the expenses as enumerated under this
article. The invoice will be sent by registered or certified mail, returned
receipt requested.
§ 168-5 HANDBILLS § 168-7
165:361
§ 168-8. Costs to be recovered.
Cost to be recovered under this article shall be those costs and expenses as
defined in § 168-3. If the responsible party fails to pay the City of Roseville
for costs incurred within 30 days of the date of the invoice sent by the City
of Roseville to the responsible party, the City of Roseville may institute legal
action to collect the costs due, including expenses, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred to collect those costs.
§ 168-9. Conflict with state or federal laws.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with state or federal
laws requiring persons responsible for causing a release, or threatened
release, from engaging in remediation activities or paying the cost thereof,
or both.
§ 168-10. Nonexclusive remedies.
The remedies provided by this article shall be in addition to any other
remedies available in equity or at law and such penalties as provided by law
or ordinance.
§ 168-11. Interpretation.
This article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general
purpose to conform to state law. Section headings and cross references of
this article shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or affect in any
manner the scope, meaning or extent of the provision of this article or any
section thereof.
§ 168-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed only
to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect.
§ 168-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article
is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
C. The invoice shall require full payment within 30 days from the date of
mailing or service of said invoice upon the responsible person. In the
event the landowner is determined to be a responsible party, a lien may
be placed against the property for all costs and expenses incurred,
including attorneys' fees, and subject to collection in the same fashion
as ad valorem taxes.
D. Any questions or challenges to the invoice should be made prior to the
thirty-day full payment requirement to avoid any legal action by the City
of Roseville.
§ 168-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 168-13
165:362
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of remaining
portions of this article, being the intent of the City that this article shall be
fully severable.
§ 168-14. When effective.
Provisions of this article shall become effective 20 days following adoption.
§ 168-13 HANDBILLS § 168-14
165:363

ARTICLE II
Disclosure and Management
[Adopted 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 1219]
§ 168-15. Applicability; findings; intent.
A. This article shall apply to all hazardous materials which are used,
handled, stored, possessed and/or located by businesses within the City
of Roseville. It is hereby determined that:
(1) Numerous business, industry, research and testing enterprises
within the City engage in the handling, storage, use, processing
and disposal of hazardous materials;
(2) The public health, safety and welfare of the citizens may be
endangered by the improper handling, storage, use, processing and
disposal of such hazardous materials;
(3) The surface waters, groundwater and soils within the City of
Roseville are particularly susceptible to damage from the improper
handling, storage, use, processing and disposal of hazardous
materials. Moreover, the expense and difficulty of cleaning up
surface water, groundwater and soils that have been damaged by
hazardous materials makes it imperative that protective measures
be taken to limit the threat of damage from such materials;
(4) Article IV, Section 52 of the Constitution of the State of Michigan
provides that the conservation and development of the natural
resources of the state is of paramount public concern in the
interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the people;
(5) The health, safety and welfare of the fire, police and other
emergency service personnel have been in the past, and may be in
the future, endangered because of a lack of complete knowledge of
the types and locations of such hazardous materials;
(6) Protection for the community is best advanced by business entities
disclosing and reporting the type and location of hazardous
materials located with the City of Roseville with a spirit of mutual
cooperation between the government and business entities, so that
public health, safety and welfare will be achieved.
B. The intent of this article is to encourage compliance with the following
rules, including any amendments thereto in the future:
(1) Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994, PA
451, as amended;106
(2) Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Act (MIOSH), PA 154 of
1974, as amended;107
106. Editor's Note: See MCLA 324.101 et seq.
§ 168-15 HANDBILLS § 168-15
165:365
§ 168-16. Title.
This article is hereby designated and shall be referred to as: "Hazardous
Materials Disclosure Ordinance."
§ 168-17. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this article:
BUSINESS — An employer, person, self-employed individual, trust, firm,
joint stock company, limited-liability company, corporation, partnership or
association. For purposes of this article, households that generate, store,
handle, dispose, treat or recycle hazardous materials of the kind and in the
amounts customary for ordinary households do not constitute a business.
FIRE MARSHAL — The person appointed by the Fire Chief of the City of
Roseville or such other person designated to act under the provisions of this
article.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those chemicals, substances or gases which
are a physical hazard or health hazard, whether the materials are in usable
or waste condition.
§ 168-18. Hazardous materials disclosure Permit required; waiver
affidavit; exempt businesses subject to inspection.
No business shall use, handle, store, possess and/or locate a hazardous
material within the City of Roseville without a hazardous materials
disclosure permit issued pursuant to this article. All businesses shall
complete and file at least one of the following applications with the Fire
Marshal:
(3) 2003 International Fire Code;
(4) 2003 Michigan Building Code, incorporating the 2000 International
Building Code;
(5) Executive Order 1994-17, Establishment of the State Emergency
Planning and Community Right-To-Know Commission;
(6) Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986; SARA
Title III, Section 312, Public Law 99-499, codified at 42 U.S.C.
§ 11022.
A. Permit waiver affidavit. Businesses which report that they do not have
hazardous substances shall file a waiver affidavit with the Fire Marshal.
Businesses who report that they are exempt from this article are
subject to random inspections by the Fire Marshal.
B. Annual permit. Businesses which report that they have hazardous
substances shall file a permit application with the Fire Marshal. The
107. Editor's Note: See MCLA 408.1001 et seq.
§ 168-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 168-18
165:366
§ 168-19. Hazardous materials management plan required.
No business shall use, handle, store, possess and/or locate a hazardous
material in quantities which meet or exceed the threshold amounts listed in
the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Michigan Office of Fire
Safety Bulletin No. 9 ("Fire Department Hazardous Material Emergency
Planning Responsibilities-Attachment B") within the City of Roseville
without having first filed a hazardous materials management plan (HMMP)
with the Fire Marshal. The approved HMMP shall be followed at all times,
including in the event of any spill, discharge, seepage, runoff or leakage of
any hazardous materials.
permit shall be valid for one year and renewed annually prior to
expiration.
(1) Application forms promulgated by the Fire Marshal shall include,
but not be limited to, the name and amount of all hazardous
materials that the business uses, handles, stores, possesses and/or
locates on site.
(2) In addition to completing the necessary application forms
promulgated by the Fire Marshal, businesses which have
hazardous substances shall provide a copy, 8 1/2 inches by 11
inches in size, of the site plan and/or floor plan showing where
various items are located at the site, such as hazardous materials,
utility emergency shutoffs, fire hydrants, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer locations and related information.
A. In general, major elements of the HMMP include:
(1) General facility information.
(2) Emergency notifications.
(3) Direction and control of responding agencies.
(4) Facility evacuation information.
(5) Hazardous material operating procedures and secondary
containment.
(6) Chemical inventory.
(7) Standard operating procedure for spill cleanup.
B. A pollution incident prevent plan (PIPP) expressly approved by the
Waste Management Division (WMD) within the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality (MDEQ), under the authority of Part 31 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994, PA 451, as
amended (Act 451),108 shall be deemed to comply with the requirements
of this section.
108. Editor's Note: See MCLA 324.3101 et seq.
§ 168-18 HANDBILLS § 168-19
165:367
§ 168-20. Materials exempt from regulation.
The following substances are excluded from the hazardous material
reporting requirements:
§ 168-21. Permit database and map.
The Fire Marshal shall maintain a database which includes the permit status
of all businesses subject to this article. The Fire Marshal shall also maintain
a map, showing where businesses regulated by this article are located, for
public review.
C. The HMMP shall be valid for five years and renewed prior to expiration.
However, an updated HMMP shall be filed for review and approval by
the City of Roseville whenever there is a change in the use, handling or
storage of hazardous materials.
A. The quantities of alcoholic beverages, medicines, foodstuffs, cosmetics
and consumer or industrial products containing not more that 50% by
volume of water-miscible liquids, and with the remainder of the
solutions not being flammable, in retail or wholesale sales occupancies,
are unlimited when packaged in individual containers not exceeding
1 3/10 gallons (five liters).
B. Applications and release of pesticide and agricultural products and
materials intended for use in weed abatement, erosion control, soil
amendment or similar applications when applied in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions and label directions.
C. The off-site transportation of hazardous materials when in accordance
with Michigan Department of Transportation regulations.
D. Building materials not otherwise regulated by the 2003 International
Fire Code and amendments thereto.
E. Refrigeration systems.
F. Stationary lead-acid batteries used for facility standby power,
emergency power or uninterrupted power supply, as regulated by
Section 608 of the International Fire Code and any amendments
thereto.
G. The display, storage, sale or use of fireworks and explosives in
accordance with Chapter 33 of the 2003 International Fire Code and
any amendments thereto.
H. Corrosives utilized in personal and household products in the
manufacturer's original consumer packaging in Group M occupancies.
I. The storage of distilled spirits and wines in wooden barrels or casks.
§ 168-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 168-22
165:368
§ 168-22. Inspections.
The Fire Marshal shall inspect all structures and premises utilized by
employers as often as may be necessary for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of the information provided under this article and ascertaining
whether there exist any violations of this article or any other federal or
state statutes, rules or regulations or local ordinances relating to the use,
storage, handling or disposal of hazardous materials. In those cases where
the Fire Marshal observes or otherwise discovers violations of federal or
state statutes, rules or regulations relating to the use storage, handling or
disposal of hazardous materials, such violations shall be reported to the
appropriate federal or state agency authorized to enforce such statute, rule
or regulations. In addition, the Fire Marshal may request the City Attorney,
upon proper authorization, to commence the appropriate legal proceedings
to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 168-23. Fees.
Businesses subject to this article shall pay a permit fee to the City of
Roseville sufficient to cover the implementation of this article, including
expenses incurred by the Fire Marshal and his staff. The amount of the
permit fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be
amended as necessary by the City Council. Businesses that are delinquent
in filing a permit application, paying the permit fee, or both, shall be subject
to late fees as established by resolution of the City Council.
§ 168-24. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for a party or any owner, officer, director or employees
of a business to fail to comply with the provisions of this article or to
misrepresent, falsify, conceal, destroy or fail to retain information necessary
to comply with this article. The dissolution of a business shall not discharge
its owners, officers, directors or employees from liability for such conduct.
Any person, persons or entity violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500 and costs of prosecution or by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or by both fine and costs and
imprisonment, at the discretion of the court.
§ 168-25. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed only
to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect.
§ 168-26. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this article is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
§ 168-22 HANDBILLS § 168-26
165:369
remaining portions of the ordinance, being the intent of the City that this
article shall be fully severable.
§ 168-27. When effective.
Provisions of this article shall become effective 20 days following adoption.
§ 168-26 ROSEVILLE CODE § 168-27
165:370
Chapter 174
HUNTING
CHARTER REFERENCES
Chief of Police — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 75.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Firearms — See Ch. 136.
Hunting in parks — See Ch. 215, § 215-5.
§ 174-1. Pursuing or shooting of animals or birds prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall at any time or in any
manner take, pursue, shoot at, kill or wound any game or wild animals or
any game or nongame birds or any introduced animals or birds, within the
corporate limits of the city.
§ 174-2. Hunting prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall hunt within the corporate
limits of the city with any firearm, compressed air gun, bow and arrow, trap,
pit, pitfall or deadfall or with dogs or in any other manner whatsoever.
§ 174-3. Application for issuance of hunting permit.
The owner of any acreage within the corporate limits of the city may at any
time apply to the Chief of Police of the city for permission to hunt animals or
birds upon his or her own property; provided, however, that before applying
to the Chief of Police, the owner shall first secure from the Michigan State
Conservation Department a certificate to the effect that it is necessary that
certain animals or birds be hunted and killed to prevent damage to crops
upon the acreage, and provided further that the issuance of a permit to hunt
upon property within the city shall be a discretionary matter with the Chief
of Police and shall be granted only when the Chief of Police feels that life or
property would not be endangered, and provided further that such permit,
when issued, shall be valid for only 15 days, including the date of issue.
§ 174-4. Notification of Chief of Police; supervision of hunting;
revocation of permit.
After the owner has secured permission from the Chief of Police to hunt
upon his or her own acreage, the owner shall notify the Chief of Police of the
exact time and place and length of time that he or she intends to hunt upon
his or her own property. Such hunting shall be under the direct supervision
of the Police Department and provided that when, in the discretion of the
§ 168-27 HUNTING § 174-4
174:371
Chief of Police or the police officer assigned to supervise the hunting,
the hunting is being conducted in such a manner as to endanger life or
property, the Chief of Police or the police officer supervising the hunting
shall have the power and authority to stop the hunting and revoke the
permit heretofore issued.
§ 174-5. Fee.109
No permits shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter until the
applicant shall have paid the sum as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, to
the City Clerk to cover the costs of the supervision required under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 174-6. Violations and penalties.110
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction before any court of competent
jurisdiction, shall be punished punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 176
ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement vending devices — See Ch. 73,
Art. II.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Food products — See Ch. 151.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Vending in parks — See Ch. 215, § 215-7.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 219.
Vending machine signs — See Ch. 264,
§ 264-7M.
§ 176-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for the carrying
and selling of ice cream, snow cones and similar confectionery products,
including but not limited to cotton candy, popcorn, caramel corn and
peanuts, upon public streets or parks.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 174-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 176-2
176:372
§ 176-2. License required.
All vehicles as defined by this chapter shall be licensed in accordance with
the provisions of the City Code.111
§ 176-3. Required equipment.
§ 176-4. Overtaking or meeting vehicles.
The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting any ice cream vending vehicle
which is stopped and is displaying two alternately flashing amber lights
shall proceed at 1/2 the reasonable speed of that residential street or road
on which the ice cream vending vehicle shall be parked, and in all cases
it shall be unlawful to pass such ice cream vending vehicle at more than a
reasonable speed.
§ 176-5. Vehicle to be legally parked during sales.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any food or other products from a
vehicle unless said vehicle is legally parked, or to sell or offer for sale from
other than the curb of a legally parked food vending vehicle.
§ 176-6. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to ice cream vending vehicles
operated on residential streets, roads and parks with vehicular traffic within
the city.
A. Every vehicle as defined in this chapter shall, in addition to any other
equipment required by law, be equipped with signal lamps, mounted as
high and widely spaced laterally as practicable, which shall be capable
of displaying to the front two alternately flashing amber lights located
at the same level and to the rear two alternately flashing amber lights
located at the same level. Said light shall have sufficient intensity to be
visible from a distance of at least 300 feet in normal sunlight and shall
be actuated by the driver of said vehicle whenever, but only whenever,
said vehicle is stopped on a residential street or other road with
vehicular traffic for the purpose of vending its products or is about to
stop for that purpose.
B. In addition to the equipment requirements hereinabove mentioned in
Subsection A, each ice cream vending vehicle, when operating on a
residential street or road with vehicular traffic, shall be required to
letter upon the vehicle itself or to prominently display a sign attached to
the vehicle warning other approaching motor vehicles to proceed with
caution when said signal lamps are actuated. The warning required by
this subsection shall be located both on the front and the rear of said ice
cream vending vehicle.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Licensing, and Ch. 133, Fees, for applicable fees for ice cream
trucks.
§ 176-2 ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLES § 176-7
176:373
§ 176-7. Applicability of statute.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with Public Acts of
1968, No. 298, of the Michigan Statutes Annotated, commonly known as
the "Frozen Desserts Act," and it is hereby considered incorporated and
applicable to ice cream vending vehicles operating in the city.112
§ 176-8. Violations and penalties.113
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
Chapter 178
IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES
§ 178-1. Impersonating city employees or officials prohibited.114
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely assume or pretend to be
a police officer, code enforcement officer, fire fighter, fire marshal or
inspector or any representative of the Department of Buildings and
Inspection, Department of Parks and Recreation or any other person
employed by the city or by any other governmental agency for the
protection of the peace, health and safety of the city or to take upon himself
or herself to act as such or to require any person to aid him or her in any
manner pertaining to the duties of persons employed by the city for the
protection of the peace, health and safety of the city.
§ 178-2. Violations and penalties.115
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
112. Editor's Note: See MSA § 12.795(1); MCL § 288.321.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 176-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 178-2
178:374
Chapter 179
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK
DEALERS
CHARTER REFERENCES
County and City Health Departments — See
Ch. 5, Sec. 5.4.
City Clerk — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.2.
Director of Buildings and Inspection — See
Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Nuisances — See Ch. 203.
Junk automobiles — See Ch. 336.
§ 179-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Pawnbroker, Secondhand
Dealer and Junk Dealer Ordinance of the City of Roseville" and will be
referred to herein as "this chapter."
§ 179-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning,
the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed by this
section:
AUTO SALVAGE DEALER — Any junk dealer engaged substantially in the
business of purchasing or receiving, wrecking or dismantling, and the
sale or exchange of motor vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts or
materials therefrom.
AUTO SALVAGE YARD OR SHOP — Any place where an auto salvage dealer
purchases, receives, wrecks, dismantles, sells, or exchanges used motor
vehicles, or parts, or materials salvaged therefrom.
CERTAIN REGULATED BUSINESSES EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN
PROVISIONS — Any owner, person, corporation, limited-liability company,
member of a co-partnership, or firm which is regulated pursuant to state
law and which is required to maintain and report transactions pursuant to
state law on the recommendation of the Police Chief shall be permitted to
be exempt from §§ 179-3 through 179-10 and §§ 179-11, 179-13, 179-15,
179-17, and 179-22 other than those regulated by state laws involving
secondhand and junk dealers pursuant to MCL § 445.401 et seq., precious
metal and gems pursuant to MCL § 445.481 et seq., and pawnbrokers,
dealers and junk dealers pursuant to MCL § 445.471 et seq.
COLLECTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for the collection,
transportation, or handling of junk, or secondhand property, except not
§ 178-2 IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES § 179-2
178:375
including a towing vehicle used to transport automobiles substantially used
other than in transportation of motor vehicles as part of an auto salvage
dealer business.
EMPLOYEE — Any person 18 years of age, or older, who renders any
services in connection with the operation of a pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer, or junk dealer business and who receives compensation from the
business, or patrons thereof.
GOOD MORAL CHARACTER — The propensity on the part of the person to
serve the public in a licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner.
GOODS — Any item not specifically covered by other definitions contained
in this section.
JUNK — Any personal property which is, or may be, salvaged for reuse,
resale, reduction, or similar disposition, or which is possessed, transported,
owned, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted for any of the
aforesaid purposes. Without limiting the aforesaid definition of "junk,"
terms shall include "used," or "salvaged" rope, bags, paper, rags, glass,
rubber, wood pellets, and similar articles of property, and used motor
vehicles, machinery, or parts thereof, which are used, owned, or possessed
for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts of materials therefrom.
Metals available or used as scrap shall be considered as junk.
JUNK DEALER — Any person whose substantial business is buying,
exchanging, collecting, receiving, storing, accumulating, selling, or
otherwise handling junk.
JUNK YARD or JUNK SHOP — Any place at which a junk dealer buys,
exchanges, collects, receives, stores, accumulates, sells, or otherwise
handles junk.
OWNER or OPERATOR — Any person who owns any part of, or controls,
a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business. This includes
individuals, licensees, managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships,
corporations, societies, organizations, associations, limited-liability
companies, or any combination of individuals, of whatever form or
character.
PATRON — Any person 18 years of age, or older, who does business in any
form with a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, corporation, member of a limited-liability
company, member of a partnership, or firm who loans money on deposit,
or pledge personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities,
or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property, or other valuable things on condition of selling the same
back again as stipulated price.
PAWN SHOP — Any place where a pawnbroker regularly conducts the
business of being a pawnbroker.
SCRAP IRON AND METAL PROCESSOR OR RECYCLER — Any junk dealer
engaged substantially in the business of purchasing or receiving scrap iron
§ 179-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 179-2
178:376
and metal (except scrap motor vehicles not purchased from a licensed auto
salvage dealer or junk dealer) and the storing, processing, recycling, and
sale or exchange thereof.
SCRAP YARD — Any place where a scrap iron and metal processor or
recycler engages in the business of receiving, storing, processing or
recycling scrap iron or metal.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, corporation, member of a copartnership,
or firm, or limited-liability company whose principal business is
that of purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging, and receiving secondhand
personal property of any kind or description. Excluded from §§ 179-10,
179-12, 179-13, 179-15, 179-16, 179-17, and 179-22 shall be any business
whose primary business is the purchase and resale of clothing.
SECONDHAND STORE — Any place at which a second dealer buys,
exchanges, collects, receives, stores, or sells secondhand property.
Excluded from §§ 179-10, 179-12, 179-13, 179-15, 179-16, 179-17, and
179-22 shall be any business whose primary business is the purchase and
resale of clothing.
§ 179-3. License required.
No owner or operator shall engage in or carry on the operation of a
pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business without first
obtaining and maintaining a valid business license issued by the City
pursuant to this chapter for each separate office or place of business
conducted by such owner or operator.
§ 179-4. License application.
Any owner or operator desiring a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk
dealer business license shall file a written application with the City on a
form to be furnished by the City. A separate application shall be completed
for pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and junk dealer. The applicant shall
accompany the application with the correct license fee, which fee shall not
be refundable, and shall furnish the following information:
A. Type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual, partnership,
corporation, or otherwise, including copies of the most recent annual
statement and most recent articles of incorporation, partnership
agreement, articles of organization, or other applicable document.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is
to be conducted, including each address at which the business is to be
conducted.
C. A complete list of the names, resident addresses, birth dates, and
driver's license numbers, if applicable, of all owners, employees and
persons, or entities lending, investing, or giving money to the business,
identifying, where applicable, any employees who will manage, or be in
charge of, the operation of the business at any time.
§ 179-2 IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES § 179-4
178:377
D. The following personal information concerning the applicant and
owners, if an individual; concerning each stockholder, officer, or
director, if a corporation; concerning each member, if a limited-liability
company; concerning the partners, including general and limited
partners, if a partnership; and concerning the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business:
(1) Name, address and telephone number, date of birth and driver's
license number, if applicable;
(2) Two previous addresses prior to the present address of the
applicant;
(3) Written proof showing date of birth;
(4) Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and sex;
(5) Two front-faced portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of application, at least two inches by two inches in size;
(6) A full, accurate and complete business history detailing experience,
including, but not limited to, whether or not such person has
previously had any ownership interest in, or worked at, in this or
another city or state, the same or similar business, including
whether any license or permit was issued, whether any such license
or permit was ever denied, revoked, or suspended, the reason
therefor and business activities, or occupations, including the full
name and address of the business and the name and phone number
of any contact persons;
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which such conviction occurred,
the offense for which conviction, or such conviction and the
circumstances thereof;
(8) Complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the
Chief of Police, or his or her authorized representative.
E. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information
and conduct an investigation to the truth of the statements set forth in
the application and qualifications of the applicant.
F. The names and addresses of three adult residents in the county who will
serve as character references, who must be persons other than
relatives and business associates.
G. A written declaration by the applicant under penalty of perjury that the
information contained in this application is true and correct with such
declaration dated and signed in the City.
H. Execution of any and all necessary documents and a statement
indicating that proper equipment will be installed for the direct
electronic entry into the City of Roseville’s computerized system, or
§ 179-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 179-4
178:378
§ 179-5. Investigation; inspections; approval of application.
§ 179-6. License issuance; conditions for denial.
The City, upon receipt of an application for a license required by this
chapter, and reports and recommendations of the Chief of Police, or his
designee, shall place the application upon the agenda for the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting, provided that such meeting date is not less than
seven days from the date of receipt of such application by the City Clerk. If
it is less than seven days from such receipt, such application shall be placed
upon the agenda for the following regular meeting of the Council. The
Council shall determine whether or not such license shall be issued, after
reviewing the reports of investigation and inspection and recommendation
by the Chief of Police, or his designee, and other employees of the City.
third-party contractor, transaction information, or recording by
electronic transmission pursuant to this chapter.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or
junk dealer business license, the City shall refer the application to the
Chief of Police, or his designee, who shall conduct an investigation into
the applicant’s moral character, personal and criminal history. A
personal interview may be required and such further information,
identification and physical examination of the person and proposed
business premises and records of the applicant as shall bear on the
investigation.
B. The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall cause to be conducted an
investigation of the premises where the business is to be carried on for
the purpose of insuring that the premises comply with all requirements
set forth in this chapter and with ordinances of the City relating to
public health, safety and welfare. Additionally, no applicant’s license
shall be considered as issued until all equipment is installed and
demonstrated to be operating for the electronic transmission of
information relating to transactions as required pursuant to this
chapter.
C. An applicant shall submit to lawful inspections by the City and any of its
departments, as well as the county and any other governmental
agencies as necessary to insure that the proposed business and
applicant comply with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of
the City. An application may be refused for submission for approval to
the City Council until a report from applicable departments is received
and information furnished such that the applicant or proposed premises
complies with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
D. Before issuance of any license, the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall
submit, within 45 days of receipt of an application and report of
investigations, inspections and a recommendation for approval or
denial.
§ 179-4 IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES § 179-6
178:379
§ 179-7. Hearings on appeals or variances.
A. The Council shall direct that a license be issued within 14 days,
provided, in addition, electronic transmission is demonstrated to be
capable, unless it finds that:
(1) The correct fee has not been tendered or any fee in the form of
check or draft has been dishonored.
(2) The operation as proposed is not compliant with the applicable
laws, including but not limited to the City’s building, fire, zoning
and health ordinances.
(3) The applicant or any person having an ownership interest in any
entity which is the applicant, or a manager, has been convicted of
any crime involving moral turpitude, including but not limited to
prostitution and pandering, gambling, extortion, fraud, criminal
usury, controlled substances, weapons, assault, theft, unless such
conviction occurred at least 15 years prior to the date of
application.
(4) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application, or in any
document required by the City.
(5) The applicant has had a similar business license, or other similar
permit, or license denied, revoked, or suspended for any of the
causes set forth here and above in this chapter, or any other state
or local agency within the prior 15 years of the date of application.
(6) The applicant or any owner is not 18 years of age or older.
B. The Council, if it denies an application, shall specify the grounds for
denial, notifying the applicant by regular mail, addressed to the address
furnished in the application, which notice shall specify the grounds for
denial.
A. Within 20 days of the date of denial of an application, the applicant may
request, in the form of a written application to the City, furnished to the
City Clerk, a hearing before the City Council for reconsideration of the
license application denial, or for a variance of any of the provisions of
this chapter, which provision constituted grounds for the original denial
of the application. Such hearings shall be conducted as follows:
(1) The applicant, and his or her attorney, may present and submit
evidence on the applicant’s behalf to show that the grounds for the
original denial do not exist or are inaccurate.
(2) After reviewing the evidence, Council shall determine whether to
uphold the denial or grant the application.
(3) The applicant and his or her attorney, may present a statement and
adequate evidence, demonstrating that:
§ 179-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 179-7
178:380
§ 179-8. Inspections of business premises; display of license;
change in information.
§ 179-9. License fees; expirations; transfers.
§ 179-10. Fingerprinting; statements and recording of transactions;
inspection of records.
(a) Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
apply to the business referred to in the appeal submitted,
which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to
any proposed business, which warrant the issuance of the
application notwithstanding conformity with this chapter.
(b) The granting of such license will not materially affect the
health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood, patrons, or the public at large and that such
issuance shall not be a material detriment or injurious to public
welfare.
B. In all cases where a variance is granted, Council shall find that:
(1) The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter; and
(2) The grant of the variance will not be detrimental or injurious to the
neighborhood or the City at large.
C. The Council may impose reasonable conditions, if the license is
approved for issuance.
A. Every licensee shall permit all reasonable inspections of the business
premises, including during regular business hours and otherwise after
regular business hours, and shall at all times comply with all applicable
laws, including after expiration of any license and during any period the
license may be revoked or suspended.
B. Any licensee shall display the license in an open and conspicuous place
on the premises visible to the patrons of the premises.
C. During the pendency of any application, or during the term of any
license, if any information provided in the application changes, such
change of information shall be furnished, in writing, to the Chief of
Police, or his designee, within 72 hours after such change.
A. Fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Council.
B. The license granted shall expire on June 30 of each year and shall
require payment of a renewal fee for the ensuing year.
C. No license shall be deemed transferable, separable, or divisible.
§ 179-7 IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES § 179-10
178:381
A. The City shall furnish forms for the taking of fingerprints and furnishing
additional information as required by regulations of the Roseville Police
Department. Every person licensed to conduct, maintain, or engage in a
business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer shall
maintain in a form provided by the Chief of Police, or his designee,
records in the manner and form as provided herein, which shall be
subject to inspection by the Roseville Police Department upon request.
B. Every licensee, owner and employee shall keep a record of all persons
and/or entities with whom business has transacted and all property
coming into his/her possession. Reports must be electronically
transmitted to the Chief of Police or his designee. Within 48 hours, a
report must be transmitted by means of electronic transmission
through a modem, or similar device, in a format that the data is capable
of direct electronic entry into the City of Roseville’s Police
Department’s computerized system, or third-party contractor, as
approved by the Chief of Police, or his designee, for identifying property
coming into the possession of a licensor, including but not limited to all
pawn property, all transactions in which used goods have been received
the preceding day by pawn, trade, purchase, or consignment and items
received by junk dealers. A transaction report by electronic
transmission under this subsection shall not be reported on paper
forms, unless the Chief of Police, or his designee, so requires. All
secondhand dealers, junk dealers, and pawnbrokers must have the
equipment installed in their place of business no later than May 1,
2013. Information must be reported electronically beginning May 1,
2013. If the volume of transactions does not exceed 10 for a ninety-day
period, transactions taking place at that business may not be reported
electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms approved by the
Chief of Police or his designee.
C. A fee as adopted and subject to change periodically by the City Council
shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess the property
registration fee for each transaction, the licensee reports either
through batch file upload or directly using the vendor’s business
interface, or on the vendor’s automated reported service that involves
transactions subject to the provisions of this chapter.
D. "Transaction" is defined as a single buy, or which may involve one or
more items and does not include contract extensions, or claims. The
per-transaction registration fee is not a per-item fee included in the
transaction. It is within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer
whether to recover the fee from his/her customers for registering a
transaction.
E. The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The City’s vendor
automated reporting service isolates and generates a list of the billable
transactions that will be used for deriving invoiced amounts. The above
fees are assessed for the use of the standard vendor’s automated
recording service. Any custom programming completed for the
secondhand dealer will be negotiated on a contract basis and may
§ 179-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 179-10
178:382
§ 179-11. License required.
No entity or person who is not a licensed pawnbroker, secondhand dealer,
or junk dealer shall sell, offer for sale, advertise for sale, or represent any
article, personal property, or other valuable thing for sale which is subject
to the provisions of this chapter unless the proper license is in effect. No
pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer shall purchase, or receive in
pawn, any item, or other articles, or keep for sale any such articles, or items
unless a current effective license is in effect.
§ 179-12. Sunday operation prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter,
or otherwise as a pawnbroker, or secondhand dealer, or used goods dealer,
pursuant to state law to transact business, or to open, or keep open, the
place or room where such business is conducted on any Sunday.
§ 179-13. Sales prohibited during certain hours.
No licensee, employee, or agent of a licensee shall sell or purchase by sale,
barter, exchange, or otherwise any item under a license issued pursuant to
this chapter from or to any person or entity between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. In addition, no person or entity shall sell
or purchase by sale, barter, exchange, or otherwise any junk between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
§ 179-14. Sale or possession of items with serial numbers altered or
removed prohibited.
result in additional licensing arrangements between the vendor and the
licensor. Sales tax will be added to the above amounts where applicable.
Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a violation of this chapter.
A. No licensee, or agent, or employee shall conceal or misrepresent the
identity by removing, concealing, defacing, adding to, substituting, or
altering the serial number or manufacturer’s number on any motor
vehicle, motor, appliance, mechanical device, watch, clock, camera,
precision instrument, outboard motor, radio, shotgun, or any other
article or thing where the manufacturer has placed numbers for the
purpose of identification; by altering or replacing any part of such
article, or thing, baring the serial or manufacturer’s number with a new
or replaced part upon which the proper serial number or
manufacturer’s number has not been stamped or placed.
B. No person licensed under this chapter, or employee of such licensed
person, shall deal in, or possess, any item as described hereinabove
from which the serial numbers have been removed, concealed, defaced,
added, substituted, altered, or replaced.
C. In all prosecutions under this section, possession by any dealer,
licensor, person, or entity of an item from which the serial numbers, or
§ 179-10 IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES § 179-14
178:383
§ 179-15. Merchandise displays.
No licensee under this chapter shall display merchandise or articles outside
of the building or fail to change a window display at least twice monthly.
§ 179-16. Police order to hold property.
Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies an auto
salvage dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or owner or
employee of any of the foregoing, the item must not be sold or removed
from the premises. If the hold was conveyed verbally, the hold shall be
confirmed by the investigating agency within 72 hours, either in writing
or by electronic transmission. The order to hold the item shall expire 60
days from the date it is placed, unless the holding agency seizes the item
of evidence, or obtains other court order to hold the item, or determines
that the hold is still necessary and notifies the business, in writing or
by electronic transmission, to continue to hold the item for an additional
60 days. Each licensee and owner shall be jointly and severally liable for
holding such property.
§ 179-17. Retention of articles for specified periods.
Items, goods, articles and junk purchased or exchanged shall be retained
for not less than 15 days before disposal in an accessible place in the
building where licensed activity occurs. A tag shall be attached to such
item in some visible and conspicuous place with a number corresponding to
the entry in the electronic record or other record provided. For items not
recorded electronically, the purchaser shall prepare and deliver on Monday
of each week, to the Chief of Police, or his designee, before noon, a legible
and correct copy in the English language containing a description of each
item and photograph, purchased or received during the previous week,
including the hour, day when purchased and a description of the person
from whom it was purchased, including a copy of a photo identification.
Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the licensee, employee,
or owner who received the item.
§ 179-18. Prohibited purchases.
No licensee, owner, or employee shall receive any item, goods, or junk
from any person who at the time is intoxicated, or appears to be under the
influence of a controlled substance, or is known to be a thief, or receiver of
stolen property, or from any person who is suspected not to be the owner of
the property, or from any minor under the age of 18 years.
manufacturer’s number, or identification number has been removed,
concealed, defaced, added, substituted, altered, or replaced shall be
prima facie evidence of violation of the provisions of this section.
§ 179-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 179-19
178:384
§ 179-19. Enclosed premises required.
No licensee shall maintain a junkyard, junk shop, auto salvage yard, or
scrap metal yard, or any other business unless the business is carried on
entirely inside a building, or unless the premises is conducted within an
enclosed area, except for gates, or doors for ingress and egress by a suitable
enclosure such as a fence, or wall as approved by the Planning Commission
for the City of Roseville.
§ 179-20. Premises condition.
§ 179-21. Storage of scrap tires.
Scrap tires may only be stored after special land use approval by the
Planning Commission under the standards for special land use approval and
the Zoning Ordinance.116
§ 179-22. Bonds.
A. All fences and enclosures shall be maintained in a neat and substantial
manner, including but not limited to painting, removal, or replacement
of dilapidated areas and maintenance of a continuous, uninterrupted,
even perimeter of the same materials.
B. No items, goods, or junk shall be permitted to lean on or touch any such
enclosure, or be in front of or suspended on any such enclosure. Items
may not be piled higher than two feet below the top of such enclosure,
and items must be arranged so that safety aisles, driveways and
uniform passageways are provided, allowing reasonable access to all
parts of the premises by law enforcement and fire-fighting operations.
C. All premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and neat condition,
and no fire shall be permitted unless a permit from the Fire Marshal
and any other regulatory agency has been obtained and is in full force.
A. Prior to any license being issued, the applicant shall furnish a corporate
security bond, best A rated, or better, and the penal sum of $10,000,
with sufficient sureties to be approved by the City, which bond shall be
conditioned that the owner, operator shall, during the time of the
license, comply with all the laws of the State of Michigan and City
pursuant to this chapter and in regard to pawnbrokers, secondhand
dealers, junk dealers, the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act117 of the
state, as set forth, and the sale of secondhand watches act of the
state,118 as set forth, including any amendments to the foregoing state
laws. Any person aggrieved by the action of the licensee shall have a
right of action on the bond for recovery of money damages. Such bond
shall remain in full force and effect for 90 days after the expiration or
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
117. Editor's Note: See MCL § 445.481 et seq.
118. Editor's Note: See MCL § 445.551 et seq.
§ 179-19 IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES § 179-22
178:385
§ 179-23. Compliance with state laws.
Each licensee and employees must comply with the terms of state laws,
including but not limited to MCL §§ 445.471 through 445.476, and any
amendments thereto, the state act regulating pawnbrokers, where
applicable, §§ MCL 446.201 through 446.219, and any amendments thereto.
Full compliance with the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act as set forth
in MCL §§ 445.481 through 445.492, and any amendments thereto, is
required. Compliance with the sale of secondhand watches act, MCL
§§ 445.551 through 445.555, and any amendments thereto, is required.
§ 179-24. Compliance with zoning ordinances.
Every licensee and employee shall comply with all requirements for
business location at which work, pursuant to any license issued under this
chapter, occurs as provided in any applicable zoning ordinances of the City.
§ 179-25. Minors restricted.
No licensee, dealer, employee, person or entity shall purchase or receive
any item or property on the premises, or otherwise off premises associated
with the business conducted on the premises, from any person under the
age of 18 years. Minors shall only be permitted upon the premises in the
company of a parent or legal guardian.
§ 179-26. Violations and penalties.
Any licensee, dealer, employee, person, or entity who violates the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both, plus costs. Any violation may also result in a suspension or revocation
of such license as prescribed by statute and as otherwise imposed by the
Chief of Police after notice of such proposed action at least seven days
beforehand. The licensee shall be permitted a hearing before the Chief of
Police and a right of appeal as prescribed for denial of the issuance of a
license.
Chapter 183
LAWNS
cancellation of any license, or after the termination of any action upon
such bond.
B. On the recommendation of the Building Inspector, City Manager, or
Chief of Police, an additional bond may be required in order to assure
that the conditions at the site of the business are maintained, from
which the costs of any enforcement action shall be repaid to the City in
the event of any enforcement action for compliance with this chapter.
§ 179-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 183-1
183:386
§ 183-1. Walking on lawns by certain deliverymen prohibited.
No person who is engaged in the activity of delivering on a regular,
recurrent or repetitive basis any materials, goods or services to the owner
or occupant of any residential property in the city, including readers of
gas, water, electric or other utility metering devices, letter carriers, route
deliverymen, mailmen or newspaper delivery persons, shall enter upon and
walk over or trample upon the lawn of said property, including the grass,
sod, flowers or shrubs thereon, or otherwise cross said lawn, except upon
a sidewalk, driveway, porch, step or other area designated as a pathway,
after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, the agent
or servant of either; provided, however, that where such person cannot
otherwise deliver such materials or goods and services except by walking
upon the lawn as aforesaid, then this section shall not apply.
§ 183-2. Violations and penalties.119
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction thereof, punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
Chapter 185
LIBRARY
§ 185-1. Failure to return materials.120
Any person, corporation or association who shall procure or obtain in any
way from the Roseville Public Library any book, pamphlet, map, chart,
painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine,
manuscript, exhibit, sculpture, cassette, educational game, computer
software, video, hand puppet and any other materials or property of the
Roseville Public Library, or any part thereof, and who fails to return same
or pay the reasonable value thereof within 30 days from the date of the
posting by registered mail of a notice addressed to such person, corporation
or association, at the last address furnished the public library, and which
notice may be given at any time after the date on which such person,
corporation or association, under the rules of the library, should have
returned the loaned property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 185-2. Mutilation of materials.121
Any person, corporation or association who shall mutilate any book,
pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper,
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 183-1 LIBRARY § 185-2
185:387
magazine, manuscript, exhibit, sculpture, cassette, educational game,
computer software, video, hand puppet and any other materials or property
of the Roseville Public Library, or any part thereof, procured or obtained
in any way from the Roseville Public Library, and who fails to pay the
reasonable value thereof within 30 days from the date of the posting by
registered mail of a notice addressed to such person, corporation or
association, at the last address furnished the public library, and which
notice may be given at any time after the date on which such person,
corporation or association, under the rules of the library, should have paid
the reasonable value for any such mutilated or damaged property, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 185-3. Violations and penalties.122
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 187
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 73.
Bicycle permits — See Ch. 82.
Carnivals — See Ch. 96.
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 103.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 158.
Ice cream vending vehicles — See Ch. 176.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 179.
Massage businesses — See Ch. 193.
Parking lots and garages — See Ch. 211.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 219.
Restaurants — See Ch. 240.
Skating rinks — See Ch. 245.
Temporary open-air sales — See Ch. 248, Art.
I.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 250.
Signs — See Ch. 264.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 300.
Tattoo parlors — See Ch. 302.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 308.
Used car lots — See Ch. 332.
§ 187-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "General Licensing
Ordinance of the City of Roseville."
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 185-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 187-2
185:388
§ 187-2. Greater restrictions to control.
Whenever this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons,
premises or personal property than is imposed or required by any other
existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
§ 187-3. Definitions and word usage.
§ 187-4. License or permit required to conduct business.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct
any business or nonprofit enterprise or to use in connection therewith any
vehicle, premises, machine or device, wholly or partially, for which a license
or permit is required by any ordinance of this City, without obtaining a
license or permit and said license or permit being in effect prior to the act
A. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein:
BUSINESS — Includes all vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises and establishments and all other business activities,
together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used
therein, which are conducted for private profit or benefit, directly or
indirectly, on any premises within the City or within the jurisdiction of
the City.
CITY LICENSE OFFICER or LICENSING OFFICER — The license
officer of the City of Roseville and shall be either the Roseville Police
Chief, or designated representative, or the City Clerk or designated
representative, as provided for in the ordinances of the City of
Roseville.
INSIGNIA or INSIGNE — Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or
device which may be required for use in connection with any license
issued hereunder.
LICENSE or PERMIT — The permission granted by this chapter or any
other ordinance of the City or Roseville to conduct any business as
defined herein.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
LICENSEE or PERMITTEE — The person who is the holder of any
license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
or any other ordinance of the City or Roseville for the privilege of
conducting business in the City or Roseville.[Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 1125]
PREMISES — All lands, structures and places and also the equipment
and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business and
also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise
used in connection with any such business conducted on such
"premises."
§ 187-2 LIBRARY § 187-4
185:389
of business and said license or permit being in effect at all such times as
required by this chapter or other ordinances of this City. For the purpose
of this chapter, any person shall be deemed to be engaged in a business or
engaged in a nonprofit enterprise and subject to the requirements of this
section when any goods or services are sold or when business is solicited,
goods offered for sale or services extended for sale or hire or when any
vehicle or premises is used in the City for business purposes. The agents
or representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this City shall
be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the
enterprises they represent with the terms of this chapter.
A. Branch establishments. A license shall be obtained as herein prescribed
for each branch establishment or location of the business licensed as if
such branch establishment or location were a separate business;
provided, however, that warehouses and distributing plants used in
connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the
provision of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of
business or branch establishments, and further provided, however, that
each unit of rental real property shall be deemed a branch
establishment or a separate place of business under the terms of this
chapter when there is a representative of the owner or the owner's
agent on the premises who is authorized to transact business for said
owner or where there is a regular employee of the owner or of the
owner's agent working on or about the premises.
B. Combination of businesses. A person engaged in two or more
businesses at the same location shall not be required to obtain separate
licenses for the conducting of each business but, when eligible, shall be
issued one license which shall specify on its face all such businesses,
except that no business licensee shall be allowed to operate any
temporary open-air retail sales at the business location of the licensee
without first obtaining a permit as provided for in Chapter 248, Sales,
Special, Article I.
C. License for delivery. A license shall not be required of any person for
the mere delivery in the City of any property purchased or acquired in
good faith from such person at a regular place of business outside of the
City where there is no intent shown to evade the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Special sales. This chapter shall apply to all business in the nature of
special sales for which a license is required by any ordinance of this
City, and it shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly,
to conduct any such sale except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. The City license officer shall issue special permits without the
payment of any license fees or other charges therefor to any person or
organization for the conduct or operation of a nonprofit enterprise,
either regularly or temporarily, when he or she finds that the applicant
operates without private property for a public, charitable, educational,
literary, fraternal or religious purpose.
§ 187-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 187-4
185:390
§ 187-5. Administrative duties of City license officer.
The City license officer shall issue licenses in the name of the City to all
persons qualified under the provisions of this chapter and shall see that all
fees due under this chapter are paid to the City Treasurer and shall:
§ 187-6. Qualifications of applicant.
The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of every
applicant for a City license shall be considered and applied by the City
license officer. The City license officer shall determine that:
(1) Application. An applicant for a special permit shall submit an
application to the City license officer upon forms prescribed by said
officer and shall furnish such additional information and make such
affidavits as the license officer shall require in order that he or she
may make a determination as to the applicant's qualification for
said special permit.
(2) Compliance. A person or organization operating under a special
permit shall conduct this nonprofit enterprise in compliance with
this chapter and all other applicable rules and regulations except
as herein specifically provided.
A. Establish reasonable administrative procedures necessary to the
operation and enforcement of this chapter.
B. Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be supplied therein as
to the character of the applicant, as well as establishing all other
necessary relevant forms for the administration of this chapter.
C. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to the
administration of this chapter.
D. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interested City officials for
their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the applicant with all
City regulations which they have the duty of enforcing.
E. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license as
prescribed herein.
F. Within 30 days after the application is made, notify any applicant of the
acceptance or rejection of the application and shall, upon refusal of any
license or permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons
therefor and deliver them to the applicant.
A. The applicant shall be of good moral character, and in making such
determination, the City licensing officer shall consider:
(1) Penal history. All convictions of the applicant, together with the
reasons therefor, and compliance with any sentence. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
§ 187-4 LIBRARY § 187-6
185:391
§ 187-7. Application for license.
(2) License history. The license history of the applicant; whether such
person, in previously operating in this or another state under a
license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reasons
therefor, and compliance with any sentences. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(3) General personal history. Such other facts relevant to the general
personal history of the applicant as would bear upon the character
or business reputation of the applicant.123
B. Inspections. The applicant shall submit to lawful inspections by the
Department of Buildings and Inspection, Police Department, Fire
Department, Health Department and such other departments as may be
necessary to ensure that the proposed business and applicant complies
with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the City. The licensing
officer may refuse to issue a permit to any applicant until said officer
has a report, from any department he or she deems necessary to make
an inspection, that the applicant or the proposed premises comply with
all ordinances and regulations.
A. Application for license. Every person required to procure a license
under the provisions of any ordinance of the City shall submit an
application for such license to the City license officer. The application
shall: [Amended 2-11-1986 by Ord. No. 935]
(1) Be a written statement upon forms provided by the City license
officer.
(2) Require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance
with § 187-6 and of any other information which the City license
officer shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair
administration of this chapter.
(3) Be accompanied by the payment in full of the applicable fee under
the ordinances of this City, plus any penalty due thereon.
B. Issuance of receipts. Whenever the City license officer finds a license
cannot be issued at the time of the application for same is made, there
shall be issued a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance;
provided, however, that such receipt shall not be construed as the
approval of the City license officer for the issuance of a license, nor
shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any
business contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Renewal of licenses. An applicant for the renewal of a license shall
submit an application for such license to the City license officer. The
123. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Defaulters to the City, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 5-11-2010 by Ord. No. 1237, which ordinance also provided
for the relettering of former Subsection C as Subsection B.
§ 187-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 187-7
185:392
§ 187-8. Determination of license fee.
application shall be substantially the same as that provided for above
and further shall require the disclosure of such information concerning
the applicant's business and the operation of the applicant's business
during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably necessary to the
determination by the licensing officer of the applicant's eligibility for a
renewal of license and to a possible adjustment of the license fee.
D. Duplicate licenses. A duplicate license or special permit shall be issued
by the licensing officer to replace any license previously issued which
has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without any willful conduct
on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of an affidavit attesting to
such fact and the paying to the licensing officer the fee of the amount
due under Chapter 133, Fees. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
E. Supplemental license. When a licensee places himself or herself in a
new status as provided for in this chapter, the licensing officer shall
issue a supplemental license and such additional insignia as may be
required.
F. Denial of license. The license officer shall, upon disapproving any
application submitted in pursuance of this chapter, refund all fees paid
in advance to the applicant, provided that the applicant is not otherwise
indebted to the City as set forth in § 187-6B; provided, however, that
when the issuance of a license is denied and any action instituted by the
applicant to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the
business for which the license was refused unless said license is issued
pursuant to a judgment ordering same.
A. The license fees shall be in the amounts as set forth in Chapter 133,
Fees. In the event that there is another licensing ordinance covering a
business or endeavor not covered by this chapter, then the fee set forth
in that specific ordinance shall govern.
B. All licenses issued under the authority of this chapter shall expire on
April 30 of each year. Licenses issued to a newly established business
after November 1 and prior to April 1 will be charged at 50% of the
established annual fee for the period prior to April 30. Licenses issued
to a newly established business during the month of April will be
charged only for the subsequent year beginning May 1. [Amended
2-11-1986 by Ord. No. 935]
C. No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by
reason of the nonuse of such license or by reason of a change of location
or business rendering the use of such license ineffective; provided,
however, that the license office shall have the authority to refund a
license fee or prorated portion thereof where said fee was collected in
case of error.
§ 187-7 LIBRARY § 187-9
185:393
§ 187-9. Contents of license.
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the name of the
licensee and any other name under which such business is to be conducted,
the kind and address of each business so licensed, the amount of license
fee therefor, the dates of issuance and expiration thereof and such other
information as the licensing officer shall determine necessary.
§ 187-10. Duties of licensee.
A. Every licensee under this chapter shall permit all reasonable
inspections of the business premises and shall, at all times, comply with
the laws and regulations applicable to such business premises and shall
refrain from operating the licensed business on the premises after the
expiration of said license and during the period the license may be
revoked or suspended.
B. Display of license and insignia. Every licensee under this chapter shall:
(1) Identification of premises.
(a) Post and maintain such license upon the licensed premises in a
place where it may be seen at all times.
(b) Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection with the
business premises on the inside glass part of the window of
said establishment facing the public way or on the inside glass
part of the door opening on the public way. Such insignia shall
be placed and maintained so as to be plainly visible from the
public way.
(c) Where the licensed premises does not have a window facing a
public way at street level or a glass door opening upon the
public way, such insignia shall be affixed to the glass in the
door, window or other prominent place in the nearest proximity
to the principal public entrance to such establishment and
shall be placed and maintained so as to be plainly visible from
such public entrance.
(2) Vehicles.
(a) Effect of this chapter. Any general or special license fees
required for any kind of vehicle, for the privilege of being
operated upon the public highways, by any statute or
ordinance, shall not abrogate, limit or affect any further
requirements of this chapter or of other ordinances or laws for
additional and separate licenses, permits and insignia and fees
for such vehicles, or other uses, for and relating to the
privilege of using the same in the business so licensed.
(b) Insignia for motor vehicles. Affix any insignia delivered for use
in connection with a licensed motor vehicle on the inside of the
§ 187-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 187-10
185:394
§ 187-11. Transfer of license. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
A licensee hereunder shall have the right to transfer the license to another
person, provided that said transfer shall be approved by the licensing officer
and the licensing officer shall collect a transfer fee as provided in Chapter
133, Fees, from the transferee prior to the issuance of the new license.
§ 187-12. Inspection; order to comply.
windshield of the vehicle or as may be otherwise prescribed by
the license officer or by law.
(c) Insignia for motorless vehicles. Affix any metal or other
durable type of insignia delivered for use in connection with a
wagon or other vehicle not operated by motor power securely
on the outside of such vehicle.
(3) Carry such license on his or her person when he or she has no
licensed business premises.
(4) Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection therewith upon
the outside of any coin, vending or other business machine or
device, so that it may be seen at all times.
(5) Not allow any license, special permit or insignia to remain posted
or displayed or used after the period for which it was issued has
expired or when it has been suspended or revoked or for any other
reason become ineffective. The licensee shall promptly return such
inoperative license, special permit or insignia to the license officer.
(6) Not loan, sell, give or assign to any person or allow any other
person to use or display or to destroy, damage or remove or to have
in his or her possession, except as authorized by the license officer
or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued to said
licensee.
C. New location desired. A licensee shall have the right to change the
location of the licensed business, provided that he or she shall:
(1) Obtain written permission from the license officer for such change
of location.
(2) Pay a removal fee as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, to the license
officer. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
A. The licensee shall submit to lawful inspections by the Department of
Buildings and Inspection, Police Department, Fire Department, Health
Department and such other departments as may be necessary to ensure
that the business and applicant complies with all applicable ordinances
and regulations of the City. The licensing officer may refuse to issue a
license or permit to any applicant until he or she has a report from any
§ 187-10 LIBRARY § 187-12
185:395
department he or she deems necessary to make an inspection that the
applicant or the premises comply with all ordinances and regulations.
Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses or premises as herein
authorized shall report all violations of this chapter or of other laws or
ordinances to the licensing officer and shall submit such other reports
as the licensing officer shall order.
B. When an inspector has reported the violation of this chapter or any law
or ordinance, the license officer shall issue to the affected person a
provisional order to comply.
(1) Nature of notice. The provisional order and all other notices issued
in compliance with this chapter shall be in writing, shall be
personally served and shall apprise the person affected of the
specific violations.
(2) Period for compliance. The provisional order shall require
compliance within 10 days of personal service on the affected
person unless a hearing is requested as herein provided.
(3) Hearing. Upon written application by the person affected before
the expiration of the ten-day period for compliance, the licensing
officer shall order a hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given
to the affected person in the manner prescribed herein.
(4) Modifying authority of license officer. Upon written application, or
on his or her own motion, the license officer shall have the
authority in a proper case to extend the time for compliance to
grant a new hearing date and to change, modify or rescind any
order or recommendation.
(5) Final order. Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply
with the provisional order or with any order made after hearing,
the licensing officer shall then declare and make the provisional
order final. The licensing officer shall have the authority to suspend
licenses upon making and declaring a provisional order final, and
upon suspension no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be
made to the licensee, and the licensee shall immediately cease all
business at all places under such license or licenses unless an
appeal is filed as herein provided.
(6) Summary action. When the conduct of any licensee, agent or
employee is so inimical to the public health, safety and morals as to
constitute a nuisance and thus give rise to an emergency, the
licensing officer shall have the authority to summarily order the
cessation of business and the closing of the premises or to suspend
or revoke the license. Unless waived in writing within five days
after he or she has acted summarily, the licensing officer shall
conduct a special hearing for such action in respect to the summary
order as may be therein determined. Notice of such hearing shall
be given to the affected person in a manner prescribed herein.
§ 187-12 ROSEVILLE CODE § 187-12
185:396
§ 187-13. Schedule of fees. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Fees for licensed shall be as prescribed in Chapter 133, Fees, shall be
payable annually and shall be subject to all other relevant provisions of the
Code of the City of Roseville.
(7) Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
license officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to an
Appeal Board, consisting of three persons, one of whom shall be the
City Manager. The other two members of the board shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the Council.
Such notice of appeal shall be a written notice filed with the City
Manager within the 10 days following the effective date of the
action or decision complained of.
(a) Contents of appeal. Such notice of appeal shall set out a copy
of the order or decision appealed from and shall include a
statement of facts relied upon to avoid such order.
(b) Notification of license officer. At the time of filing any such
notice of appeal, a copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant
with the license officer.
(c) Hearing. The City Manager shall fix a time and place for
hearing the appeal and shall cause a written copy of such
hearing time and place to be served upon the appellant. The
City Manager shall also give notice to the license officer, and
such officer shall be entitled to appear and defend such order.
(d) Appeal to Council. In the event that the licensee does not agree
with the finding of the Appeal Board, then the licensee may file
an appeal to the City Council within five days of being notified
of the Board's action. Upon the licensee failing to make such an
appeal, the officer shall revoke the license, or in the event that
an appeal is made and the City Council determines that the
license should be revoked or that the order of the Appeal Board
should be reversed, said Council may confirm, reverse or
modify the order of the Appeal Board. The findings of the
Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be personally
served upon the applicant as required herein.
(8) The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of which is required
hereunder, shall constitute a debt due the City; and the City
Attorney may, at the direction of the licensing officer, institute civil
suit in the name of the City to recover any such unpaid fee;
provided, however, that no civil judgment or any act by the City
Attorney, the licensing officer or the violator shall bar or prevent a
criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this chapter.
§ 187-12 LIBRARY § 187-14
185:397
§ 187-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I. In addition to this penalty, any licensee who fails to secure such license
by May 1 as provided herein shall pay an additional penalty equal to 50% of
the license fee established by Chapter 133, Fees, for each month or fraction
thereof that he or she fails to secure this license.
Chapter 189
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills — See Ch. 165.
Restaurant sanitary requirements — See Ch.
240.
Prevention of rodent harborage — See Ch.
244.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 285, Art. I.
§ 189-1. Littering unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to litter or permit
to be littered on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places
within the City of Roseville, by throwing, depositing, tracking, dropping,
dumping or spilling any trash, paper, dirt, mud, ashes, sand, glass, leaves,
garbage, debris or other materials or to deposit or cause to be deposited
the same upon, or permit the same to be accumulated upon, any premises
other than those designated as official city dumps.
§ 189-2. Discharge of water or waste unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any commercial or industrial water or
any polluted or contaminated waste upon the sidewalks, streets, alleys or
gutters within the City of Roseville at any time.
§ 189-3. Enforcement.
All officers of the Roseville Police Department and all other city employees
charged with the duty of enforcement of ordinances in the City of Roseville
are hereby charged with the enforcement of this chapter and are authorized
to issue violation tickets for any violation of this chapter.
§ 189-4. Reward.
A. The City of Roseville will pay a reward of $100 to any person who signs
a complaint in District Court based on personal knowledge alleging a
violation of this chapter and gives testimony resulting in a conviction
for the alleged violation; provided, however, that no police officer or any
§ 187-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 189-4
189:398
§ 189-5. Presumptive evidence.
§ 189-6. Failure to remove debris after accident.
It shall be unlawful for a person who removes a vehicle wrecked or damaged
in an accident on a highway, road or street to fail to remove all glass and
other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road or street as a
result of the accident.
§ 189-7. Dumping of refuse.124
No person shall dump, deposit or place any filth, garbage or refuse on
the grounds or premises of another, without the specific permission of the
owner thereof.
§ 189-8. Violations and penalties.125
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. The provisions of
this chapter are in addition to, not in lieu of, the provisions of any other
ordinance of the City of Roseville, and no repeal of any other ordinance or
other employee of the city shall be eligible for a reward under the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person who claims a reward pursuant to this chapter shall file a
claim in writing with the City Controller, in which he or she shall state
the title of the court, the names of the parties and the court number of
the case in which a person was convicted of a violation of this chapter
and a statement of the information which he or she gave which led to
the arrest and conviction of such person. The City Controller may also
require an appropriate certificate from the City Attorney to the effect
that the claimant did sign a complaint in District Court based on
personal knowledge alleging a violation of this chapter and gave
testimony resulting in a conviction of the alleged violation.
A. In a proceeding for violation of this chapter involving litter from a motor
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation,
complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that
the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the
registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes
in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was
the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
B. The driver of a vehicle is presumed to be responsible for litter which is
thrown, deposited, dropped, dumped, spilled, placed or left from the
vehicle upon public or private property.
124. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-4 LITTERING § 189-8
189:399
any section of any other ordinance is intended hereby. The court, in lieu
of any other sentence imposed, may direct a substitution of litter-gathering
labor, including but not limited to the litter connected with the particular
violation, under the supervision of the court.
Chapter 191
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering where controlled substances are
sold — See Ch. 109, Art. I.
Minors — See Ch. 197, Arts. I and III.
Loitering in parks — See Ch. 21, § 215-6.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 217.
§ 191-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and includes the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly and also
includes the colloquial expression "hanging around."
§ 191-2. Loitering on pedestrian overpasses.
No person shall loiter on the pedestrian overpasses for the I-94 and I-696
expressways or for Gratiot Avenue or loiter on any bridge over the I-94 or
I-696 expressway or any other bridge or pedestrian overpass in the City of
Roseville. No person shall use any bridge or pedestrian overpass for any
purpose except for continuous passage.
§ 191-3. Loitering to disturb motorists.
No person shall loiter on the pedestrian overpasses for the I-94 and I-696
expressways or for Gratiot Avenue or loiter on any bridge over the I-94
or I-696 expressway or any other bridge or pedestrian overpass in the
City of Roseville in such a manner as to cause motorists to be fearful or
apprehensive that articles or things may or are to be dropped or thrown
from bridges or pedestrian overpasses.
§ 191-4. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
A. No person shall loiter in any public place or area open to the general
public in such a manner as to:
(1) Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
passage, access, comfort and repose of any person.
(2) Create or cause to be created any danger of a breach of peace.
§ 189-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 191-4
191:400
§ 191-5. (Reserved)126
§ 191-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-14-1980 by Ord. No.
829; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 1162]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a civil infraction.
Chapter 192
MARIHUANA, REGULATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71.
Controlled substances — See Ch. 109.
Nitrous oxide — See Ch. 201.
Tobacco and vapor products — See Ch. 313.
(3) Obstruct, impede or restrict in any manner the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles.
(4) Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
(5) Create a breach of the peace by loitering in any school building or
on school property. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(6) Be guilty of loitering in or with a motor vehicle upon any property
owned by a school district in this City. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 1125]
B. This section shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of any
offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
cause fear or apprehension or to annoy or disturb the person or persons
to whom or in whose hearing they are made.
126. Editor's Note: Former § 191-5, Orders by police officers to leave area, was repealed
5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 1162.
§ 191-4 LOITERING § 191-6
191:401

ARTICLE I
Prohibition of Recreational Marihuana Establishments
[Adopted 7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 1312]
§ 192-1. Legislative intent.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Roseville
Prohibition of Recreational Marihuana Establishments Ordinance."
§ 192-2. Definitions.
Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in Initiated Law
1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
§ 192-3. Prohibition of recreational marihuana establishments.
The City of Roseville hereby prohibits all recreational marihuana
establishments within the boundaries of the City pursuant to Initiated Law
1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
§ 192-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with any
provision of this article, or causes or allows or consents to any of the
same shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this article.
The violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se.
B. A violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction, for which the
fine shall not be less than $100, and no more than $500, in the
discretion of the court. The foregoing sanctions shall be in addition to
the rights of the City to proceed at law or equity with other appropriate
and proper remedies. Additionally, violators shall pay costs which may
include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the City incurs in
connection with the municipal civil infraction.
C. Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
D. In addition, the City may seek injunctive relief against persons alleged
to be in violation of this article, and such other relief as may be
provided by law.
§ 192-1 LOITERING § 192-4
191:403
Chapter 193
MASSAGE BUSINESSES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Health Department — See Ch. 5, Sec. 5.4.
Police Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.9.
Fire Department — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.10.
Department of Buildings and
Inspection — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133. Licensing — See Ch. 187.
§ 193-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Massage Parlor Ordinance of
the City of Roseville" and will be referred to herein as "this chapter."
§ 193-2. Definitions.
Unless the particular provisions of the context otherwise require, the
definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the
construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this
chapter:
EMPLOYEE — Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massage
therapist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a
massage parlor and receives compensation from the operator of the parlor
or patrons.
MASSAGE BUSINESS — Any place of establishment where massage
therapy, as defined in this chapter, is made available.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — Any individual engaged in the practice of
massage therapy.
MASSAGE THERAPY — The application of a system of structured touch,
pressure, movement and holding to the soft tissue of the human body in
which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health and well-being
of the client. The practice of massage therapy includes complementary
methods, including the external application of water, heat, cold, lubrication,
salt scrubs, body wraps or other topical preparations; and
electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the actions possible by
the hands. Practice of massage therapy does not include medical diagnosis;
practice of physical therapy; high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust to a joint;
electrical stimulation; application of ultrasound; or prescription of
medicines.
OWNER or OPERATOR — A person who owns or controls or who has
the duty to control the operation of a massage therapy business. This
§ 192-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 193-2
191:404
includes individuals, licensees, managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships,
corporations, societies, organizations, associations or any combination of
individuals of whatever form or character.
PATRON — Any person over 18 years of age who receives massage therapy
under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will
pay money or give any other consideration therefore.
§ 193-3. Business license required.
No owner-operator shall engage in or carry on the operation of a business
engaged in massage therapy unless he or she has a valid massage business
license issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each
and every separate office or place of business conducted by such owneroperator.
§ 193-4. Massage therapist's license required.
No person shall practice massage as a massage therapist, employee,
instructor or otherwise unless the person has a valid and subsisting
massage therapist's license issued by the State of Michigan.
§ 193-5. Application for business license.
Any owner or operator desiring a massage business license to perform
massage therapy at a location within the City shall file a written application
with the Police Chief on a form to be furnished by the Police Chief. The
applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct
license fee, as hereinafter provided, which fee shall not be refundable, and
shall, in addition, furnish the following information:
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The exact nature of the massage to be administered and the facilities
therefor.
C. The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is
to be conducted.
D. (Reserved)
E. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all massage
therapists and employees in the business and the name and residence
address of the manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business.
F. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of
the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the
applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the
§ 193-2 LOITERING § 193-5
191:405
§ 193-6. (Reserved)
§ 193-7. Investigation of applicant.
Upon receiving the application for a massage business license, the Police
Chief shall conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character and
members, if the applicant is a limited liability company; and concerning
the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of
the business:
(1) Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, gender and color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(6) The massage or similar business history and experience, including
but not limited to whether or not such person, in previously
operating in this or another city or state under license or permit,
has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, the
reason therefor and the business activities or occupations
subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions, other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and the circumstances thereof.
G. Such other information, identification and physical examination of the
person as shall be deemed necessary by the Police Chief to discover the
truth of the matters hereinafter required to be set forth in the
application.
H. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information
and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in
the application, the qualifications of the applicant for the permit and
the criminal history of the applicant, including the use of the Law
Enforcement Information Network (L.E.I.N.).
I. The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will
serve as character references. These references must be persons other
than relatives and business associates.
J. A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct,
said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city.
§ 193-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 193-7
191:406
personal and criminal history. The Police Chief may, in his or her discretion,
require a personal interview of the applicant and such further information,
identification and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the
investigation.
§ 193-8. Investigation of premises.
The Police Chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the
premises where the massage business is to be carried on for the purpose of
assuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as
set forth in this chapter and with the ordinances of public health, safety and
welfare for the City of Roseville.
§ 193-9. Inspections by departments.
Any applicant for a massage business license shall submit to lawful
inspections by the Department of Buildings and Inspection, Police
Department, Fire Department, Health Department and such other
departments as may be necessary to ensure that the proposed business
and applicant complies with all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the city. The Roseville Police Chief may refuse to submit any application
for approval to the Roseville City Council until the Chief has a report from
any department he or she feels necessary to make an inspection that the
applicant or proposed premises comply with all ordinances and regulations.
§ 193-10. Submission of application to City Manager.
Before the Roseville Police Chief shall issue any license under this chapter,
he or she shall first submit, within 45 days of the receipt of an application,
the application with a report of investigations and inspections and his or her
recommendation to the Roseville City Manager.
§ 193-11. Placement of application on Council meeting agenda.
The Roseville City Manager, on receipt of an application, reports and
recommendations of the Roseville Police Chief, shall place the application
for a license upon the agenda for the next regularly scheduled Council
meeting; provided, however, that the Council meeting is not less than six
days from the date of receipt of the application by the City Manager, and
in the event it is less than six days, an application shall be placed upon the
agenda for the following meeting of the City Council.
§ 193-12. Review of application and reports; issuance of license.
The Roseville City Council shall determine whether or not a license shall be
issued after reviewing the reports of investigations and inspections and the
recommendations of the Police Chief and other code enforcement officers.
The Roseville City Council shall authorize the Roseville Police Chief to issue
a massage business license within 14 days, unless it finds that:
§ 193-7 LOITERING § 193-12
191:407
§ 193-13. Denial of application.
In the event that the Roseville City Council shall deny an application, it
shall specify the particular grounds for such denial and shall direct the City
Attorney or City Manager to notify the applicant by regular mail addressed
to the applicant at the address shown on the application. Said notice shall
specify the grounds for which said application is denied.
§ 193-14. Request for hearing to reconsider denial.
Within 20 days of the date of denial of an application for a massage business
license or a masseur's license, the applicant may request, in the form of
a written application to the Roseville City Manager, a hearing before the
Roseville City Council for reconsideration of the application for license or
for a variance of any of the provisions or requirements of any ordinance,
A. The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city and, in the
case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation.
B. The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the city's
building, fire, zoning and health ordinances.127
C. The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more
than 10% of the stock of the corporation and any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or any of
the members, if the applicant is a limited liability company; and the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, have been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud
or deceit, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the
date of the application.
D. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required
by the city in conjunction therewith.
E. The applicant has had a massage business, massage therapy or other
similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended for any of the
above causes by the city or any other state or local agency within five
years prior to the date of the application.
F. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors, if the
applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or any of the members, if the
applicant is a limited liability company; and the manager or other
persons principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not
over the age of 18 years.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Building Construction, Ch. 142, Fire Prevention, and Ch. 370,
Zoning.
§ 193-12 ROSEVILLE CODE § 193-14
191:408
the violations of which constituted grounds for the original denial of the
application.
§ 193-15. Submission of evidence.
At a reconsideration hearing, the applicant and his or her attorney may
present and may submit evidence on his or her behalf to show that the
grounds for the original denial no longer exist.
§ 193-16. Review of evidence and determination by Council.
After reviewing an applicant's evidence, the City Council shall determine
whether to sustain the denial or to grant the application for license.
§ 193-17. Evidence of exceptional circumstances.
At a reconsideration hearing, the applicant and his or her attorney may
present a statement and adequate evidence showing that:
§ 193-18. Granting of variance.
In all cases where the Roseville City Council shall grant a variance of any
provision or requirement of this chapter, the Roseville City Council shall
find that the granting of the variance under such conditions as the Roseville
City Council may deem necessary or desirable to apply thereto will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and that it will
not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public
welfare.
§ 193-19. Inspections; compliance required.
Every licensee/applicant under this chapter shall permit all reasonable
inspections of the business premises and shall at all times comply with the
laws and regulations applicable to such business premises and shall refrain
from operating the licensed business on the premises after the expiration of
said license and during the period the license may be revoked or suspended.
A. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the proposed massage business applicant referred to in the
appeal application submitted to the Roseville City Manager, which
circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to any proposed
massage business.
B. The granting of such massage business license will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the
health, safety or welfare of the persons residing or working in the
neighborhood or attending any massage parlor and will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to the immediate neighborhood or the city at
large.
§ 193-14 LOITERING § 193-20
191:409
§ 193-20. Display of licenses.
The massage business licensee/applicant shall display the license, and that
of each and every massage therapist employed in the establishment, in an
open and conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business.
§ 193-21. Notification of Police Chief of change in information.
If, while any application for a massage business license is pending or
during the term of any license granted hereunder, there is any change in
fact, policy or method which would alter the information provided in such
application, the applicant/licensee shall notify the Roseville Police Chief
thereof, in writing, within 72 hours after such change.
§ 193-22. License fees.
The annual fee for a massage business shall be as provided in Chapter 133,
Fees.
§ 193-23. Expiration date.
All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
February 1 of each and every year.
§ 193-24. Appointment book.
Every person who operates a massage business or practices or provides
massage therapy shall at all times keep an appointment book in which the
name, age and address of each and every patron shall be entered, together
with the time, date and place of service and the service provided. Such
appointment book shall be available at all times for inspection by the Police
Chief or authorized representatives, and said appointment book shall be
kept on file for one year from the date of the last entry therein.
§ 193-25. Licenses not transferable.
No massage business license is transferable, separate or divisible, and such
authority as a license confers shall be conferred only on the licensee named
therein.
§ 193-26. Periodic inspections; minimum standards.
All premises used by the licensee hereunder shall be periodically inspected
by the Police Chief, Director of Buildings and Inspection, Fire Chief or their
authorized representatives for the safety of the structure and adequacy of
the plumbing, ventilation, heating and illumination. The following minimum
standards shall be maintained:
A. Walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in
all rooms where water or steam baths are given.
B. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse.
§ 193-20 ROSEVILLE CODE § 193-26
191:410
§ 193-27. Toilet facilities.
Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five or more
employees and patrons of different genders are on the premises at the same
time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per
gender shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that
gender on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for
water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be
designated as to the gender accommodated therein.
§ 193-28. Lavatories.
Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water
shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or
washbasins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
§ 193-29. Dressing rooms.
Separate dressing room and/or locker room facilities shall be provided for
the employees and patrons of different genders. The dressing room and/or
locker room facilities shall be designated as to the gender accommodated.
§ 193-30. Services to be carried on in one room.
All massage services enumerated in this chapter must be carried on in one
cubicle, room, booth or area within the massage establishment. No massage
service enumerated in this chapter may be carried on in any other cubicle,
room, booth or area except where such cubicle, room, booth or area has
transparent doors or walls, such that all activity within the cubicle, room,
booth or area is visible from outside the same.
§ 193-31. Advertising regarding nurse in attendance.
Advertising that there is a nurse in attendance is prohibited unless there is
a registered graduate nurse constantly in attendance during the business
hours of the massage business.
§ 193-32. Advertising regarding physician in attendance.
Advertising that there is a doctor in attendance is prohibited unless there is
a registered physician constantly in attendance during the business hours
of the massage business.
C. All equipment used in the massage operation shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
D. Towels, linen and items for personal use of masseurs and patrons shall
be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be
used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted
for sheets, provided that such paper is changed for every patron.
§ 193-26 LOITERING § 193-33
191:411
§ 193-33. Restrictions on advertising.
No massage business granted a license under the provisions of this chapter
shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, publish or
distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human
body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service
is available other than those services as described in the definition of
“massage therapy” in § 193-2 of this chapter or that employees or massage
therapists are dressed in a manner other than that described in § 193-35
of this Chapter, nor shall any massage business indicate in the text of such
advertising that any service is available other than those services described
in the definition of "massage therapy" in § 193-2.
§ 193-34. Safety of patrons.
Licensees shall exercise every precaution for the safety of patrons. They
shall watch for early signs of fatigue or weakness and immediately
discontinue whatever form of service is being given upon the appearance of
such signs.
§ 193-35. Uniforms.
Uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massage
therapists or employees while attending patrons, which shall be of washable
material and shall be kept in a clean condition. The sleeves shall not reach
below the elbow.
§ 193-36. Hands of attendants; washing before attending patrons.
The skin of the hands of those attending patrons shall be clean and in
healthy conditions, and the nails shall be kept short. The hands shall be
washed thoroughly before giving the patron any attention.
§ 193-37. Covering of patrons; certain contact prohibited.
The private parts of patrons shall be covered when in the presence of any
massage therapist or employee. Any contact with the patron's genital area
is prohibited.
§ 193-38. Supervision of premises.
A business licensee shall have the premises supervised at all times when
open for business. Any business rendering massage therapy shall have one
person who is qualified as a massage therapist on the premises at all times
while the establishment is open. The licensee shall personally supervise the
business and shall not violate or permit others to violate any applicable
provision of this chapter. The violation of any such provision by any agent
or employee of the licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee.
§ 193-33 ROSEVILLE CODE § 193-39
191:412
§ 193-39. Persons under 18.
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or
remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as massage
therapist, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on
lawful business.
§ 193-40. Hours of operation.
No person shall open or cause to be opened or operate or cause to be
operated, within the city limits, any massage parlor between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 193-41. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage on the premises
of any massage business.
§ 193-42. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes,
medical clinics or sanitariums or to persons holding an unrevoked
certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the State of
Michigan or to persons working under the direction of any such persons
or in any such establishment, nor shall this chapter apply to barbers or
cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular professions or
businesses and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of
registration issued by the State of Michigan.
§ 193-43. Administrative procedures.
The Roseville Police Chief or the Roseville City Manager shall establish
reasonable administrative procedures necessary to the operation and
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 193-44. Violations and penalties.
Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner,
operator or employee of the operator or whether acting as a mere helper
for the owner, employee or operator or acting as a participant or worker in
any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment without
first obtaining a permit, and paying a license fee to do so, from the City of
Roseville or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 193-39 LOITERING § 193-44
191:413
Chapter 195
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 221.
§ 195-1. Adoption of standards by reference; amendments.
[Amended 6-26-1984 by Ord. No. 903; 1-26-1988 by Ord. No. 963;
2-26-1991 by Ord. No. 1011; 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 1051; 6-9-1998
by Ord. No. 1114]
A. A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk for the City of Roseville, being marked and designated as the
"International Mechanical Code," as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code for the
City of Roseville, State of Michigan, for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; for the regulation of the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of mechanical systems in the City of Roseville and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms,
supplements, amendments, provisions and penalties of such
International Mechanical Code, 1996 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B of
this chapter.
B. Additions, insertions and changes. The following sections are hereby
revised as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Mechanical
Code of the City of Roseville," hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
(2) Section 106.5.2, Fee schedule, is amended to read as follows:
106.5.2 Fee Schedule: The fees for all mechanical work shall be
paid in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution
of the Roseville City Council.128
128. Editor's Note: The latest fee schedule is on file and available for examination by the public
in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 193-44 ROSEVILLE CODE § 195-1
195:414
§ 195-2. Licensing of journeymen.
(3) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
a building or structure in violation of any approved plan or
directive of the Code Official, or of this Code, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that the violation continues after a due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(4) Section 108.5, Unlawful continuance, is amended to read as
follows:
108.5 Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue
any work in or about the structure after having been served with
a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
to a fine of not less than $100 but not more than $500.
A. Journeyman license required. The actual work necessary to install, alter
or service any refrigerant containing a component of a refrigerating
system covered by the code shall hereafter be done by such persons
licensed as refrigeration journeymen by the City of Roseville or by any
reciprocal municipality participating in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. The foregoing shall not apply to a helper, apprentice or
specialized craftsman if the work is performed in the presence of a
licensed refrigeration contractor or journeyman. A person who is
licensed as a first-class refrigeration operator by the City of Detroit
shall be permitted to service a refrigerating system which he or she is
responsible to operate as a full-time employee, and he or she shall not
be required to possess a refrigeration journeyman license to service the
refrigerating system while thus employed. A refrigeration contractor
licensed by the City of Roseville is not required to hold a refrigeration
journeyman license to install, alter or service refrigeration equipment
covered by the code.
B. Application for journeyman license. Application for a refrigeration
journeyman license shall be made on blank forms furnished for such
purpose by the Department. Applications shall be typewritten or in ink,
shall contain such information as may be deemed pertinent in
determining the eligibility of the applicant for examination and shall be
in affidavit form. Each application submitted shall bear the signatures
of two persons who are acquainted with the character and habits of the
applicant. Documentary evidence of professed experience shall be
submitted at the time application for a journeyman license is made.
§ 195-1 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 195-2
195:415
C. Grades of journeyman licenses. There shall be two grades of
refrigeration journeyman licenses, designated as limited and unlimited,
the applicable term to be indicated on the face of the license. The
holder of the limited refrigeration journeyman license shall install, alter
or service only unit or self-contained room air conditioners or domestic
boxes not exceeding 1 1/2 horsepower. The holder of the unlimited
refrigeration journeyman license may install, alter or service any
refrigeration equipment covered by the license of the refrigeration
contractor by whom employed.
D. Experience required for journeyman licenses. No refrigeration
journeyman license shall be issued until the applicant has shown the
Department by sworn affidavit that he or she meets one of the following
experience requirements:
(1) An applicant for an unlimited refrigeration journeyman license
shall have at least four years of experience, and an applicant for a
limited refrigeration journeyman license shall have at least two
years of experience, in the actual installation, alteration or
servicing of refrigerating systems; or
(2) He shall be a registered professional engineer or shall possess a
bachelor of science degree in mechanical, electrical, civil or
chemical engineering or shall be a graduate of an approved
refrigeration trade school or shall hold a first-class refrigeration
operator license, in addition to which he or she shall have at least
two years of experience for an unlimited refrigeration journeyman
license in the actual installation, alteration or servicing of
refrigerating systems.
E. Age. Applicants for refrigeration journeyman licenses shall have
attained a minimum of 18 years of age.
F. Examination required for journeyman licenses. Written examinations
for refrigeration journeyman licenses to be issued by the City of
Roseville or by any municipality participating in the reciprocal
provisions of this chapter specified shall be administered by the
Director of Building and Inspections of the City of Roseville or
authorized assistants. The enforcing official of the reciprocating
municipality for whose applicant the examinations are being conducted
may be present at any phase of the administration of the examinations.
No license shall be issued to an applicant until he or she has passed the
required examination.
G. Journeyman examination content. Examinations shall be practical in
character and shall relate to those matters which fairly test the ability
of the applicant to install, alter or service refrigerating systems in a safe
and proper manner. The applicant shall attain a predetermined score in
the written examination (as set by the Department) to qualify for a
license. Applicants who fail the written examination shall at least 90
days before again applying for examination. The Department shall have
§ 195-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 195-2
195:416
Chapter 197
MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Purchase and possession of alcohol by
minors — See Ch. 71, Art. I.
Minors in poolrooms — See Ch. 73, Art. I.
Inhaling model glue — See Ch. 109, Art. II.
Possession of weapons by minors — See Ch.
136.
Loitering — See Ch. 191.
Possession of spray paint by minors — See Ch.
286.
Tobacco sale to and use by minors — See Ch.
313, Art. I.
the authority in specific cases to make such modification of the waiting
period between examinations as will not be contrary to the public
interest and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed.
H. Expiration of journeyman license. Refrigeration journeyman licenses
shall expire one year from the date of issue and, unless renewed within
60 days thereafter, shall be considered revoked until the holder thereof
has submitted the required application and has been certified by the
Department. It shall be unlawful for any person whose license has
expired to install, alter or service any refrigerant containing part of any
refrigerating system.
§ 195-2 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 195-2
195:417

ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as §§ 113-1 through 113-3 of
the 1984 Code]
§ 197-1. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for any minor child under the age of 17 years to
loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways,
roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and
unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the
following day, official City time; provided, however, that the provisions of
this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 197-2. Responsibility of parents and guardians.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to knowingly
permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the
public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public
grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement, vacant
lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. on the following day, official City time; provided, however, that the
provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or
her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of
the minor. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 197-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-4-1993 by Ord. No.
1034]
Any minor violating the provisions of § 197-1 shall be found responsible for
a civil infraction. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of a minor, whether exclusive or nonexclusive, violating § 197-2
shall be held responsible for a civil infraction. Persons found responsible for
violation of a civil infraction (whether minor or parent) shall be responsible
for a judgment in a sum not to exceed $100, plus costs, for a first offense
and not to exceed $200, plus costs, for any subsequent offense. Persons
found responsible who have failed to pay any civil infraction judgment may
be withheld any license or permit to be issued by the City or may be
withheld any recommendation for issuance of a permit or license where
the authority the City is to recommend. Any judgment unpaid pursuant to
this provision may be added to the tax rolls for responsible parties against
whom judgments have entered and collected in the same manner as ad
valorem real property taxes with the same interest and penalties and other
provisions provided for the collection of ad valorem real property taxes.
§ 197-1 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 197-3
195:419

ARTICLE II
Juvenile Runaways
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as § 113-4 of the 1984 Code]
§ 197-4. Aiding and abetting juvenile runaways.
No person shall knowingly and willfully aid or abet a child under the age of
17 years to violate an order of the Family Division of the Circuit Court or
knowingly and willfully conceal or harbor juvenile runaways who have taken
flight from the custody of the court, their parents or legal guardian.
§ 197-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both [MSA
§ 25.264(1)(2)].
§ 197-4 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 197-5
195:421

ARTICLE III
Parental Responsibility
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 209 of the 1984 Code]
§ 197-6. Parental neglect.
It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to exercise reasonable
parental control which results in the minor committing any criminal act or
to allow or encourage any minor to commit any criminal act or become
delinquent in accordance with the Probate Code as it pertains to juveniles.
§ 197-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL ACTS — Those acts which violate the statutes of the state or the
ordinances of the City and shall include traffic violations.
HABITUAL OFFENDER — One who commits two or more criminal acts,
or including four or more moving traffic violations, within a twelve-month
period.
MINOR — Any juvenile under the age of 17 years residing with the parent
as defined in this article.
PARENT — Mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the
care or custody of a minor, or such other adult with whom a minor may be
found residing.
§ 197-8. Notification of arrest of minor.
§ 197-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of
any criminal act within the City, the parent of such minor shall be
immediately notified by the Police Department, advising the parent of
such arrest or detention, the reason therefor and their responsibility
under this article.
B. A record of such notifications shall be kept by the Police Department.
§ 197-6 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 197-9
195:423

ARTICLE IV
Truancy
[Adopted 3-25-1997 by Ord. No. 1091(Ch. 114 of the 1984 Code)]
§ 197-10. Failure to be in school.
It shall be unlawful for any minor child under the age of 17 years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads,
alleys, parks, malls, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places of
amusement or entertainment within the City during the hours when said
person is required to be in attendance at either a public or private school as
required by state law.
§ 197-11. Aiding and abetting; excusable truancy.
It shall be unlawful for a person to encourage or assist a student not to
attend or return to school unless said absence is excused by a school official
or such excuse is recognized by law.
§ 197-12. Responsibility of parents and guardians.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to knowingly
permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the
public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, malls, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places of amusement or entertainment within the
City during the hours when said minor is required to be in attendance at
either a public or private school as required by state law.
§ 197-13. Violations and penalties.
Any minor or other person violating this chapter shall be held responsible
for a civil infraction. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of a minor, whether exclusive or nonexclusive, violating
this chapter shall be held responsible for a civil infraction. Persons found
responsible for violation of a civil infraction, whether minor or parent, shall
be responsible for a judgment in a sum not to exceed $100, plus costs for a
first offense, and not to exceed $200, plus costs for any subsequent offense.
Persons found responsible who have failed to pay any civil infraction
judgment may be withheld any license or permit to be issued by the City
or may be withheld any recommendation for issuance of a permit or license
where the City has the authority to recommend. Any civil infraction
judgment unpaid may be collected in the same manner as provided for
under the laws of the State of Michigan.
§ 197-10 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 197-13
195:425

ARTICLE V
Child Abuse
[Adopted 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1249]
§ 197-14. Leaving child unattended in vehicle.
A person responsible for the care or welfare of a child shall not leave a child
under the age of six years old, unattended in a vehicle for a period of time
that may cause an unreasonable risk of harm or injury to the child or under
circumstances that pose an unreasonable risk of harm or injury to a child.
§ 197-14 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 197-14
195:427
Chapter 199
MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 340.
§ 197-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 197-14
199:428
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 199-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in 49 CFR 390.5 shall
apply, except that the definition of employer and exempt intracity zone shall
not apply and except for the following definitions as modified:
ACT — Public Act No. 181 of the Public Acts of 1963, as amended ("Act").
APPEAL BOARD — The Motor Carrier Safety Appeal Board created in
section 1b of Act No. 181 of the Public-Acts of 1963, as amended.
BUS — Any motor vehicle designed for carrying 16 or more passengers,
including the driver. "Bus" does not include a school bus, a bus defined and
certificated under the Motor Bus Transportation Act, Act No. 432 of the
Public Acts of 1982, being §§ 474.101 to 474.141 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws, or a bus operated by a public transit agency operating under any of
the following:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled or towed vehicle
designed or used on public highways to transport passengers or property
except for a bus exempted under the definition of "bus" above, if the vehicle
is one or more of the following:
A county, city, township or village as provided by law, or other authority
incorporated under Act No. 55 of the Public Acts of 1963, being
§§ 124.351 to 124.359 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
A.
An authority incorporated under the Metropolitan Transportation
Authorities Act of 1967, Act No. 204 of the Public Acts of 1967, being
§§ 124.401 to 124.426 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or that operates
a transportation service pursuant to an interlocal agreement under the
Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, Act No. 7 of the Public Acts of the Extra
Session of 1967, being §§ 124.101 to 124.512 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws.
B.
A contract entered into pursuant to Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of the
Extra Session of 1967, being §§ 124.531 to 124.536 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws, or Act No. 35 of the Public Acts of 1951, being §§ 124.1
to 124.13 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
C.
An authority incorporated under the Public Transportation Authority
Act, Act No. 196 of the Public Acts of 1986, being §§ 124.451 to 124.479
of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a nonprofit corporation organized
under the Nonprofit Corporation Act, Act No. 162 of the Public Acts of
1982, being §§ 450.2101 to 450.3192 of the Michigan Compiled Laws,
that provides transportation services.
D.
An authority financing public improvements to transportation systems
under the Revenue Bond Act of 1933, Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of
1933, being §§ 141.101 to 141.140 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
E.
§ 199-1 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-1
199:429
GROSS COMBINATION WEIGHT or (GCW) — The combined weight of a
combination of vehicles and any load on those vehicles.
GROSS WEIGHT, GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT or (GVW) — The combined
weight of a motor vehicle and any load on that vehicle.
MOTOR CARRIER — A carrier of passengers or property in a commercial
motor vehicle. Motor carrier includes a motor carrier's agents, officers and
representatives as well as employees responsible for hiring, supervising,
training, assigning or dispatching of drivers and employees concerned with
the installation, inspection and maintenance of motor vehicle equipment
and accessories.
§ 199-2. Drivers to meet qualifications.
A person shall not drive and an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not
employ, engage, hire or contract for hire any person, to operate, drive or
maintain, any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer or certain other motor
vehicles unless the person meets the qualifications as set forth by this
chapter and the Department of State Police.
§ 199-3. Equipment to meet qualifications.
An individual, partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or
receivers appointed by any court shall not operate any truck, truck tractor
or trailer, or permit any person to drive any bus, truck, truck tractor or
certain other motor vehicles which does not meet driver or operator safety
standards, safety standards for equipment and devices on buses, trucks,
truck tractors or trailers or certain other motor vehicles and the loading and
unloading thereof as set forth in this chapter and rules promulgated by the
Department of State Police.
§ 199-4. Facilities to meet safety standards.
An individual, partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or
receivers appointed by any court shall not operate or maintain any facility
use in connection with the transportation of persons or property by any bus,
truck, truck tractor or trailer which facility does not meet safety standards
for the operation and maintenance of such facility as set forth in this
chapter or rules promulgated by the Department of State Police.
Has either a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross weight or
gross combination weight rating or actual gross combination weight of
10,000 or more pounds.
A.
B. Is designed for carrying 16 or more passengers, including the driver.
Is used in the transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity that
requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to 49 CFR
Parts 100 to 180.
C.
§ 199-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-4
199:430
ARTICLE II
Regulations Pertaining to Drivers
§ 199-5. Driver qualifications.
A. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle unless he or she is qualified to
drive a motor vehicle. A motor carrier shall not require or permit a
person to drive a motor vehicle unless that person is qualified to drive a
motor vehicle.
B. Except as provided in this chapter, a person is qualified to drive a motor
vehicle if he or she:
(1) Meets one or more of the following:
(a) Is at least 18 years old when transporting intrastate property
or passengers, except as provided in subparagraphs (ii) and
(iii).
(b) Is at least 16 years of age when acting as a farm vehicle driver
as defined in 49 CFR 390.5.
(c) Is at least 21 years old when transporting hazardous materials
in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or
placarded pursuant to the provisions of 49 CFR Parts 100 to
180 in a cargo tank as defined in 49 CFR 171.8 with a gross
vehicle weight or more than 50,000 pounds.
(2) Can read and speak the English language sufficiently to converse
with the general public, to understand highway traffic signs and
signals in the English language, to respond to official inquiries and
to make entries on reports and records.
(3) Can, by reason of experience or training, or both, safely operate the
type of motor vehicle he or she drives.
(4) Can, by reason of experience or training, or both, determine
whether the cargo being transported, including baggage in a
passenger carrying motor vehicle, has been properly located,
distributed and secured in or on the motor vehicle he or she drives.
(5) Is familiar with methods and procedures for securing cargo in or on
the motor vehicle he or she drives.
(6) Is physically qualified to drive a motor vehicle in accordance with
49 CFR 391.41 to 391.49.
(7) Has an appropriate valid license issued only from one state or
jurisdiction.
(8) Has prepared and furnished the motor carrier that employs him or
her with the list of violations or the certificate as required by 49
CFR 319.27.
§ 199-5 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-5
199:431
§ 199-6. Review of driving records by motor carrier.
§ 199-7. Road test and certificate required.
Except as provided in this chapter, a person shall not drive a motor vehicle
unless he or she has first successfully completed a road test and has been
issued a certificate of driver's road test in accordance with 49 CFR 391.31.
(9) Is not disqualified to drive a motor vehicle under 49 CFR 391.15.
(10) Has successfully completed a driver's road test and has been
issued a certificate of driver's road test in accordance with 49 CFR
391.31, or has presented an operator's license or a certificate of
road test which the motor carrier that employs him or her has
accepted as equivalent to a road test in accordance with 49 CFR
391.33.
(11) Has taken a written examination and has been issued a certificate
of written examination in accordance with 49 CFR 391.35, or has
presented a certificate of written examination which the motor
carrier that employs him has accepted as equivalent to a written
examination in accordance with 49 CFR 391.37.
(12) Has completed and furnished the motor carrier that employs him
or her with an application for employment in accordance with 49
CFR 391.21.
A. Except as provided in this chapter, each motor carrier shall, at least
once every 12 months, review a copy of the driver's record from each
state in which the driver held a license during the preceding year to
determine whether that driver meets minimum requirements for safe
driving or is disqualified to drive a motor vehicle pursuant to 49 CFR
391.15.
B. In reviewing a driving record, the motor carrier must consider any
evidence that the driver has violated applicable provisions of the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations and the Hazardous Materials
Regulations. The motor carrier must also consider the driver's accident
record and any evidence that the driver has violated laws governing the
operation of motor vehicles, and must give great weight to violations,
such as speeding, reckless driving and operating while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, that indicate that the driver has exhibited
a disregard for the safety of the public.
C. A note setting forth the date upon which the review was performed and
the name of the person who reviewed the driving record shall be
included in the driver's qualification file.
§ 199-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-8
199:432
§ 199-8. Written examination and certificate required.
Except as provided in this chapter, a person shall not drive a motor vehicle
unless he or she has first taken a written examination and has been issued
a certificate of written examination in accordance with 49 CFR 391.35.
§ 199-9. Physical qualifications; medical examiner's certificate.
A person shall not drive a motor vehicle unless he or she is physically
qualified to do so and, except as provided by this chapter, has on his or
her person the original or a photographic copy of a medical examiner's
certificate that he or she is physically qualified to drive a motor vehicle.
§ 199-10. Persons requiring medical examination and certification.
Except as provided in this chapter, the following persons must be medically
examined and certified in accordance with 49 CFR 391.43 as physically
qualified to drive a motor vehicle:
§ 199-11. Waiver of physical defect.
A. Any person who has not been medically examined and certified as
physically qualified to drive a motor vehicle.
B. Any driver who has not been medically examined and certified as
qualified to drive a motor vehicle during the preceding 25 months.
C. Any driver whose ability to perform his normal duties has been
impaired by a physical or mental injury or disease.
A. A person who is not physically qualified to drive under 49 CFR 391.41
and who is otherwise qualified to drive a motor vehicle may drive a
motor vehicle if the Motor Carrier Division of the Department of State
Police or the Appeal Board has granted a waiver to that person.
B. An application for a waiver shall be submitted jointly by the person who
seeks a waiver of his or her physical disqualification and by the motor
carrier that will employ the person if the application is granted. The
application shall be addressed to:
Michigan State Police
Motor Carrier Division
300 North Clippert Street
Lansing, MI 48913
C. An application for a waiver shall contain all of the following:
(1) A description of all of the following:
(a) The type, size and special equipment, if any, of the vehicles the
individual applicant intends to drive.
§ 199-8 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-11
199:433
(b) The general area and type of roads the individual applicant
intends to travel while driving.
(c) The maximum distances the individual applicant intends to
drive.
(d) The period of time he or she will be on duty and driving.
(e) The nature of the commodities or cargo the individual
applicant intends to transport.
(f) The methods the applicant or any other person will use to load
and secure the commodities or cargo.
(g) The nature and extent of the individual applicant's experience
at operating motor vehicles of the type he or she intends to
drive.
(2) An agreement that the motor carrier will promptly file with the
Motor Carrier Division of the Department of State Police such
reports as the Division may require, including reports about all of
the following which involve the individual applicant:
(a) Driving activities.
(b) Accidents.
(c) Arrests.
(d) License suspensions, revocations or withdrawals.
(e) Convictions.
(3) An agreement that if a waiver is granted, it authorizes the
individual applicant to drive intrastate only when employed by the
motor carrier that joined in the individual's application.
D. An application for a waiver shall be accompanied by all of the following:
(1) Not less that two reports of medical examinations, conducted
within the preceding 60 days of the date of the application,
pursuant to 49 CFR 391.43, at least one of which was conducted by
a medical examiner selected and compensated by the motor
carrier, each of which includes the medical examiner's opinion
concerning the individual applicant's ability to operate safely a
vehicle of the type the applicant intends to drive.
(2) A copy of the certificate of driver's road test that was issued to the
individual applicant pursuant to 49 CFR 391.31.
(3) A copy of the certificate of written examination that was issued to
the individual applicant pursuant to 49 CFR 391.35.
(4) A copy of the individual applicant's application for employment
made pursuant to 49 CFR 391.21.
§ 199-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-11
199:434
§ 199-12. Appeal of denial of physical defect waiver.
An applicant who was denied in whole or in part his or her application
for a waiver of physical defect under this chapter or conflict of medical
evaluation under 49 CFR 391.47 may make an appeal for review by
contacting the Motor Carrier Division of the Department of State Police.
§ 199-13. Driver qualification file.
E. An application for a waiver shall be signed by both the individual
applicant and the motor carrier. If the motor carrier is a corporation,
the application shall be signed by an officer of the corporation. If the
motor carrier is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a
general partner.
F. The driver applicant or motor carrier applicant shall not falsify
information in the letter of application or the renewal application.
G. The motor carrier division of the Department of State Police may deny
the application or may approve the application in whole or in part and
issue a waiver subject to such terms, conditions and limitations as it
may consider consistent with safety and the public interest. A waiver is
valid for not more than two years, and a waiver may be renewed upon
submission of a new application pursuant to this chapter.
H. If the Motor Carrier Division of the Department of State Police grants a
waiver, it shall notify each applicant by a letter, that sets forth the
terms, conditions and limitations of the waiver. The motor carrier shall
retain the letter or a legible copy of it in the driver's qualification file as
long as the individual applicant is employed by that motor carrier and
for three years thereafter. The individual applicant shall have the letter
or a legible copy of it in his or her possession when he or she drives a
motor vehicle or is otherwise on duty.
A. Each motor carrier shall maintain a driver qualification file for each
driver it employs. A driver's qualification file may be combined with the
driver's personnel file.
B. The qualification file for an intrastate driver who has been a regularly
employed driver as defined in 49 CFR 390.5 of the motor carrier of
property for a continuous period which began on or before June 10,
1984, and the file for a driver who has been a regularly employed driver
of a motor carrier of passengers for a continuous period which began
30 days before the effective date of the amendatory act that added this
section shall include all of the following:
(1) The original, or legible copy, of the letter granting a waiver of
physical disqualification issued pursuant to § 199-11 if required or
the Motor Carrier Division Form MC-25 granting a medical waiver
for claiming grandfather rights required by § 199-14.
§ 199-11 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-13
199:435
(2) The note relating to the annual review of the driver's driving record
required by § 199-6.
(3) The records of violations required by 49 CFR 391.27. These records
include both the driver's certified list of violations and a copy of the
driver's record from each state in which he or she held a license
during the preceding year.
(4) A legible copy of the driver's appropriate license.
(5) Any other matter which relates to the driver's qualification or
ability to drive a motor vehicle safely, including the records kept in
compliance with 49 CFR 391.87.
C. The qualification file for a regularly employed driver who was employed
by a motor carrier of property after June 10, 1984, and a regularly
employed driver of a motor carrier of passengers who has not been
regularly employed by the motor carrier for a continuous period which
began not less than 30 days before the effective date of Public Act No.
181 shall include all of the following:
(1) The documents specified in Subsection B.
(2) The driver's application for employment completed in accordance
with 49 CFR 391.21.
(3) The responses of state agencies and past employers to the motor
carrier's inquiries concerning the driver's driving record and
employment in accordance with 49 CFR 391.23.
(4) The original or a legible copy of the driver's road test and the
certificate of driver's road test issued to the driver in accordance
with 49 CFR 391.31, or a legible copy of the license or certificate
which the motor carrier accepts as equivalent to the driver's road
test in accordance with 49 CFR 391.33.
(5) The questions asked, the answers the driver gave and the
certificate of written examination issued to the driver in
accordance with 49 CFR 391.35, or a legible copy of a certificate
which the motor carrier accepted as equivalent to a written
examination in accordance with 49 CFR 391.37.
D. The qualification file for an intermittent, casual or occasional driver
shall include all the following:
(1) The original or a legible copy of the medical examiner's certificate
required by § 199-9 and the letter granting a waiver of a physical
disqualification issued pursuant to 49 CFR 391.49 if required.
(2) The original or a legible copy of the driver's road test and the
certificate of driver's road test issued to the driver in accordance
with 49 CFR 391.31, or a legible copy of the license or certificate
§ 199-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-13
199:436
§ 199-14. Nonapplicability to regularly employed driver of an
intrastate motor carrier of property.
which the motor carrier accepted as equivalent to the road test in
accordance with 49 CFR 391.33.
(3) The questions asked, the answers the driver gave and the
certificate of written examination issued to the driver in
accordance with 49 CFR 391.35, or a copy of a certificate which the
motor carrier accepted as equivalent to a written examination in
accordance with 49 CFR 391.37.
(4) The driver's name, social security number and a legible copy of the
driver's appropriate license.
(5) Any other matter which relates to the driver's qualifications or
ability to operate a motor vehicle safely, including the records kept
in compliance with 49 CFR 391.87.
E. A carrier's qualification file for a driver who is regularly employed by
another motor carrier, and who is employed by the carrier in
accordance with 49 CFR 391.65, shall include a copy of a certificate
issued by the regularly employing carrier in accordance with 49 CFR
391.65(a)(2) stating that the driver is fully qualified to drive a motor
vehicle.
F. Driver qualification files and records will be maintained and retained in
accordance with the following:
(1) Each driver's qualification file shall be kept at the motor carrier's
principal place of business for as long as a driver is employed by
that motor carrier and for three years thereafter.
(2) The following records may be removed from a driver's qualification
file after three years from date of execution:
(a) The medical examination and the medical examiner's
certificate, or photographic copies, of the driver's physical
qualification to drive a motor vehicle as required by 49 CFR
391.43 or 391.64.
(b) The record of violations submitted by the driver and the driving
record from the applicable state agency as required by 49 CFR
391.27.
(c) The note relating to the annual review of his driving record as
required by § 199-6.
A. The provisions of this chapter and 49 CFR 391.31 relating to
applications for employment, 49 CFR 391.23 relating to investigations
and inquiries, 49 CFR 391.31 relating to road tests and 49 CFR 391.35
relating to written examinations do not apply to a driver who has been a
regularly employed driver of an intrastate motor carrier of property for
§ 199-13 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-14
199:437
§ 199-15. Nonapplicability to regularly employed driver of an
intrastate motor carrier of passengers.
a continuous period which began on or before June 10, 1984, as long
as he or she continues to be a regularly employed driver of that motor
carrier. Such a driver is qualified to drive a motor vehicle if he or she
fulfills the requirements of § 199-5B(1) to (9).
B. The provisions in the Act pertaining to an intrastate driver's medical
qualifications do not apply to any driver who:
(1) Has been a regularly employed driver of the motor carrier for a
continuous period which began on or before June 10, 1984.
(2) Has continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor
carrier.
(3) With the exception of § 199-5B(6), is otherwise qualified to drive a
motor vehicle under § 199-5.
(4) Has made application to the Appeal Board claiming grandfathering
rights.
(5) Has received a waiver of medical qualification from the motor
carrier division of the Department of State Police. The medical
waiver/grandfather rights card, Motor Carrier Division Form
Number MC-22, shall be carried at all times on the person of the
driver while he or she is operating a motor vehicle. The original
medical waiver/grandfather rights, Motor Carrier Division Form
Number MC-25, will be retained in the driver's qualification file in
accordance with Article II.
A. The provisions of 49 CFR 391.21 relating to applications for
employment, 49 CFR 391.23 relating to investigations and inquiries, 49
CFR 391.31 relating to road tests and 49 CFR 391.35 relating to written
examinations do not apply to a driver who has been a regularly
employed driver of an intrastate motor carrier of passengers for a
continuous period which began not less that 30 days before the
effective date of the amendatory act that added this section, as long as
he or she continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor
carrier. Such a driver is qualified to drive a bus if he or she fulfills the
requirements of § 199-5B(1) to (9) relating to qualifications of drivers.
B. The provisions of this chapter pertaining to an intrastate driver's
medical qualifications do not apply to a bus driver who:
(1) Has been a regularly employed driver of the motor carrier for a
continuous period which began not less than 30 days before the
effective date of the amendatory act that added this section.
(2) Has continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor
carrier.
§ 199-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-15
199:438
§ 199-16. Nonapplicability of investigation of driver's past
employment.
The provisions of 49 CFR 391.23(a)(2) and (c) relating to the investigation of
the driver's past employment do not apply to a person who becomes a driver
for a motor carrier after being a full-time employee of the motor carrier for
a minimum of three years before becoming a driver.
§ 199-17. Nonapplicability to driver of a vehicle eligible for
displaying a farm registration plate.
The provisions of 49 CFR 391.21 relating to application for employment, 49
CFR 391.23 relating to investigations and inquiries, 49 CFR 391.31 relating
to road tests, 49 CFR 391.35 relating to written examinations, 49 CFR
391.41 to 391.45 to the extent that they require a driver to be medically
qualified to examine and to have a medical examiner's certificate on his or
her person, and Article II relating to the maintenance of files and records do
not apply to a driver of a vehicle eligible for displaying a farm registration
plate.
§ 199-18. Nonapplicability to mechanic servicing motor-carrier
equipment.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a mechanic who services
motor-carrier equipment during the intrastate operation of this equipment
when:
(3) Is otherwise qualified to drive a bus under § 199-5, except for the
requirement of § 199-5B(6).
(4) Has made application to the Motor Carrier Division of the
Department of State Police claiming grandfathering rights.
(5) Has received a waiver of medical qualification from the Motor
Carrier Division of the Department of State Police. The medical
waiver/grandfather rights card, Motor Carrier Division Form
Number MC-22, shall be carried at all times on the person of the
driver while he or she is operating a motor vehicle under the
applicability of these rules. The original medical waiver/
grandfather rights, Motor Carrier Division Form MC-25, will be
retained in the driver qualification file in accordance with Article
II.§ 199-16.
A. The vehicle or combinations are not being used to transport passengers
or property or any for-hire or compensated transportation, including
paid haulage when the units are empty.
B. The mechanic is not otherwise being used as a regularly employed
driver.
§ 199-15 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-19
199:439
§ 199-19. Nonapplicability to utility, telephone and cable television
company service employees.
This chapter and 49 CFR Part 391 do not apply to utility, telephone and
cable television company service employees if those employees:
§ 199-20. Bumpers and underride guards.
A. Are not otherwise being used as regularly employed drivers.
B. Are not used to operate a bus or a motor vehicle, except a motor home,
having a gross vehicle weight rating of 36,000 or more pounds, a motor
vehicle towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than
10,000 pounds or a motor vehicle carrying hazardous material and on
which is required to be posted a placard as defined and required under
49 CFR Parts 100 to 180. This does not include a vehicle used
exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for
nonbusiness purposes.
A. A motor vehicle, except truck tractors, pole trailers, vehicles engaged
in driveaway-towaway operation and truck tractors and semitrailer
combinations described in Subsection B that were manufactured after
December 31, 1952, that is so constructed that the body or the chassis
assembly if without a body has a clearance at the rear end of more than
30 inches from the ground when empty, shall be provided with bumpers
or devices serving similar purposes which shall be so constructed and
located that:
(1) The clearance between the effective bottom of the bumpers or
devices and the ground shall not exceed 30 inches with the vehicle
empty.
(2) The maximum distance between the closest points between
bumpers or devices, if more than one is used, shall not exceed 24
inches.
(3) The maximum transverse distance from the widest part of the
motor vehicle at the rear to bumper or device shall not exceed 18
inches.
(4) The bumpers or devices are located not more than 24 inches
forward of the extreme rear of the vehicle.
(5) The bumpers or devices are substantially constructed and firmly
attached. Motor vehicles constructed and maintained so that the
body chassis or other parts of the vehicle afford the rear-end
protection contemplated shall be deemed to be in compliance with
this section.
B. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length
longer than 50 feet whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches
beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the
§ 199-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-20
199:440
§ 199-21. Nonapplicability to certain commercial motor vehicles.
The rules in 49 CFR Part 395 apply to all drivers of commercial motor
vehicles as defined in § 199-1, except:
§ 199-22. Number of driving hours.
roadway shall not be operated on the highways of this state unless
equipped with an underride guard on the extreme rear of the frame or
body. The underride guard shall meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground
clearance of 22 inches, as measured with the vehicle empty and on
level ground.
(2) Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the trailer
of both left and right sides.
A. Farm vehicle drivers as defined in 49 CFR 390.5.
B. Mechanics as defined in § 199-18.
C. Utility, telephone and cable television company service employees as
defined in § 199-19.
D. Any driver of a public utility service vehicle when being used in cases of
emergency.
A. A motor carrier shall not permit or require a driver of a commercial
motor vehicle, regardless of the number of motor carriers using the
driver's services, to drive for any period after having been on duty 60
hours in any seven consecutive days if the employing motor carrier does
not operate every day in the week, or having been on duty 70 hours in
any period of eight days if the employing motor carrier operates motor
vehicles every day of the week.
B. This section shall not apply to the following drivers, provided that their
total driving time does not exceed 30 hours in any period of seven
consecutive days:
(1) Any driver-sales person.
(2) Any driver delivering home heating fuel from the months of
October through April in a vehicle of less than 40,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight.
(3) Any driver involved with the pickup or delivery of crude oil
products during the time when weight limitations are imposed due
to seasonal climatic changes.
(4) Any driver of a vehicle engaged in seasonal construction-related
activities within a one-hundred-air-mile radius of the normal work
reporting location.
§ 199-20 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-22
199:441
§ 199-23. Records of duty activities and hours of service.
(5) Any driver of a motor vehicle which is being used in the delivery of
beverages to retail business.
A. Failure to complete the record of duty activities required by 49 CFR
395.8 or 49 CFR 395.15, failure to preserve a record of such duty
activities or making of false reports in connection with such duty
activities shall make the driver or the carrier, or both, liable to
prosecution.
B. A carrier, agent or driver who makes a correction of the hours of service
records after submission shall certify as to the accuracy of the record
on the corrected record and state the reason for the correction. This
certification shall be a legible signature of the carrier official making
the correction in addition to the driver certification required in 49 CFR
395.8(d)(5).
C. The 12 consecutive hours on duty requirement contained in 49 CFR
395.8 (1)(1)(ii) shall not apply to intrastate drivers of motor vehicles
regularly delivering beverages to retail business who return to the work
reporting location and are released from work within 15 consecutive
hours of being on duty.
§ 199-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-23
199:442
ARTICLE III
Applicability; Rules and Regulations; Safety Documents
§ 199-24. Applicability; knowledge of rules.
§ 199-25. Promulgation of rules and regulations by state.
The Department of State Police may promulgate rules and regulations
reasonably necessary to the accomplishment of the purpose of the Act.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter is applicable
to all employers, employees and commercial motor vehicles, which
transport property or passengers.
B. The rules in 49 CFR 387, entitled "Minimum Levels of Financial
Responsibility for Motor Carriers," are applicable to motor carriers as
provided in 49 CFR 387.3 or 49 CFR 387.27.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit an employer from
requiring and enforcing more stringent requirements relating to safety
of operation and employee safety and health.
D. Every motor carrier shall be knowledgeable of and comply with this
chapter and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Act that are
applicable to that motor carrier's operations. Every driver and
employee shall be instructed regarding, and shall comply with, all
applicable provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated
pursuant to the Act. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the
use of additional equipment and accessories if such additional
equipment or accessories are in proper working condition, are not
inconsistent with or prohibited by this chapter or the rules promulgated
pursuant to the Act and do not decrease the safety of operation of the
vehicles on which they are used. All motor vehicle equipment and
accessories required by this chapter and federal law or regulation shall
be maintained in compliance with all applicable performance and
design criteria set forth in this chapter and the rules promulgated
pursuant to the Act.
E. Unless otherwise specifically provided, this chapter and the rules
promulgated under the Act do not apply to:
(1) The occasional transportation of personal property by individuals
not for compensation nor in the furtherance of a commercial
enterprise.
(2) The transportation of human corpses or sick and injured persons.
(3) The operation of an authorized emergency vehicle by a fire fighter
who has met the driver training standards of the Michigan Fire
Fighter's Training Council.
(4) A semitrailer or truck used exclusively for storage purposes.
§ 199-24 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-26
199:443
§ 199-26. Adoption of provisions of Title 49 of Code of Federal
Regulations.
This City hereby adopts the following provisions of Title 49 of the Code
of Federal Regulations as of February 28, 1990, on file with the office of
the City Clerk, except where modified by this chapter, to provide for the
safe transportation of persons and property with the intent of following
the policies and procedures of the United States Department of
Transportation's Federal Highway Administration as they relate to Title 49
of the Code of Federal Regulations and the North America standard uniform
out of service criteria and inspection procedures:
§ 199-27. Safety documents.
A. Hazardous materials regulations, being 49 CFR Parts 100 through 180.
B. Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 CFR Part 387, Parts 390
through 393 and Parts 395 through 397 and 399, including Appendices
C, D, E and G, except for the following:
(1) Where the terms "United States Department of Transportation,"
"Federal Highway Administration," "Federal Highway
Administrator," "director" or "Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety"
appear, they shall be construed to refer to the City of Roseville
Police Department.
(2) Where "interstate" appears, it shall mean intrastate or interstate,
or both, as applicable.
C. Where "special agent of the Federal Highway Administration" or
"administration personnel" appears, either shall be construed to mean a
peace officer or an enforcement member or a vehicle inspector of the
Motor Carrier Division of the City of Roseville.
D. Where MCS 63 appears, it shall mean MC 9 and MC 9b.
E. Where MCS 64 appears, it shall mean MC 5.
A. Upon demand, motor carriers shall submit all their transportation
safety-related documents, such as all records and information
pertaining to any accident, driver's records of duty status, bills of
lading, shipping records, driver time and payroll records, driver
qualification records, vehicle maintenance records and equipment for
inspection or copying during regular business hours to any motor
carrier officer displaying a valid City of Roseville Police Department,
Motor Carrier Division identification card.
B. The following is a facsimile of a Motor Carrier Division identification
card:
§ 199-26 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-27
199:444
CITY OF ROSEVILLE POLICE
DEPARTMENT
This is to certify that
_______________________
PHOTO WHOSE PHOTOGRAPH APPEARS
HEREON IS A MEMBER OF THE CITY
OF ROSEVILLE POLICE DEPARTMENT
AND IS VESTED WITH THE
AUTHORITY OF A MOTOR CARRIER
OFFICER AS PRESCRIBED BY LAW.
Chief of Police
C. A carrier operating within this state with main offices in another state
or province shall submit all transportation safety-related documents as
outlined in Subsection A for inspection and copy within ten working
days after receiving formal notification requesting the documents.
§ 199-27 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-27
199:445

ARTICLE IV
Vehicle Specifications
§ 199-28. Maximum width of vehicles; exceptions.
A. The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle shall not
exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. A person may operate or move an implement of husbandry of any width
on a highway as required for normal farming operations without
obtaining a special permit for an excessively wide vehicle or load under
Article XII. The operation or movement of the implement of husbandry
shall be in a manner so as to minimize the interruption of traffic flow. A
person shall not operate or move an implement of husbandry to the left
of the center of the roadway from a half hour after sunset to a half hour
before sunrise, under the conditions specified in MCL § 257.639, or at
any time visibility is substantially diminished due to weather conditions.
A person operating or moving an implement of husbandry shall follow
all traffic regulations.
C. The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete pipe,
agricultural products or unprocessed logs, pulpwood or wood bolts
shall not exceed 108 inches.
D. Except as provided in Subsection B, if a vehicle which is equipped with
pneumatic tires is operated on a highway, the maximum width from the
outside of one wheel and tire to the outside of the opposite wheel and
tire shall not exceed 103 inches, and the outside width of the body of
the vehicle or the load on the vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches.
E. The total outside width of a bus or motor home shall not exceed 102
inches.
F. A vehicle shall not extend beyond the center line of a state trunk line
highway except when authorized by law. Except as provided in
Subsection B, if the width of the vehicle makes it impossible to stay
away from the center line, a permit shall be obtained under Article XII.
G. The Director of the State Transportation Department, a County Road
Commission or a local authority may designate a highway under the
agency's jurisdiction as a highway on which a person may operate a
vehicle or vehicle combination which is not more than 102 inches in
width, including load, the operation of which would otherwise be
prohibited by this section. The agency making the designation may
require that the owner or lessee of the vehicle or of each vehicle in the
vehicle combination secure a permit before operating the vehicle or
vehicle combination. This subsection does not restrict the issuance of a
special permit under Article XII for the operation of a vehicle or vehicle
combination described in § 199-69 carrying a load described in that
section if the operation would otherwise result in a violation of that
section.
§ 199-28 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-29
199:447
§ 199-29. Width of load carried on passenger-type vehicles;
violation as civil infraction.
§ 199-30. Height; length; combinations; lamps and reflectors; axles;
weight.
A. A passenger-type vehicle shall not be operated on a highway with a load
carried on the vehicle extending beyond the line of the fenders on the
left side of the vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the
line of the fender on the right side of the vehicle.
B. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, a vehicle unloaded or with load
shall not exceed a height of 13 feet six inches. The owner of a vehicle
which collides with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct shall be
liable for all damage and injury resulting from a collision caused by the
height of the vehicle, whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is
posted or not.
B. A truck, truck tractor, semitrailer or trailer manufactured on or after
July 27, 1978, shall not be used to transport flammable liquids, in bulk,
having a flash point at or below 70° F. if the truck, truck tractor,
semitrailer or trailer exceeds 11 feet 8 1/2 inches in height. However,
safety equipment and those appurtenances which are required by state
law, when added to a vehicle, may cause the vehicle height to exceed 11
feet 8 1/2 inches, but shall not cause the vehicle height to exceed 13
feet six inches. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
C. A vehicle, except a truck tractor, trailer or semitrailer, including load, or
articulated buses operated by a local public transit system funded by
Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951, being §§ 247.651 to 247.675 of
the Michigan Compiled Laws, shall not exceed a total length of 40 feet.
The total length of a semitrailer operating in a truck tractor and
semitrailer combination shall not exceed 53 feet, including load. All
semitrailers longer than 50 feet shall have a wheelbase of 40.5 feet plus
or minus 0.5 feet measured from the kingpin coupling to the center of
the rear axles or to the center of the tandem axle assembly if equipped
with two axles. Articulated buses operated by a local public transit
system funded by Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951 may operate
with a maximum length of 65 feet. A combination of truck tractor,
semitrailer and trailer, or truck and semitrailer or trailer, or
combination of truck tractor and two semitrailers, including load, shall
not exceed a total overall length of 59 feet, except as provided for on
routes designated and approved by the State Transportation
Department and by local authorities with respect to highways under
their jurisdiction on which a person may operate a combination of a
truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer or a truck tractor and two
semitrailers with no limit on the overall combination length, if the
length of each semitrailer or trailer including load does not exceed
§ 199-29 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-30
199:448
28 1/2 feet or the overall length of the semitrailer and trailer or two
semitrailers as measured from the front of the first towed unit to the
rear of the second towed unit while the units are coupled together
does not exceed an overall length of 58 feet, including load. The State
Transportation Department and local authorities with respect to
highways under their jurisdiction may designate highways where the
overall length of a truck and trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed
65 feet. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer
length longer than 50 feet shall not be allowed to operate with more
than two axles on the semitrailer. All truck tractor and semitrailer
combinations with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not
be allowed to operate with more than two axles on the semitrailer. All
truck tractor and semitrailer combinations with a semitrailer length
longer than 50 feet shall travel exclusively on highways designated
by the appropriate road authority. City, village and county authorities
shall have the option of prohibiting stops within their jurisdiction unless
the stop occurs along appropriately designated routes or is necessary
for emergency purposes or to reach shippers, receivers, warehouses
and terminals along designated routes. A truck tractor shall not haul
more than one trailer and one semitrailer or more than two semitrailers
in combination at any time, except that a farm tractor may haul two
wagons or trailers, or garbage and refuse haulers may, during daylight
hours, haul up to four trailers for garbage and refuse collection
purposes, not exceeding in any combination a total length of 44 feet at
a speed of not to exceed 15 mile per hour. In determining the length of a
vehicle or a vehicle combination under this subsection, the length shall
not be considered to include safety and energy conservation devices,
including but not limited to impact-absorbing bumpers, rear-view
mirrors, turn signals, lamps, marker lamps, steps and hand holds for
entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps or splash and
spray suppressant devices, load-induced tire bulge, refrigeration or
heating units or air compressors. A device shall be excluded from
a determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the
carrying of cargo. Semitrailers and trailers shall be measured from
the front vertical plane of the foremost transverse load-supporting
structure to the rearmost transverse load-supporting structure.
D. If a combination of two semitrailers is pulled by a truck tractor, a fifth
wheel connecting assembly which conforms with motor carrier safety
rules promulgated by the Department of State Police pursuant to the
Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Act No. 181 of the Public Acts of
1963, as amended, being §§ 480.11 to 480.21 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws, shall be used on each semitrailer.
E. A train of vehicles or a vehicle operated alone shall not carry a load
extending more that three feet beyond the front of the train of vehicles
or vehicle.
F. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length
longer than 50 feet shall not be operated on the highways of this state
§ 199-30 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-30
199:449
at the times specified in MCL § 257.684 unless equipped with all of
the following lamps and reflectors, in addition to any other lamps and
reflectors required under City of Roseville ordinances:
(1) Two side marker lamps which display an amber light, one on each
side of the semitrailer, located at 1/2 the distance from the front to
the rear of the semitrailer.
(2) Two reflectors which reflect an amber light, one on each side of the
semitrailer, located at 1/2 the distance from the front to the rear of
the semitrailer.
(3) Two clearance lamps, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at
1/2 the distance from the front to the rear and as near to the top of
the semitrailer as practicable.
G. A lamp required under Subsection F shall be lighted at the time
specified in MCL § 257.684 and shall be visible when lighted at a
distance of 500 feet from the side of the semitrailer on which it is
mounted. A reflector required under Subsection F shall be visible at the
time specified in MCL § 257.684 from all distances from 50 to 500 feet
from the semitrailer when directly in front of the lawful upper beams of
headlamps.
H. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a person may
operate a combination of truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer or truck
tractor and semitrailer or trailer designed and used exclusively to
transport assembled motor vehicles or bodies, recreational vehicles or
boats, which does not exceed a total length of 65 feet. Stinger-steered
combinations of truck tractor and semitrailer shall not exceed a total
length of 74 feet. The load on the combination of vehicles may extend
an additional three feet beyond the front and four feet beyond the rear
of the combination of vehicles. Retractable extensions used to support
and secure the load that does not extend beyond the allowable
overhang for the front and rear shall not be included in determining the
length of a loaded vehicle or combination of vehicles. As used in this
subsection, "Stinger-steered" means a semitrailer combination in which
the fifth wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the
rearmost axle of the power unit.
I. A combination of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles.
J. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a number of motor
vehicles, wholly or partially assembled, may be transported over the
highways of this state in combination, utilizing one tow bar or three
saddle mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive
power of one of the vehicles in combination. The combination shall not
exceed the maximum length of 65 feet for the transportation of
assembled motor vehicles, and the vehicles in the combination shall be
adequately and securely fastened together in compliance with
regulations of the city, state and of any federal agency having
jurisdiction over the transportation. If motor vehicles are towed by
§ 199-30 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-30
199:450
means of triple saddle mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes
acting on all wheels which are in contact with the roadway. A
combination exceeding 55 feet in length may be operated only on
highways and routes approved and designed for that operation by the
State Transportation Department and by local authorities with respect
to highways under their jurisdiction.
K. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a person may
operate a truck and semitrailer or trailer designed and used to
transport saw logs, pulpwood and tree-length poles that does not
exceed an overall length of 70 feet, including load. These combinations
of vehicles shall only be operated upon highways designated by the
State Transportation Department or local authorities with respect to
highways under their jurisdiction.
L. The total gross weight of a truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer
combination or a truck tractor and two semitrailers combination which
exceed 59 feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds per
engine net horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent specified in
the SAE handbook published by the Society of Automotive Engineers,
Inc. (1977).
§ 199-30 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-30
199:451

ARTICLE V
Transporting Mobile Homes
§ 199-31. Towing vehicle with mobile home attached; operating
restriction; permits; transport requirements; violations; definitions.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a person shall not
operate on the highways of this state a towing vehicle to which a mobile
home is attached, if that mobile home is more than 45 feet in length or
more that 60 feet in length when combined with the towing vehicle, is
more than 12 1/2 feet in height and has an actual body width of more
than 102 inches at base rail, unless that person possesses either of the
following:
(1) A permit issued by the jurisdictional authority pursuant to this
section.
(2) A special permit issued by the jurisdictional authority pursuant to
Article XII.
B. The jurisdictional authority may issue to a mobile home transport
company, a mobile home manufacturer or a mobile home dealer an
annual permit to move over a highway, in the ordinary course of that
company's, manufacturer's or dealer's business a mobile home that
conforms to each of the following:
(1) The mobile home is not more that 12 feet wide.
(2) The actual body length of the mobile home is not more than 80 feet
and the combined length of the mobile home and towing vehicle is
not more than 95 feet or the total length of a combination of mobile
homes is not more than 80 feet and the total length of a
combination of mobile homes and towing vehicle is not more than
95 feet.
C. A jurisdictional authority may, in accordance with Article XII, issue a
special permit for the movement of a mobile home over a highway
within its jurisdiction if the width of that mobile home conforms to both
of the following:
(1) The mobile home is not more than 16 feet wide, including eaves.
(2) The length of the mobile home complies with Subsection B(2).
D. A person operating a towing vehicle under Subsection C shall transport
a mobile home only on the lane farthest to the right of that person and
shall operate the towing vehicle in a manner that places the eave
portion of the mobile home over the shoulder of the highway on which
the mobile home is moved. A person shall not move a mobile home that
is 14 or more feet in width, including an eave of two feet, when the wind
velocity exceed 25 mile per hour.
§ 199-31 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-31
199:453
E. A jurisdictional authority shall not issue a permit described in
Subsection B or C for the transport of a mobile home on a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday from the noon before until the noon after a
holiday or during the hours between sunset and sunrise.
F. A jurisdictional authority shall provide and a person operating a towing
vehicle shall comply with all of the following in a permit issued under
this section:
(1) The date, day and time period during which a mobile home subject
to the permit may be moved on a highway.
(2) Notice that the permit is conditioned upon its holder's compliance
with the permit's terms and with the law.
(3) Notice that the operator of a towing vehicle transporting the
mobile home shall operate the towing vehicle on a highway as
follows:
(a) At a safe speed and in a safe manner that will not impede motor
traffic.
(b) Only when the surface condition of the highway is not slippery.
(c) In accordance with seasonal load restrictions.
(4) For a mobile home and towing vehicle that, when combined, are
more than 80 feet in length or more than 12 feet wide, all of the
following:
(a) Notice that the mobile home shall be equipped with two
flashing amber lights on the rear of the mobile home and one
flashing amber light on the top of the towing vehicle.
(b) Notice that the mobile home shall be equipped with stop lights
and directional lights on the rear of the mobile home.
(c) Notice that signs with the words "oversize load" shall be
displayed on the front bumper of the towing vehicle and the
back of the mobile home or in the case of mobile homes that
are 16 feet wide, notice that signs with the words "16-ft. wide
load" shall be displayed on the front bumper of the towing
vehicle and the back of the mobile home.
(d) Notice that the signs identified in Subsection F(4)(c) above
shall be of durable material, in good condition, with black
lettering on interstate yellow background, and that each letter
shall be of block lettering not less than 12 inches high at the
front and not less that 16 inches high at the rear of the unit.
(e) Notice that a vehicle escort is required on those roads where
the State Police consider escort vehicles necessary for highway
safety.
§ 199-31 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-31
199:454
G. Signs and other special identification for escort vehicles shall conform
to State Transportation Department requirements for all escort vehicles
for oversized loads.
H. For a mobile home being moved pursuant to these sections or Article
XII, the distance between mobile home axle centers shall not be less
than 34 inches. The axles and tires shall meet standards established by
the State Transportation Department.
I. This section does not grant or give authority to the State Transportation
Department that did not exist on May 1, 1982, in accordance with
Section 127 of Title 23 of the United States Code, 23 U.S.C. § 127.
J. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction
and may be assessed a civil fine of not more than $500. The owner of
the towing vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
K. The State Transportation Commission may order the State
Transportation Department to immediately cease issuing all special
permits to move on the highways of the lower peninsula of this state a
mobile home that is more than 14 1/3 feet wide plus normal
appurtenances that extend no more than six inches, and an eave that
extends no more than two feet from the width of that mobile home upon
a State Transportation Commission determination that those permits
create an unreasonable safety hazard or hazards. The State
Transportation Commission shall notify all other jurisdictional
authorities of the determination made under this subsection. The order
shall not prohibit the issuance of a special permit for the movement of a
mobile home if a binding contract for the movement of that mobile
home was executed before the Commission determination of an
unreasonable safety hazard or hazards.
L. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JURISDICTIONAL AUTHORITY — The State Transportation
Department, a County Road Commission or a local authority having
jurisdiction over a highway upon which a mobile home is proposed to
be moved.
MOBILE HOME — Any of the following:
(1) A prebuilt housing module.
That term as defined in Section 2 of the Mobile Home Commission
Act, Act No. 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, being § 125.2302 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws.
(2)
A section of a mobile home as that term is defined in Subsection
(2).
(3)
§ 199-31 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-32
199:455
§ 199-32. Additional transporting requirements.
All mobile homes transported on the highways of the Lower Peninsula of
this state that are more than 14 1/3 feet wide, plus normal appurtenances
that extend no more than six inches, and an eave that extends no more than
two feet from the width of the mobile home, are subject to the following
requirements in additional to the requirements of § 199-31:
A. Two escort vehicles shall escort the towing vehicle and mobile home on
all two-lane roads and on those roads where the State Police consider
two escort vehicles necessary for highway safety.
B. Each towing vehicle shall be equipped with a radio or other device that
allows for continuous communication between the towing vehicle and
each escort vehicle.
C. The person transporting the mobile home shall have in effect a liability
insurance policy covering personal injury and property damage and
having policy limits of not less than $1,000,000.
D. The towing vehicle and mobile home shall not exceed a speed of 45
miles per hour or 10 miles per hour below the posted speed limit,
whichever is lower.
§ 199-32 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-32
199:456
ARTICLE VI
Vehicle Loads
§ 199-33. Spillage of load contents on roads.
A person shall not drive or move a vehicle, except a vehicle carrying logs
or tubular products, on a highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing
off or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. This requirement does not apply
to a vehicle transporting agricultural or horticultural products when hay,
straw, silage or residue from a product, but not including the product itself,
or when materials such as water used to preserve and handle agricultural
or horticultural products while in transportation, escape from the vehicle
in an amount that does not interfere with other traffic on the highway. The
tailgate, faucets and taps on a vehicle shall be securely closed to prevent
spillage during transportation whether the vehicle is loaded or empty, and
the vehicle shall not have any holes or cracks through which material can
escape. Any highway maintenance vehicle engaged in either ice or snow
removal shall be exempt from this section.
§ 199-34. Proof of spillage.
Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage is not
necessary to prove a violation of this section.
§ 199-35. Loads which are not completely enclosed.
A vehicle carrying a load, other than logs or tubular products, which is not
completely enclosed shall meet either of the following requirements:
§ 199-36. Liability for violation.
A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle or causes it to
be loaded or unloaded, with knowledge that it is to be driven on a public
highway, in a manner so as to cause a violation of § 199-33 shall be prima
facie liable for a violation of these sections.
§ 199-37. Vehicles carrying logs or tubular products.
A person shall not operate a motor vehicle carrying logs or tubular products
on a highway unless the following conditions are met:
A. Have the load covered with firmly secured canvas or similar type of
covering. A device used to comply with the requirement of this
subsection shall not exceed a width of 108 inches nor by design or use
have the capability to carry cargo by itself.
B. Have the load securely fastened to the body or the frame of the vehicle
with binders of adequate number and of adequate breaking strength to
prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load.
§ 199-33 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-37
199:457
A. If the logs or tubular products are loaded crosswise or right angles to
the side of the vehicle, the load of logs or tubular products shall be
securely fastened to the body or frame of the vehicle with not less than
two binders which are secured to the frame at each end of the load and
pass over the load so that the frame and binders completely encircle the
load.
B. If the vehicle is a truck or trailer carrying logs which has a loading
surface more than 33 feet in length and the logs are loaded crosswise or
at right angles to the side of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be equipped
with a center partition located approximately 1/2 the distance from the
front to the rear of the loading surface of the truck or trailer. The center
partition shall be either a center mounted hydraulic loader or a center
set of stakes and shall be pinned, bolted or otherwise securely fastened
to the frame. The load shall be secured as required by Subsection A,
and in addition, the two lengthwise tie downs shall be attached or
threaded through the center partition at a level not less that one foot
below the load height.
C. If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle,
obliquely or parallel to the sides, with metal stakes and pockets, the
load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows:
(1) With two tie-downs from frame to frame for every tier.
(2) So that not more than 1/2 the diameter of the top log or tubular
product extends higher than the stake tops.
(3) With two cross chains per tier if the load extends more than five
feet above the loading surface.
(4) So that every ten linear feet has not less than one tie-down from
frame to frame.
D. If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle,
obliquely or parallel to the sides, with permanent metal gusted bunks,
the load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows:
(1) With two tie-downs from frame to frame for every tier.
(2) So that not more than 1/2 the diameter of the top log extends
higher than the stake tops.
(3) So that every ten linear feet has not less than one tie-down from
frame to frame.
E. The tie-downs, cross chains, stakes and other materials used to secure
loads of logs or tubular products as required under Subsections A to D
shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Chain shall be of steel and shall be of a strength not less than 5/16
inch in diameter "transport," which is embossed with a grade
stamp representative of Grade 70, or not less than 3/8 inch in
§ 199-37 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-37
199:458
§ 199-38. Transport of agricultural commodities.
Section 199-35 shall not apply to a person operating a vehicle to transport
agricultural commodities in the normal operation of a farm. However, a
person operating a vehicle to transport agricultural commodities in the
normal operation of the farm who violates § 199-33 or 199-36 is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 199-41.
§ 199-39. Nonapplicability to loads of sufficient weight to prevent
spillage.
Section 199-35A shall not apply to a motor vehicle transporting items of a
load which because of the weight will not fall off the moving vehicle and
which have their centers of gravity located at least six inches below the top
of the enclosure nor to a motor vehicle carrying metal which because of its
weight and entity is so loaded as to prevent it from dropping or falling off
the moving vehicle.
§ 199-40. Nonapplicability to equipment engaged in road work.
Section 199-35A shall not apply to motor vehicles and other equipment
engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street in a designated
work area.
§ 199-41. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both.
§ 199-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
diameter "high test," which is embossed with a grade stamp
representative of Grade 40. Chain shall not be repaired by welding,
wire or cold shuts.
(2) Wire rope shall be of improved plow steel and not less than 3/8 inch
in diameter.
(3) Webbing strap shall be not less than three inches in width and shall
have a minimum breaking strength of 14,000 pounds.
(4) Metal stakes shall be of sufficient strength to hold and contain the
load.
(5) Connecting links and hooks shall be at least as strong as the tiedown
materials used.
§ 199-37 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-42
199:459
CROSS CHAIN — A chain which extends through the load of logs or tubular
products and is connected at each end to a side stake.
LOGS — Sawlogs, pulpwood or tree-length poles.
TIE-DOWN — A high-strength material which is used to secure the load of
logs or tubular products to the frame or the bed of the vehicle.
TIER — A vertical pile or stack of logs or tubular products.
§ 199-42 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-42
199:460
ARTICLE VII
Passenger Vehicle or Pickup Truck Towing
§ 199-43. Number of vehicles in tow restricted.
Except as otherwise provided in § 199-47, a passenger vehicle or a pickup
truck shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or having attached to the
passenger vehicle or pickup truck more than one vehicle or trailer.
§ 199-44. Length of drawbar; signal cloth.
The drawbar or other connection between two vehicles, one of which is
towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall not exceed 15 feet in length
from one vehicle to the other. If the connection consists of a chain, rope or
cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a red flag or other signal
or cloth not less than 12 inches in both length and width.
§ 199-45. Coupling devices and safety chains.
A vehicle or trailer towed or drawn by a vehicle shall be attached to
the vehicle with forms of coupling devices in a manner so that when the
combination is operated in a linear alignment on a level, smooth, paved
surface, the movement of the towed or drawn vehicle or trailer does not
deviate more than three inches to either side of the path of the towing
vehicle that tows or draws it. The vehicle or trailer shall also be connected
to the towing vehicle, by suitable safety chains or devices, one on each side
of the coupling and at the extreme outer edge of the vehicle or trailer, and
each chain or device and connection used shall be of sufficient strength to
haul the vehicle or trailer when loaded.
§ 199-46. Pickup truck with fifth-wheel assembly.
A pickup truck with a fifth-wheel assembly shall not tow a semitrailer unless
the fifth-wheel assembly conforms to motor carrier safety rule R 460.16442
of the Michigan Administrative Code.
§ 199-47. Conditions for towing of additional trailers.
Notwithstanding § 199-43, a pickup truck with a towing rating equal to or
greater than the weight being towed equipped with a fifth-wheel assembly
which conforms with motor carrier safety rules promulgated by the
Department of State Police pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety Act of
1963, Act No. 181 of the Public Acts of 1963, being §§ 480.11 to 480.21 of
the Michigan Compiled Laws, towing attached with a semitrailer designed
for recreational living purposes may tow an additional trailer or semitrailer
under to following conditions:
A. The additional trailer or semitrailer shall be attached pursuant to
§ 199-45. The safety chains described in § 199-45 shall be securely
attached at the extreme outer edge of the attached trailer or semitrailer
with a locking mechanism. The towing vehicle hitch shall be of
§ 199-43 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-47
199:461
§ 199-48. Speed limit.
For the purposes of this section, a pickup truck towing a semitrailer and
additional trailer shall be considered a passenger vehicle and shall comply
with the speed limit requirement of MCL § 257.627(5).
§ 199-49. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this article is responsible for a civil infraction.
substantial material and shall be attached in a proper and skillful
manner to the frame of the towing vehicle.
B. The total length of the pickup truck, semitrailer designed for
recreational living purposes and additional trailer or semitrailer shall
not exceed 59 feet.
C. The gross weight of the additional trailer or semitrailer towed or drawn
shall not exceed the empty weight of the pickup truck or the empty
weight of the semitrailer.
§ 199-47 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-49
199:462
ARTICLE VIII
Wheel and Axle Load
§ 199-50. Normal loading maximum.
The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds designated
in the following provisions which prescribe the distance between axles:
§ 199-51. Designation of certain highways adequate for heavier
loading.
When normal loading is in effect, the State Transportation Department
and local authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction may
designate certain highways, or sections of those highways, where bridges
and road surfaces are adequate for heavier loading, which designation may
be revised as needed, on which the maximum tandem axle assembly loading
shall not exceed 16,000 pounds for any axle of the assembly, if there is no
other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly.
§ 199-52. Number of tandem axle assemblies permitted on
designated heavier loading highways.
Except as provided in § 199-57, on a legal combination of vehicles, only one
tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on the designated highways at the
gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other
axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly, and if no other tandem
axle assembly in the combination of vehicles exceeds a gross weight of
13,000 pounds per axle. When the maximum gross weight of a combination
of vehicles with load does not exceed 73,280 pounds, two tandem axle
assemblies shall be permitted on the designated highways at a gross
permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other axle
within nine feet of any axle of the assembly.
§ 199-53. Tire size and wheel load.
The normal size of tires shall be the rated size as published by the
manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel
shall not exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
A. When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the maximum
axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with
high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
B. When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between two axles but more
than 3 1/2 feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 13,000 pounds
for vehicles equipped with high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
C. When axles are spaced less than 3 1/2 feet apart, the maximum axle
load shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle.
D. Subsections A, B and C shall be known as the normal loading maximum.
§ 199-50 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-54
199:463
§ 199-54. Seasonal load limits.
§ 199-55. Suspension of restrictions.
The State Transportation Department or a local authority with respect to
highways under its jurisdiction may suspend the restrictions imposed by
this article when and where, in its discretion, conditions of the highways
or the public health, safety and welfare so warrant, and may impose the
restricted loading requirements of this article on designated highways at
any other time that the conditions of the highway may require.
§ 199-56. Determination of gross vehicle weight.
For the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, the gross vehicle weight of
a single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and loads shall be
determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the total
weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In addition, the
gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing individual axles or by
weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross weight of the group of
axles by the number of axles in the group. Pursuant to § 199-57, the overall
gross weight on the group of two or more axles shall be determined by
A. During the months of March, April and May in each year, the maximum
axle load allowable on concrete pavements, or pavements with a
concrete base, shall be reduced by 25% from the maximum axle load as
specified in this chapter, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all
other types of roads during these months shall be reduced by 35% from
the maximum axle loads as specified. The maximum wheel load shall
not exceed 525 pounds per inch of tire width on concrete and concrete
base or 450 pounds per inch of tire width on all other roads during the
period the seasonal road restrictions are in effect.
B. Upon receipt of a written application and good cause being shown, the
State Transportation Department for roads under their jurisdiction and
County Road Commissions, for roads under their jurisdiction, may
permit exemptions from seasonal weight restrictions for milk on
specified routes when requested. Approval or denial of a request for an
exemption shall be given by written notice to an applicant within 30
days after the date of submission of the application. If a request is
denied, the written notice shall state the reason for denial and alternate
routes for which the permit may be issued.
C. The applicant shall have the right to appeal to the State Transportation
Commission or the County Road Commission.
D. These exemptions shall not apply on county roads in counties which
have negotiated agreements with milk haulers, or haulers of other
commodities, during period of seasonal load limits in years prior to the
effective date of this 1993 amendatory act. This 1993 amendatory act
shall not limit the ability of these counties to continue to negotiate such
agreements.
§ 199-54 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-56
199:464
weighing individual axles or several axles, and the total weight of all the
axles in the group shall be the overall gross weight of the group.
§ 199-57. Loading maximum for interstate highways.
A. The loading maximum in this section shall apply to interstate highways,
and the State Transportation Department or a local authority with
respect to highways under its jurisdiction may designate a highway, or a
section of a highway, for the operation of vehicles having a gross vehicle
weight of not more than 80,000 pound which are subject to the
following load maximums:
(1) Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle, including all
enforcement tolerances.
(2) A tandem axles weight of 34,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances.
(3) An overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive
axles equaling:
W = 500((LN/(N-1)) + 12N =36)
Where
W = Overall gross weight on a group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds.
L = Distance in feet between the extreme of a group of two
or more consecutive axles.
N = Number of axles in the group under consideration,
except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each if the first
and last axles of the consecutive sets of tandem axles
are not less than 36 feet apart.
B. The gross vehicle weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds including all
enforcement tolerances. Except for five-axle truck tractor, semitrailer
combinations having two consecutive sets of tandem axles, vehicles
having a gross weight in excess of 80,000 pounds or in excess of the
vehicle gross weight determined by application of the formula in this
section shall be subject to the maximum axle loads of §§ 199-50, 199-51
and 199-52.
C. As used in this section, "tandem axle weight" means the total weight
transmitted to the road by two or more consecutive axles, the centers of
which may be included between parallel transverse vertical planes
spaced more than 40 inches but not more than 96 inches apart,
extending across the full width of the vehicle.
§ 199-56 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-57
199:465

ARTICLE IX
Transportation of Flammable Liquids
§ 199-58. Flash point.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck pulling a trailer,
a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination or a truck
tractor pulling two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in
bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70° F. within this state.
§ 199-59. Safety devices.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article other than §§ 199-58
and 199-60, a truck with a water capacity of more than 9,500 gallons
or a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer with a water capacity of more
than 9,500 gallons shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which
has a flash point at or below 70° F. in this state, unless the existing
manhole or inspection ports of each truck, semitrailer or trailer in the
vehicle combination has been equipped with devices which are capable of
withstanding the forces caused by an internal pressure of 50 pounds per
square inch, applied and held at least 50 milliseconds, and then released
to two pounds per square inch, without having any residual venting of
flammable liquid during the subsequent two-pounds-per-square-inch
condition.
§ 199-60. Water capacity of certain vehicles.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a truck or a truck
tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk,
which has a flash point at or below 70° F. in this state, if the truck or
semitrailer was manufactured after July 1, 1982, or before July 1, 1982, but
was not a vehicle registered in this state by the Secretary of State at any
time between January 1, 1985, and October 1, 1985, unless the truck or the
semitrailer has a water capacity of less than 13,800 gallons.
§ 199-61. Quantity restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a truck or truck tractor
pulling a semitrailer shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which
has a flash point at or below 70° F. in a quantity of more than 13,400 gallons.
§ 199-62. Violations and penalties.
The owner or driver of a vehicle which transports a flammable liquid
in violation of §§ 199-58, 199-59, 199-60 and 199-61 is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500, or imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 199-58 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-63
199:467
§ 199-63. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced only by a police officer or an officer appointed
by the Director of the Department of State Police pursuant to Section 6d
of Act No. 49 of the Public Acts of 1935, being § 28.6d of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
§ 199-63 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-63
199:468
ARTICLE X
Road Service Vehicles
§ 199-64. Logos and emblems to be displayed on vehicles.
All motor trucks or truck tractors, except as provided in subsection (d), of
more than 5, 000 pounds registered weight and all towing or platform bed
wrecker road service vehicles in operation upon the public highways of this
state shall have the name, City and state or the registered logo or emblem
of the registered owner of the vehicle, and lessee of the vehicle if the vehicle
is being operated under lease, painted or permanently attached on each
side of the cab on a motor truck or truck tractor in letters of not less than
three inches in height, not lower than the bottom edge of the door, except
that motor trucks with closed van bodies may place the information on each
side of the van body not lower than the bottom edge of the cab door. This
information shall be in sharp color contrast to the background.
§ 199-65. Removable identification devices.
Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, the
identification requirements of § 199-58 may be met through the use of
removable devices which meet the requirements of § 199-58. These devices
shall be of durable construction and securely attached to each side of the
motor truck or truck tractor. The removable devices shall be attached so
that the identification is in a horizontal position.
§ 199-66. Time limit for compliance.
Motor vehicles subject to this article shall have two years after the effective
date of this section to be in compliance with the marking location as
required in § 199-58.
§ 199-67. Trucks with farm license plates.
This article shall not apply to trucks eligible for and equipped with farm
license plates.
§ 199-68. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
§ 199-64 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-68
199:469

ARTICLE XI
Vehicle Weighing
§ 199-69. Determination of unlawful vehicle and load; procedure for
correction.
A. A City of Roseville police officer or a duly authorized agent of the State
Transportation Department or a County Road Commission having
reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful may
require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle by
either portable or stationary scales approved and sealed by the
Department of Agriculture as a legal weighing device, and may require
that the vehicle be driven to the nearest weighing station of the State
Transportation Department for the purpose of allowing an officer or
agent of the State Transportation Department or County Road
Commission to determine whether the conveyance is loaded in
conformity with this chapter.
B. When the officer or agent, upon weighing a vehicle and load,
determines that the weight is unlawful, the officer or agent may require
the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing
until that portion of the load is shifted or removed as necessary to
reduce the gross axle load weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted
under this chapter. All material unloaded as provided under this section
shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle at the risk of
the owner or operator. A Judge or Magistrate imposing a civil fine and
costs under this section which are to be paid in full immediately or for
which a bond is not immediately posted in double the amount of the
civil fine and costs shall order the driver or owner to move the vehicle at
the driver's own risk to a place of safekeeping within the jurisdiction of
the Judge or Magistrate, inform the Judge or Magistrate in writing of
the place of safekeeping and keep the vehicle until the fine and costs
are paid or sufficient bond is furnished or until the Judge or Magistrate
is satisfied that the fine and cost will be paid. The officer or agent who
has determined, after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is
unlawful, may require the driver to proceed to a Judge or Magistrate
within the city. If the Judge or Magistrate is satisfied that the probable
civil fine and costs will be paid by the owner or lessee, the Judge or
Magistrate may allow the driver to proceed after the load is made legal.
If the Judge or Magistrate is not satisfied that the owner or lessee, after
a notice and right to be heard on the merits is given, will pay the
amount of the probable civil fine and costs, the Judge or Magistrate may
order the vehicle to be impounded until trial on the merits is completed
under conditions set forth in this article for the impounding of vehicles
after the civil fine and costs have been imposed. Removal of the vehicle
and forwarding, care or preservation of the load shall be under the
control of and at the risk of the owner or driver. Vehicles impounded
shall be subject to a lien subject to prior valid bona fide lien of prior
record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs and if the civil fine and
costs are not paid within 90 days after the seizure, the Judge or
§ 199-69 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-69
199:471
§ 199-70. Fines.
§ 199-71. Failure to stop or bypassing scales.
A driver or owner of a vehicle, truck or truck tractor, truck or truck tractor
with other vehicles in combination, or special mobile equipment who
knowingly fails to stop at or who knowingly bypasses any scales or weighing
station is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Magistrate shall certify the unpaid judgment to the City Attorney of the
City in which the violation occurred, who shall proceed to enforce the
lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in the
case of chattel mortgage foreclosures. When the duly authorized agent
of the State Transportation Department or County Road Commission
is performing duties under this chapter, the agent shall have all of the
powers conferred upon peace officers by the general laws of this state.
A. An owner of a vehicle or a lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator, or
other person, who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or
moved on a highway, when the weight of that vehicle violates Article
VIII is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine in an
amount equal to:
(1) Three cents per pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000
pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less.
(2) Six cents per pound of excess load when the excess is over 2,000
pounds but not over 3,000 pounds.
(3) Nine cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 3,000 pounds but not over 4,000 pounds.
(4) Twelve cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000 pounds.
(5) Fifteen cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 5,000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds.
(6) Twenty cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 10,000 pounds.
B. However, the court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of
the civil fine within the schedule provided by this section and may
impose the civil fine provided in MCL § 257.907(3) for a civil infraction
where at the time of the violation, either the motor vehicle, motor
vehicle and semitrailer or trailer did not exceed the total weight which
would be lawful for each unit by a proper distribution of the load upon
the various axles supporting each unit.
§ 199-69 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-72
199:472
§ 199-72. Stopping of moving vehicles.
An agent or authorized representative of the State Transportation
Department or a County Road Commission shall not stop a truck or vehicle
in movement upon the road or highway within the state for any purpose,
unless the agent or authorized representative is driving a duly marked
vehicle, clearly showing and denoting the branch of government
represented.
§ 199-73. Failure to stop when requested.
A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when requested
or ordered to do so by a police officer or a duly authorized agent of the
State Transportation Department or a representative or agent of a County
Road Commission, authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the vehicle and load by means of a portable scale, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 199-72 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-73
199:473

ARTICLE XII
Special Permits
§ 199-74. Issuance by jurisdictional authority.
Upon receipt of a written application and good cause being shown, a
jurisdictional authority may issue a written special permit authorizing an
applicant to operate upon or remove from a highway maintained by that
jurisdictional authority a vehicle or combination of vehicles that are any of
the following:
§ 199-75. Application information.
The application for a special permit shall be on a form prescribed by the
jurisdictional authority and shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles
and load to be operated or moved and the particular highways upon which
the special permit to operate is requested.
§ 199-76. Farm tractors and machinery.
A jurisdictional authority may issue a special permit authorizing the
operation of the following upon a highway:
§ 199-77. Contents of permit.
A special permit shall specify the trip or trips and date or dates for which
it is valid, and the jurisdictional authority granting the special permit may
restrict or prescribe conditions of operation of a vehicle or vehicles, if
necessary, to protect the safety of the public or to ensure against undue
damage to the road foundations, surfaces, structures or installations and
may require a reasonable inspection fee and other security as that
jurisdictional authority determines necessary to compensate for damages
caused by the movement. A special permit may be issued on an annual
basis.
§ 199-78. Transport of telephone, telegraph and electric poles.
A person may transport telephone, telegraph or electric poles of a greater
length than otherwise authorized over the highways in the construction,
maintenance or repair of telephone, telegraph or electric lines pursuant to
a special permit issued under this article.
A. Of a size, weight or load exceeding the maximum specified in this
chapter.
B. Otherwise not in conformity with this chapter.
A. Traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse
corrugations upon the periphery of those movable tracks on farm
tractors.
B. Other farm machinery otherwise prohibited under this chapter.
§ 199-74 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-79
199:475
§ 199-79. Transport of concrete pipe.
A person may transport concrete pipe of a greater width than otherwise
authorized over highways pursuant to a special permit issued under this
article.
§ 199-80. Carrying of special permit in vehicle.
A special permit issued under this article shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection
by a police officer or authorized agent of an authority granting the special
permit. A person shall not violate any of the terms or conditions of the
special permit.
§ 199-81. Violations.
A person who violates this article is responsible for a civil infraction.
§ 199-82. Mobile homes.
A jurisdictional authority issuing a special permit to move a mobile home
under this article and a person who is issued a special permit to move a
mobile home under this article are subject to § 199-30.
§ 199-83. Term defined.
As used in this article, "jurisdictional authority" means the State
Transportation Department, County Road Commission or local authority
having jurisdiction over a highway upon which a vehicle is proposed to be
moved pursuant to a permit required under this article.
§ 199-79 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-83
199:476
ARTICLE XIII
Violations and Penalties
§ 199-84. Violation as to load, weight or height of vehicle or load;
powers of police officer.
Any police officer having reason to believe that the load, weight or height of
a vehicle or load is in violation of § 199-30, Article VI, Article IX or Article
XI, which violation is a misdemeanor, may require the driver of the vehicle
to stop, and the officer may investigate, weigh or measure the vehicle or
load. If after personally investigating, weighing or measuring the vehicle or
load, the officer determines that the load, weight or height of a vehicle or
load are in violation of the requirements of § 199-30, Article VI, Article IX
or Article XI, the officer may temporarily detain the driver of the vehicle for
purposes of making a record or vehicle check, may make an arrest for the
violation and may proceed as otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 199-85. Violations and penalties.
A. Except as provided in Subsection E or F, any driver or operator who
violates this chapter or rule promulgated under the Act, or any owner or
user of any bus, truck tractor or trailer or certain other motor vehicles
or any officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation or
association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court which is
the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or
operator to operate or drive any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer or
certain other motor vehicles in violation of this chapter or a rule
promulgated under the Act shall be punished as enumerated in the
specific sections being either a civil infraction or a misdemeanor. Any
misdemeanor violation will be punishable by fines of a maximum of
$500 and/or 90 days in jail.
B. A police officer upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is
being operated in violation of this chapter or a rule promulgated
pursuant to the Act may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor
vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear
for that violation.
C. In addition to any penalty imposed under this chapter, a third or
subsequent violation within one year of the rules promulgated pursuant
to the Act with respect to hours of service and recording those hours in
a daily log may result in an audit of the driver of the vehicle by the
Motor Carrier Division of the City of Roseville Police Department.
D. This chapter does not apply to a unit of government or its employees,
officer or representatives or to a motor vehicle, truck tractor or trailer,
owned or operated thereby except as provided in Section 601a of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being
§ 247.601a of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
§ 199-84 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 199-85
199:477
E. A driver or operator or an owner or user of any bus, truck, truck tractor,
or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles or any officer or agent of an
individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or
receivers appointed by any court that is the owner or user of any
vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate a
vehicle with a serious safety defect is subject to a fine of not more than
$500 for each violation.
F. As used in this section, "serious safety defect" means a violation of this
chapter or a rule promulgated pursuant to the act relative to brakes,
tires, steering coupling devices, headlights, taillights, brake lights and
trunk signals that results in the vehicle being placed out of service.
§ 199-85 ROSEVILLE CODE § 199-85
199:478
Chapter 201
NITROUS OXIDE, USE, POSSESSION AND SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Controlled substances — See Ch. 109. Minors — See Ch. 197.
§ 201-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Nitrous Oxide Use, Possession and Sale
Ordinance."
§ 201-2. Findings and purpose.
The City of Roseville finds that authoritative studies have linked the
recreational use of nitrous oxide to serious health problems in human
beings, and the sale, distribution and use and possession of nitrous oxide for
recreational purposes can be harmful to public health, safety and welfare.
Prohibiting the recreational use, sale and possession of nitrous oxide will
reduce the number of persons possessing, using and selling nitrous oxide
for recreational uses and will promote public health, safety and welfare.
§ 201-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
DEVICE — Any cartridge, compressed gas cylinder, apparatus, container, or
other object used to contain or dispense or administer nitrous oxide.
NITROUS OXIDE — A colorless, nonflammable gas, N2O, sometimes used
in aerosols and sometimes used as an anaesthetic, which, when inhaled,
produces loss of sensibility to pain, oftentimes preceded by exhilaration
and laughter and used often as an anaesthetic in dentistry. Nitrous oxide is
oftentimes called, "laughing gas."
PERSON — Any individual or other entity, howsoever organized or
constituted.
RECREATIONAL USE — Use for the purpose of causing a condition of
loss of sensibility to pain, or intoxication, or euphoria, or excitement, or
exhilaration, or sexual enhancement, or dulling of the senses or nervous
system, or stupefaction or any single or combination of such effects.
Recreational use shall not include use as exempted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 201-4. Prohibited conduct.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Roseville to attempt or
to sell, offer or distribute or otherwise provide to any person nitrous
oxide for recreational purposes, a device to dispense or administer
§ 199-85 NITROUS OXIDE, USE, POSSESSION AND § 201-4
201:479
§ 201-5. Exemptions.
Prohibitions in this chapter shall not apply to the following:
§ 201-6. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, punishable by a sentence of not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
§ 201-7. Appearance tickets.
In addition to other enforcement, an appearance ticket may be issued
pursuant to § 9A to 9G of Chapter 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927
P.A. 175, as amended; MCL §§ 764.9A to 764.9G.
§ 201-8. Repealer.
Any ordinance in conflict or inconsistent with the terms of this chapter is
repealed only to the extent as to give full effect to this chapter.
nitrous oxide for recreational purposes or any device that contains a
quantity of nitrous oxide for recreational purposes.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Roseville to use or
possess nitrous oxide for recreational purposes, a device that contains
any quantity of nitrous oxide for recreational purposes or a device to
dispense or administer nitrous oxide for recreational purposes.
A. Persons licensed under the Food Processing Act of 1977, as amended;
1978 P.A. 328, as amended; MCL §§ 289.801 to 289.810; or Chapter 7 of
the Food Law of 2000, 2000 P.A. 92; MCL §§ 289.7101 to 289.7137, who
sell or otherwise distribute the device as a grocery product.
B. Any person engaged in the business of selling or distributing
compressed gases for industrial or medical use, who sells or otherwise
distributes the device for such purpose and in the course of that
purpose, without knowledge or intent that the use or possession would
be for recreational use.
C. The health care professional who possesses or dispenses nitrous oxide
in the course of medical or dental treatment for necessary and
reasonable medical and dental treatment and not for recreational
purposes.
D. The pharmacist or pharmacist-intern or pharmacy as defined in Section
17707 of the Public Health Code of 1978; P.A. 368, as amended; MCL
§ 333.17707; who dispenses the device in the course of his or her duties
as a pharmacist or pharmacist-intern without the intent or knowledge
that such possession or use would be for recreational use.
§ 201-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 201-9
201:480
§ 201-9. Severability.
If any word, sentence, phrase or clause of this chapter is deemed to be
invalid pursuant to a court of competent jurisdiction, the balance of this
chapter shall remain in full force and effect, this chapter being deemed as
severable.
§ 201-10. When effective.
This chapter is deemed to be an emergency ordinance and shall become
effective immediately upon adoption and publication.
Chapter 202
NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Lawns — See Ch. 183.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 221.
Sewers — See Ch. 256.
§ 202-1. Purpose; scope. [Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1252]
The provisions of this chapter are to maintain quality structures for the
public health, safety and welfare. This chapter establishes safeguard
controls for non-owner-occupied residential structures and accessory uses
within the City of Roseville.
§ 202-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE — Any structure, landscaping, fence or other
appurtenance of the subject housing.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — The certificate issued by the City of
Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection evidencing compliance
with this chapter at the time of issuance. The issuance of a certificate of
compliance may not be relied upon by third persons as evidence of the
condition of the premises.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — The certificate issued by the City
of Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection registering housing
pursuant to this chapter.
HOUSING — Non-owner-occupied single-family residential structures,
multifamily residential structures, condominiums, and their accessory uses.
§ 201-9 NITROUS OXIDE, USE, POSSESSION AND § 202-2
201:481
The classification by the City Assessor shall be presumptive evidence of
the type of housing unit defined herein.[Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No.
1252]
HOUSING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within any dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED — Residential structures in which the owner does
not occupy all housing units contained in the structure and/or structures
where the owner is receiving less than 100% homestead credit on the
homestead property list of the City Assessor. It shall be prima facie evidence
of non-owner-occupied housing if such housing is not on the homestead
property list of the City Assessor.129
RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT — A natural person designated by the
owner, in writing, by all owners and the responsible local agent who has
authorization to control and care for the housing subject to the provisions of
this chapter to perform functions pursuant to this chapter on behalf of the
owner.
§ 202-3. Registration of housing property and dwelling units.
A. The owner of any housing shall register with the City of Roseville
Department of Buildings and Inspection each housing property and all
dwelling units contained within each housing property. Within 30 days
of the signing of a rental agreement or lease with an occupant who is a
non-owner, the owner shall submit an "Occupant’s Report" to the
assessing department. Such report shall contain the property location,
the contact information of the owner, manager, occupant(s), and the
start date for the term of the agreement. [Amended 1-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 1277]
B. Any owner of housing shall designate a person as the responsible local
agent who shall be legally responsible for operating the registered
housing property or housing unit(s) and shall also be responsible for
providing access to such premises for making the inspections necessary
to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter and all applicable
codes and ordinances adopted by the City of Roseville. No post office
boxes shall be accepted as a legal address.
C. A certificate of registration shall be issued by the City of Roseville
Department of Buildings and Inspection if the registration provisions of
this chapter are complied with. Registration forms shall be available at
the City of Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection with
instructions as may be provided by the Code Enforcement Official and,
at a minimum, shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
129. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "one- and two-family residential structures," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1252.
§ 202-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 202-3
201:482
§ 202-4. Certificate of compliance.
(2) The name and address of all owners of the property.
(3) The name, address, telephone number, date of birth and driver's
license number of the responsible local agent, who shall reside no
more than 25 miles from the City’s boundaries to accept process
and act as the landlord’s agent on all matters involving the
property. Said agent must maintain an office within 25 miles of the
City’s boundaries. [Amended 1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 1277]
(4) The number of units in each dwelling and the address of each of the
non-owner-occupied unit(s).
(5) The authorization appointing a responsible local agent signed by
both the owner and the responsible local agent.
(6) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the tenants in
each unit.
A. Certificate of compliance required. No person shall lease, rent or cause
to be occupied a housing unit required to be registered and/or housing
unless there is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the City of
Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection in the name of the
owner(s)/responsible local agent issued for the specific housing
property or housing unit. The certificate of compliance shall be
displayed in a conspicuous area in each dwelling unit at all times or in a
common area shared by all occupants of housing. Provided that the
housing unit or housing property is in compliance with this chapter
after inspection, the certificate of compliance shall be issued by the City
of Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection. A certificate of
compliance shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of
issuance. A certificate of compliance can be renewed by reinspection
only.
B. Certificate of compliance form. A certificate of compliance shall be
issued in such form and in accordance with such instructions as may be
provided by the City of Roseville Department of Buildings and
Inspection and shall include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner(s).
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the responsible local
agent.
(3) Identification of each housing unit or housing property approved
under the certificate of compliance.
C. Inspection requirements. All registered housing inspected for the
purposes of issuing a certificate of compliance shall be issued a
certificate of compliance if said property is in compliance with the
§ 202-3 NITROUS OXIDE, USE, POSSESSION AND § 202-4
201:483
Chapter 225, Property Maintenance, including all amendments, as
adopted by the Roseville City Council.
D. Revocation. [Amended 1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 1277]
(1) A certificate of compliance may be revoked by the City for any
violation of the provisions of the Code of Ordinances for the City of
Roseville, or the requirements of this chapter, including but not
limited to the following:
(a) Permitting an occupant to remain in a non-owner-occupied
housing unit which has failed an inspection for a period in
excess of 60 days.
(b) In the event an occupant is convicted of a third disruptive
conduct violation within a licensed year, the owner shall evict
the occupant and not allow the occupant to re-let the premises.
Failure to do so shall result in revocation.
(c) Failure to take corrective measures in response to an incident
of disruptive conduct after having received a "Disruptive
Conduct Report."
(d) If it is determined that the owner or responsible local agent has
misrepresented or withheld information on the application for
registration.
(2) Authority to revoke is vested in the City of Roseville Building
Department’s Director or his or her designee and shall be effective
immediately upon service of written notice. Service of that notice of
revocation shall be by either personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, upon the owner or responsible local
agent.
E. Conditional certificate of compliance. In the event, for any reason, an
owner requests that a certificate of compliance be issued prior to
complete compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and if the
absence of complete compliance does not, in the judgment of the Code
Enforcement Official, constitute a material health or safety hazard, a
conditional certificate of approval may be issued upon the condition
that complete compliance be achieved within a reasonable time
specified by the Code Enforcement Official, but not more that 90 days
for good cause. In the event of issuance of a conditional certificate of
compliance, the owner shall notify the City of Roseville Department of
Buildings and Inspection by or before the time period specified for
achieving compliance that compliance has been achieved. A certificate
of compliance shall then be issued if the Code Enforcement Official
determines compliance after inspection.
F. Bonds. The City of Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection
shall have the authority to require submission of a cash bond in the
amount not to exceed $1,000 as determined by the City of Roseville
§ 202-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 202-4
201:484
§ 202-5. Appeals.
§ 202-6. Transfer of ownership.
Department of Buildings and Inspection Director or his/her designee
prior to issuance of a conditional certificate of compliance, in the event
that the Department agrees to extend the time for compliance or in
the event that the inspection of the housing after the time set forth
for compliance has expired reveals that all deficiencies have been
corrected. The bond or any moneys deposited as same shall be refunded
within 30 days after the certificate of compliance is issued without
interest.
A. An owner shall have the right to appeal any order to repair, nonissuance
of a certificate of compliance or revocation to the Property Maintenance
Code Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the
Property Maintenance Code Board of Appeals within 14 days of the date
of the notice of defect/inspection report and shall detail the nature of
the appeal. The Board of Appeals shall thereafter convene within 14
business days for the purpose of hearing the appeal and shall render a
decision within five business days of the hearing. The Board of Appeals
shall be permitted, but not required, to inspect the subject premises
and defects. The filing of the appeal shall be construed as permission by
the owner for the Board of Appeals to enter the premises for such
inspection. A nonrefundable fee shall be paid at the time of filing the
appeal.
B. The owner of registered housing shall correct such deficiencies within
60 days of the date of notice of same or the decision of the Board of
Appeals. Failure by the owner to cause the housing unit or housing
property to be repaired or refurbished in compliance with the minimum
standards of this chapter as determined by the Code Enforcement
Official, after having received notice as provided herein and within the
time allowed for such compliance, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
A. Transfer of certificate of compliance. New owners of registered housing
shall register in their names, in accordance with this chapter, and apply
to have the certificate of compliance for each unit or property
transferred into the new owner's name within 10 days of the date of the
transfer of ownership. A fee shall be paid at the time of registering the
transfer.
B. Unlawful transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for any owner of
non-owner-occupied housing, subject to the provisions of registration,
who has received a notice of violation, to transfer, convey, lease or sell,
including sale by land contract, his/her ownership and/or interest in any
way to another, unless such owner shall have first furnished to the
grantee, lessee, vendee or transferee a true copy of any notice of
violation and shall furnish to the City of Roseville Department of
§ 202-4 NITROUS OXIDE, USE, POSSESSION AND § 202-6
201:485
§ 202-6.1. Non-owner obligations. [Added 1-27-2015 by Ord. No.
1277]
§ 202-7. Fee schedule. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
A fee shall be paid at the time of registration, payable to the City of
Roseville-Rental Registration Fund. Any fees payable pursuant to this
section are specifically earmarked for the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter. Inspection and registration fees are to be charged as provided
in Chapter 133, Fees, of the Code of the City of Roseville.
§ 202-8. Enforcement personnel.
Any City of Roseville Code Enforcement Officer, Department of Buildings
and Inspection official, employee of the Department of Public Works,
firefighter and police officer are authorized to issue appearance tickets to
those who fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
Buildings and Inspection a signed and notarized statement from the
grantee, lessee, vendee or transferee acknowledging their receipt of
such notice of violation.
A. Non-owners shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Occupants shall permit inspections by the Building Department
upon 24 hours notice, either written or oral.
(2) Occupants shall not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit others on
the premises to violate any federal laws, or state laws regarding the
illegal use, manufacture, or sale of narcotics, or unlawful use of
firearms. Misdemeanor and felony arrests shall be the basis for
immediate occupant eviction proceedings, or rental license
revocation.
(3) Occupants shall recognize all health and safety regulations, and not
disturb adjacent or nearby dwellings, neighbors, or property
owners.
B. Any police investigation of an alleged incident of disruptive conduct
(defined as any conduct, action, incident, or behavior perpetrated or
permitted by any occupant or visitor of a non-owner occupied unit that
violates City ordinances, state law or federal law), the police
department may prepare a “Disruptive Conduct Report” which shall be
forwarded to the Building Department or the City Attorney’s office for
review. The Building Department or City Attorney’s office shall forward
a copy of the report to the owner. Failure by the owner to take
corrective measures may result in revocation of the certificate of
occupancy.
§ 202-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 202-9
201:486
§ 202-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any owner of non-owner-occupied housing who fails to register his/her
property or units or who fails to obtain a certificate of compliance for each
property or unit or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I. Each violation for each property or unit shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 203
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances caused by dogs — See Ch. 75, Art.
II.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 179.
Littering — See Ch. 189.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 225.
Solid waste — See Ch. 285.
Sidewalk obstructions — See Ch. 290, Art. IV.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 336.
§ 203-1. Enumeration of public nuisances.
Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose
of the public, interferes with or destroys or renders dangerous any street,
highway or navigable stream, allows accumulation of junk or obnoxious
matters on private property or in any way renders the public insecure in
life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances
shall include, but shall not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any
provision of this chapter and the common and statute law of the state.
§ 203-2. Unsafe structures.
No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a menace
to the health, morals or safety of the public.
§ 203-3. Certain noises prohibited; exceptions.
A. Among others, each of the following acts is declared unlawful and is
prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal
device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other
vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another
vehicle is approaching apparently out of control or to give warning
of intent to get under motion or, if in motion, only as a danger signal
after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle
is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any
§ 202-9 NUISANCES § 203-3
203:487
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(2) Radio and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television,
phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with
such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling,
hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity.
(3) Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or the making of any
such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other
type of residence or of any person in the vicinity.
(4) Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a
loud and boisterous manner.130
(5) Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by
causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort
or repose of any person.
(6) Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give
notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger.
(7) Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively
prevents loud explosive noises therefrom.
(8) Construction noises. The erection (including excavating),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit is first obtained from the
Department of Buildings and Inspection.
(9) Handling merchandise. The creating of a loud and excessive noise
in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(10) Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker,
amplifier or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention.
(11) Noise or commotion in vehicles. To make a commotion or make
unnecessarily loud noises in vehicles, whereby the peace and good
130. Editor's Note: For additional regulations pertaining to noise made by vendors, see Ch.
219, Peddling, Soliciting and Transient Merchants, § 219-11.
§ 203-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 203-3
203:488
§ 203-4. Radio and television interference prohibited.
order of the neighborhood is disturbed or persons owning or
occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.
(12) Sound trucks. To operate or cause to be operated a sound truck
with radio or amplifier within the city without first having obtained
a permit therefor from the City Council.
(13) Sound systems in motor vehicles. To operate or permit the
operation of an electronically amplified sound system in or on any
parked or moving vehicle, including motorcycles and mopeds, so as
to produce sound that is clearly audible more than 50 feet from the
vehicle.131
B. Exceptions. None of the prohibitions herein shall apply to or be
enforced against:
(1) Any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an
emergency call.
(2) Necessary excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by
or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night when the
public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to
perform such work during the day.
(3) The reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loudspeakers in the
course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character.
A. No person shall maintain or operate any equipment, device, appliance
or apparatus in the city which generates or causes high-frequency
oscillations which interfere with radio or television transmitting or
reception, except that X-ray pictures, examinations or treatments and
diathermy treatments may be made if the machine or apparatus
therefor is equipped to avoid all unnecessary or unreasonable
interference and is not negligently operated.
B. The Building Director may act as radio inspector or designate a radio
inspector to investigate complaints of interference with radio and
television transmitting and reception. The radio inspector is hereby
empowered, upon presenting evidence of authority, to have a right of
access to any premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of
inspecting any equipment, device, appliance and apparatus, coming
within the terms of this chapter, to determine if such equipment, device,
appliance or apparatus complies with the terms of this chapter. No
person shall interfere with the radio inspector in making such
inspection nor refuse to allow the radio inspector to enter upon the
premises for such purpose.
131. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 203-3 NUISANCES § 203-4
203:489
§ 203-5. Deposit of offensive or unwholesome substances.
No person shall, within the limits of the city, by himself or herself or another,
throw, place, deposit or leave in any street, lane, alley or other public
place any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shavings, dirt,
rubbish, excrement, filth, unclean or nauseous water or liquor, hay, straw,
soot, offal, garbage or swill or any other article or substance whatever
which may cause any offensive, unwholesome or nauseous odor or endanger
the health of the public.
§ 203-6. Deposit of injurious substances.
No person shall, by himself or herself or by another, throw, place, deposit
or leave in any street, highway, lane, alley or other public place, or in any
private place or premises, any glass, broken or unbroken, or any metal,
stone, earthenware, tacks, cinders or other substances of a nature likely to
cause injury to travelers or pedestrians, automobiles, bicycles or vehicles or
to injure any horse or other animal or which might injure, cut or puncture
any pneumatic tire.
C. Whenever an inspection and test shall have been made by the radio
inspector and he or she shall find that such equipment, device,
appliance or apparatus is being operated in violation of this chapter, the
person responsible for such operation shall be notified in writing to
discontinue the use of such equipment, device, appliance or apparatus
or to make additions, repairs or modifications thereof in order that the
same may be operated in a manner which complies with the provisions
of this chapter. Such notice may be given personally to said person or by
registered mail addressed to said person. In the event that said person,
within 48 hours after receipt of such notice to repair or discontinue the
use of said equipment, device, appliance or apparatus, shall not
discontinue its use or repair the same so that it complies with this
chapter, he or she shall be deemed to be operating the same in violation
thereof.
D. The operation of any machine, mechanical device, electrical device or
thing that interferes with or causes static in the operation of the police
radio system is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The operator of
such machine or device shall immediately discontinue the use thereof
upon being notified of its interference with the police radio system and
shall not again place the same in operation until it has been repaired or
modified so as not to interfere with the police radio system.
E. The provisions herein contained shall not be construed as regulating
any equipment, device, appliance or apparatus used in interstate
commerce where the same is licensed or regulated by or under any Act
of the Congress of the United States.
§ 203-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 203-7
203:490
§ 203-7. Drainage of lands.
If any lands, excavations, cellar, vault, sewer, drain, place or premises
within the city shall be damp, unwholesome, offensive or filthy or shall be
covered during any portion of the year with stagnant or impure water or
shall be in such condition as to produce offensive exhalations, the Health
Officer or City Council may require the same to be drained, filled up,
cleansed or purified by the owner, occupant or person in charge of such lot,
premises or place.132
§ 203-8. Service of notice; failure to abate nuisance. [Amended
6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1018]
§ 203-9. Violations and penalties.133
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, in addition to the
remedies herein prescribed, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I. Each act of violation and every day upon which this
violation shall occur, after notice to abate the nuisance has been given, shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. When any officer of the city shall determine that there exists a nuisance
within the meaning of this chapter and Code, such officer shall order
such person or persons responsible for such nuisance to immediately
cease the activity causing such nuisance or to abate the nuisance in
accordance with the officer's requirements, or such officer shall cause a
notice to be served on the owner or occupant of the premises on which
said nuisance exists, requiring such person to abate said nuisance
within the time specified in the notice. Service of the notice shall be
made:
(1) By delivering the notice to the owner or occupant personally or by
leaving the same at his or her residence, office or business with
some person of suitable age and discretion.
(2) By mailing said notice by registered mail to such owner or
occupant at his or her last known address.
(3) If the owner or occupant is unknown, by posting said notice in some
conspicuous place on the premises for five days.
B. Whenever such person fails to immediately cease the activity causing
the nuisance or to abate the nuisance in accordance with any verbal
order or written notice, the city may do so, and the costs thereof shall
be charged against the owner or occupant as a special assessment.
132. Editor's Note: Former § 203-8, Privies, cesspools and vaults prohibited, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 203-7 NUISANCES § 203-9
203:491
Chapter 206
OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71.
Amusement devices displaying obscene
material — See Ch. 73, Art. II.
Offensive handbills — See Ch. 165, § 165-12.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 217.
Prohibited signs — See Ch. 264, § 264-9I.
§ 203-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 203-9
206:492
ARTICLE I
Conduct on Business Premises
[Adopted 9-24-1985 by Ord. No. 924; (Art. I of Ch. 206 of the 1984
Code)]
§ 206-1. Purpose.
This article prohibits only those activities which depict or describe sexual
conduct and applies to live, actual or simulated conduct, the showing of
films, television, slides or other electronic reproductions, in or upon a
business premises.
§ 206-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSCENE CONDUCT — Includes those activities depicting or describing
sexual conduct which, taken as a whole, appeal to the prurient interest in
sex, portraying sexual conduct in a patently offensive manner and having
no serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. The following will be
considered obscene:
§ 206-3. Obscene conduct prohibited.
No business located within the boundaries of the city and licensed by
the city shall allow obscene conduct, as defined in this article, upon its
premises.
§ 206-4. Nonrenewal or revocation of business or liquor license.
Violation of this article shall be cause to revoke the violator's business
license and/or to initiate proceedings for the nonrenewal or revocation of
the violator's liquor license.
§ 206-5. Violations and penalties.134
Any person found in violation of this article shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Patently offensive representations or depictions of ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
A.
Patently offensive representations or depictions of masturbation,
excretory functions and lewd exhibitions of genitals.
B.
134. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 206-1 OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY § 206-5
206:493

ARTICLE II
Entertainment on Cabaret Premises
[Adopted 9-24-1985 by Ord. No. 925; (Art. II of Ch. 206 of the 1984
Code)]
§ 206-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent the occurrence of potential
problems which are likely to arise when sexual conduct and nudity are
placed in close proximity with the serving of intoxicating beverages. This
article is written to prevent drunken disorderly conduct and to protect the
community from increased sexual misconduct that could arise. It is also the
purpose of this article to curb the use of sexual conduct and nudity as a
promotional tool for businesses serving food and drink.
§ 206-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CABARET — Any place where food and/or any type of alcoholic beverage
is sold or given away on the premises and where the operator or owner
thereof holds a yearly license from the state to sell alcoholic beverages by
the glass and where the patrons are provided with entertainment or space
for dancing.
NUDITY — Uncovered or less than opaquely covered postpubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the postpubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, the human male or female buttocks
or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. The female
breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the
areola only are covered.
OPERATOR — Any person licensed by the Michigan State Liquor Control
Commission, or such person's agent or employee operating any cabaret.
PERSONS — Any person, copartnership, firm, corporation, society, club,
association or other organization which engages in, sponsors or conducts
the operation of any cabaret.
§ 206-8. Certain entertainment prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article for an cabaret owner or operator to do
any of the following:
A. Allow nudity as defined by this article, such as but not limited to topless
or bottomless or totally nude waitresses, bartenders or barmaids,
entertainers (including dancers), impersonators or any form of
attraction or entertainment on the cabaret premises.
B. Allow the showing, placing, posting, exposing, exhibition or otherwise
displaying of materials containing nudity, as defined by this article, on
the cabaret premises.
§ 206-6 OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY § 206-9
206:495
§ 206-9. Nonrenewal or revocation of liquor license.
Violation of this article shall be cause to initiate proceedings for nonrenewal
or revocation of the violator's liquor license.
§ 206-10. Violations and penalties.135
Any person found in violation of this article shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
135. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 206-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 206-10
206:496
ARTICLE III
Public Nudity
[Adopted 8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 1060; (Ch. 207 of the 1984 Code)]
§ 206-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC NUDITY — Knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place,
or for payment or promise of payment, by a person, including but not limited
to payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's
genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering or a female
individual's breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and
areola. Public nudity does not include a women's breastfeeding of a baby,
whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the
feeding; material as defined in Section 2 of Act 343 of the Public Acts of
1984, being MCL § 752.362; or sexually explicit visual material as defined
in Section 3, Act 33 of the Public Acts of 1978, being MCL § 722.673.
§ 206-12. Public nudity prohibited.
No person shall engage in public nudity. No business establishment,
including but not limited to owners, officers and persons in charge of or
control of the premises shall permit persons to engage in public nudity.
§ 206-13. Aiding and abetting prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any other
person to appear nude in public.
§ 206-14. Violations and penalties.136
Any person found in violation of this article shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 206-11 OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY § 206-14
206:497
Chapter 211
PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
parking lots — See Ch. 71, § 71-6.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 213.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 340.
§ 211-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE — A building, shed or enclosure, or any portion thereof, in which
more than five motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, for
which any charge is made.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, motor scooter or other selfpropelled
vehicle not operated on tracks or from trolleys.
PARKING LOT — Any outdoor space or uncovered plot, place, lot, parcel,
yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where more than five motor
vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
§ 211-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a business of storing motor
vehicles on a parking lot or garage or to operate a parking lot in conjunction
with a commercial enterprise within the city, without first having obtained
a license therefor in the manner hereinafter set forth.
§ 211-3. Application for license.
Applications for licenses required by this chapter shall be made upon forms
provided by the Roseville Police Department, shall be signed and verified
under oath by the applicant if an individual and by a duly authorized agent
if a partnership or corporation and shall set forth the following:
A. If a person, the name and address of the applicant.
B. If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each
partner.
C. If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such
corporation was organized and, if a foreign corporation, the names of
the principal officers, directors and local representatives, their
§ 206-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 211-3
211:498
§ 211-4. License fee.
The license fee for the operation of a parking lot shall be as provided for in
Chapter 133, Fees.
§ 211-5. Employee identification cards; annual fee.
§ 211-6. Issuance of license.138
If, after an investigation by the Police Department, the City Council shall
be reasonably satisfied that the applicant has a good reputation and that
the statements set forth in the application are correct and if the proper fee
shall have been paid, the Police Department shall issue to the applicant a
license for a parking lot or garage, which license shall continue in full force
and effect until the first day of January following the issuance of the license
or until revoked by the City Council. The Police Department shall keep a
record of all applications and licenses issued.
residences and business addresses and whether authorized to do
business in the state.
D. A plot or drawing of said parking lot or garage, showing the location
and size of entrance and exit, kind of floor or ground surface, location,
size and construction of attendant's station and wall or barriers
surrounding said premises.
E. The hours for storage or parking of said vehicles and whether night
storage is to be maintained upon the licensed premises.
F. The hours during which parking attendants will be on duty.
G. A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for storing or parking of
vehicles.
H. Such other information as the Police Department may deem necessary
for the issuance of said licenses.
A. Every person owning or operating a parking lot or garage shall file with
the Roseville Police Department the name and address of each
employee employed at such parking lot or garage and shall obtain from
the Police Department a card showing the name and address of each
employee and the name and address of the operator of such parking lot
or garage at which he or she is employed. Such card shall be carried by
the employee at all times that he or she is on the premises and shall be
exhibited at any time on demand.
B. The annual fee for the issuance of each parking lot employee's
identification card shall be as provided in Chapter 133, Fees.137
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 211-3 PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES § 211-7
211:499
§ 211-7. License not transferable.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned or
used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued or at any location
other than the one for which it is issued.
§ 211-8. Revocation of license.
The City Council may revoke any parking lot or garage license if, upon a
hearing and investigation after at least 10 days' written notice of the time
and place of such hearing, the City Council finds that the licensee:
§ 211-9. Filing of schedule of rates.
Every licensee shall file with the Police Department, at the time of
application for license, a complete schedule of rates and charges to be made
for storing or parking motor vehicles on the premises to be licensed.
§ 211-10. Increase in rates.
No licensee shall make any charge for storing or parking any vehicle in a
parking lot or garage in excess of that set forth in the application for a
license unless and until the licensee has:
§ 211-11. Sign required.
A. Has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect statement in the
application.
B. Knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation
of any provisions of this chapter.
C. Has made any charge for parking or storing a vehicle other than those
set forth in the license application.
D. Knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation
of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny
or conversion of a motor vehicle or the operation of a motor vehicle
without the owner's consent, whether such licensee or other person has
been convicted of such offense or not.
E. The licensee fails to keep an attendant on duty during the times
specified on the application.
A. Notified the Police Department in writing of the new schedule of rates.
B. Posted signs showing such increase in the same manner and required
by § 211-11 of this chapter.
A. Rates; business hours. Each licensee shall maintain at each entrance to
such parking lot or garage a permanently affixed sign suitable to
apprise persons using same of the name of the licensee, the hours of the
day or night when such places are open for parking or storing motor
§ 211-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 211-11
211:500
§ 211-12. Refusal of vehicles prohibited.
No licensee shall refuse to park or store any vehicle for which there shall be
accommodation in such parking lot or garage on tender of the stated fee for
such parking.
§ 211-13. Claim checks.
§ 211-14. Bond or liability insurance.
vehicles, the rates charged and the closing hours of such parking lot or
garage. Where more than one rate is charged for parking, the figures
for each rate shall be of the same size and dimensions and such figures
shall measure not less than six inches in height and the letters and
figures indicating the closing hours shall be not less than six inches in
height. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the Building
Director or his or her authorized representative.
B. Day and night rates. Where separate rates or charges are made for day
parking and night parking, the night rate shall become effective at 6:30
p.m., and notice thereof shall be posted on the signs described in the
preceding subsection.
C. Height above sidewalk. All signs shall be erected at a height not less
than eight feet and not more than 12 feet above the sidewalk level and
shall not be erected in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or
confuse traffic.
A. When a vehicle is left for storing or parking, where a charge is made,
the licensee of the parking lot or garage, his or her agent, servant or
employee shall furnish the owner or operator of said vehicle with a
distinctive claim check which shall have printed thereon the full name
and address of the parking lot or garage and a number corresponding
to a coupon placed upon the vehicle and shall have written or stamped
thereon the date and license number of the motor vehicle. The licensee
shall not deliver any vehicle without the proper claim check being
presented or without satisfactory proof of ownership of said vehicle.
B. This provision shall not apply where vehicles are stored or parked on a
weekly or monthly fee basis.
C. It shall be unlawful to affix any parking coupon upon any vehicle so as
to obliterate in whole or in part any portion of the license plates on such
vehicle.
A. Every application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by a
bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by a bonding
or surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the penal
sum of $5,000, conditioned upon the payment by the licensee of any and
all final judgments for damages resulting to persons or property,
including the theft of any motor vehicle or any part or accessory
§ 211-11 PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES § 211-14
211:501
§ 211-15. Entrances and exits.
Each parking lot or garage shall have one common entrance and one
common exit, which may or may not be combined, and the operator of such
parking lot or garage shall keep such entrance properly attended at all
times during the period the parking lot or garage is in operation.
§ 211-16. Barriers required.
Except for places of entrance and exit, every parking lot shall be completely
enclosed by barriers constructed and maintained so as to withstand the
shocks and stresses to which they will normally be subjected by vehicles
using the premises and shall be of such height as to engage the bumper of
any motor vehicle parked on said lot so that no portion of the vehicles shall
extend over the property lines. When said lot abuts on a building, barriers
shall be erected as provided in this section to prevent motor vehicles from
striking such building.
§ 211-17. Maintenance and operation.
thereof, arising out of the operation or maintenance of any parking lot
or garage.
B. Such bond shall run to the city for the benefit of any person who may
receive injuries and for the benefit of any person, as defined in this
chapter, who may claim redress for property damage or theft resulting
from the operation or maintenance of such parking lot or garage. Such
bond shall remain in full force and effect for the full period of time for
which the license is effective.
C. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized
to do business in the state, conforming to the requirements of this
section, may be permitted in lieu of a bond; provided, however, that
where no charge is made, the City Council may waive the filing of said
bond.
A. Sidewalks. Every operator of a parking lot or garage shall keep the
sidewalk surrounding the premises free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow
and shall keep the sidewalk and driveways in a safe condition for the
travel of pedestrians.
B. Ground or floor space. The ground or floor space of each parking lot or
garage shall be macadam, cement or any like hard-top substance, with
dust-free surface.
C. Handbills. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute literature or
place handbills in or upon any vehicle while parked in a parking lot or
garage.139
139. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 165, Handbills.
§ 211-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 211-17
211:502
§ 211-18. Notification of Police Department of claims for loss or
theft.
Every licensee shall immediately notify the Police Department of every
claim made by reason of loss, theft or conversion or any damage or injury
to person or property from the operation of a parking lot or garage and
occurring during the hours said premises are regularly open for business.
The obligation created by this section shall not extend beyond the regular
posted hours of attendance as posted upon the premises and printed upon
the regular receipt furnished to the owner or person parking said vehicle.
§ 211-19. Notification of Police Department of unclaimed vehicles.
Every licensee shall immediately notify the Police Department, in writing,
of the license number, make and the name of the owner, if known, of
every vehicle left in a parking lot or garage for a period of more than 48
consecutive hours.
§ 211-20. Unauthorized use of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a parking lot or garage to make or
permit any use for any purpose whatsoever of any vehicle parked in such
place, unless the use shall have first been expressly authorized by the owner
or person having control of such vehicle. No licensee shall transfer or cause
to be moved or transferred any parked vehicle through or upon the streets
or alleys of the city without the written consent of the owner or person
having control of such vehicle.
§ 211-21. Vehicles not called for by closing.
When vehicles are not called for at closing time, the attendant shall leave
the keys and parking coupon for safekeeping at a place within a reasonable
distance of the parking lot or garage, with a responsible person whose name
and address shall be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.
D. Loading or unloading of vehicles. The loading or unloading of
passengers or drivers of vehicles across or upon a public sidewalk is
hereby expressly prohibited, and any operator or employee who, by
receiving or delivering vehicles other than within the property line of
the parking lot or garage, aids or assists in blocking any sidewalk or
street shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter.
E. Vendors prohibited. No licensee shall sublet, sublease or otherwise
permit any parking lot or garage or portion thereof to be used by any
vendor of goods, wares or merchandise or services for the conduct of
such vendor's business unless the same is conducted in a permanent
building or structure licensed by the city for that purpose.
§ 211-17 PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES § 211-22
211:503
§ 211-22. Fire protection.
Every parking lot or garage shall be equipped with proper fire extinguishing
apparatus subject to the approval of the Fire Department, and all vehicles
shall be so parked or stored that they may be reached readily in case of fire
or other emergency.
§ 211-23. Compliance required.140
All parking lots and garages licensed after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with all the terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 211-24. Violations and penalties.141
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 213
PARKING, OFF-STREET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking lots and garages — See Ch. 211. Zoning — See Ch. 370.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 211-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 211-24
213:504
ARTICLE I
Residential Property
[Adopted 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 834; (Art. I of Ch. 213 of the 1984
Code)]
§ 213-1. Parking spaces.
Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking bay,
driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the
premises they are intended to serve and shall be provided with asphaltic
or concrete surfacing and, further, shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 2006, Off-Street Parking Space Layout, Standards, Construction
and Maintenance, of the Roseville Zoning Ordinance No. 1009.142
§ 213-2. Parking in certain areas prohibited.
No persons shall park any motor vehicle in the front setback area of a
residential lot, or that area between the front of a building and the city
sidewalk of any residential lot, or that area of any residential lot between
the city sidewalk and the street, unless the motor vehicle is fully parked
on a residential off-street parking space as described above or as approved
by the Building Director. In no instance shall the requirement for hardsurfacing
of such parking spaces be waived.
§ 213-3. Violations and penalties.143
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-1 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 213-3
213:505
Chapter 215
PARKS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Board of Parks and Recreation — See Ch. 7,
Sec. 7.14.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beautification Commission — See Ch. 7.
Parks and Recreation Board — See Ch. 41.
Operation of snowmobiles — See Ch. 280.
Parks, playgrounds and public open
spaces — See Ch. 294.
Care of park trees — See Ch. 324, Art. I.
§ 215-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 215-2. Maintenance of park property.
No person in a park shall:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
DIRECTOR — A person immediately in charge of any park area and its
activities and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of
any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and
vehicles in the service of the city parks.
B. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. Buildings and other property.
(1) Disfiguration and removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables,
benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines
or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
§ 213-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 215-2
213:506
§ 215-3. Pollution of waters and dumping of refuse and trash.
No person in a park shall:
(2) Rest rooms and washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest
rooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person
over the age of seven years shall use the rest rooms and washrooms
designated for the opposite sex.
(3) Removal of natural resources. Dig or remove any beach sand,
whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs
or plants, down timber or other wood or materials or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or structure
of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or
run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such
lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
B. Trees, shrubbery and lawns.
(1) Injury and removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any
tree or plant; nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(2) Climbing trees, etc. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences or gun carriages or
upon any other property not designated or customarily used for
such purposes.
A. Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Refuse and trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on
the grounds thereof but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where
those are provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of
elsewhere.
§ 215-2 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 215-4
213:507
§ 215-4. Traffic regulations.144
No person in a park shall:
A. Motor vehicle laws. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the
state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of
vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this
chapter and other ordinances.
B. Enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all traffic officers and
park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed
to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the
highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance
with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary
regulations as may be issued subsequently by the director.
C. Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating
speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for
proper control and to safeguard life and property.
D. Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding
15 miles per hour, except upon such roads as the director may
designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel.
E. Operation confined to roads. Drive any vehicle on any area except the
paved park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may on
occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the
director.
F. Parking.
(1) Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with
the posted directions thereat and with the instructions of any
attendant who may be present.
(2) Full parking. Full park on the road or driveway at any time. In order
to enjoy some special natural scenic feature, vehicles may be
parked with the two right wheels near the right edge of the paving
for not more than 30 minutes. No stopping or parking is permitted
even briefly on the left-hand side of any road or driveway.
[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(3) Immovable vehicles. Leave any vehicle in the park anywhere with
one or more wheels chained or with the motor set in gears and
doors locked or in any manner fixed or arranged so that such
vehicle cannot readily be moved by hand.
(4) Night parking. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night without
lights clearly visible for at least one hundred feet from both front
144. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 340, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 215-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 215-4
213:508
§ 215-5. Recreational activities.
No person in a park shall:
and rear on any driveway or road area except legally established
parking areas.
(5) Emergency procedure. Fail to immediately notify an attendant of an
emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of
a tow truck, mechanic or other person.
(6) Double-parking. Double-park any vehicle on any road or parkway
unless directed by a park official.
(7) Muffler required. Fail to use a muffler to deaden the sound of the
engine in a motor vehicle.
A. Hunting and firearms.145 Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No
person shall use, carry, or possess firearms of any description, except as
otherwise permitted by law, air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows,
slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and
dangerous to human safety or any instrument that can be loaded with
and fire blank cartridges or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into
park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden. [Amended
1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 1232]
B. Picnic areas and use.
(1) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the
activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and
to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all.
Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
(2) Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces, together
with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of "first come,
first served."
(3) Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(4) Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles,
garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles
where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then
refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the
picnicker, to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
145. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 136, Firearms and Weapons; Ch. 174, Hunting.
§ 215-4 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 215-5
213:509
§ 215-6. Prohibited conduct.
No person in a park shall:
C. Camping. Camp in other than permanent cabins for organized camping,
provided by the director and used by groups of persons under adequate
supervision. No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other
temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any
person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or
special vehicle to be used for such purposes, such as a house trailer,
camp trailer, camp wagon or the like.
D. Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown
or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or
model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games, such as
football, baseball and quoits, is prohibited except on the fields and
courts or areas provided therefor. Roller-skating shall be confined to
those areas specifically designated for such pastimes.
A. Fireworks and explosives.146 Bring or have in his or her possession or
set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any
firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of
flammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such
area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes
any substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with
any other substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the
foregoing standpoints.
B. Domestic animals. Have been responsible for the entry of a dog or other
domestic animal into areas other than automobile parking concourses
and walks immediately adjacent thereto and in such other areas as may
be clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals
Permitted in This Area." Nothing herein shall be construed as
permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where
such animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate
leashes not greater than six feet.147
C. Reservation of facilities. Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or
loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section
thereof, which may be reserved and designated by the Board for the use
of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children seven years of age or
under. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
D. Alms. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private.148
146. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 146, Fireworks.
147. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 7, Animals, Arts. II and III.
148. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 219, Peddling, Soliciting and Transient Merchants.
§ 215-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 215-6
213:510
§ 215-7. Vending; advertising; signs.
No person in a park shall:
E. Fires.149 Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under
such regulations as may be designated by the director. No person shall
drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or
cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park area
or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
F. Closed areas. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall
any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
G. Games of chance. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
H. Going onto ice. Go onto the ice of any of the waters except such areas as
are designated as skating fields, and provided that a safety signal is
displayed.
I. Loitering, noise and disorderly conduct.150 Sleep or protractedly lounge
on the seats or benches or other areas or engage in loud, boisterous,
threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace.
J. Exhibit permits. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the
director he or she claims to have upon request of any authorized person
who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with any ordinance or rule.
K. Interference with permittees. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with
any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity,
under the authority of a permit.
A. Vending and peddling.151 Expose or offer for sale any article or thing,
nor shall he or she station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is
here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire by and under the
authority and regulation of the director.
B. Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way
to any article or service for sale or hire.
C. Signs.152 Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to a park.
149. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 94, Burning, Open.
150. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 191, Loitering; Ch. 217, Peace and Good Order.
151. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 219, Peddling, Soliciting and Transient Merchants.
152. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 264, Signs.
§ 215-6 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 215-8
213:511
§ 215-8. Operating policy.
A. Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, the park shall
be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours.
The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
therein for public information. All parks under the auspices of the Parks
and Recreation Board shall be opened at 7:00 a.m. each morning and
closed at 10:00 p.m. each evening, unless said activity is a scheduled
activity directly under the supervision of the Parks and Recreation
Board. [Amended 9-11-1985 by Ord. No. 923]
B. Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to
the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find
reasonably necessary.
C. Lost and found articles. The finding of lost articles by park attendants
shall be reported to the director, who shall make every reasonable effort
to locate the owners. The director shall make every reasonable effort to
find articles reported as lost.
D. Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the Department of Parks and
Recreation before participating in the following park activities:
[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(1) Reserving a baseball field, soccer field or football field for the
purpose of conducting a practice or game.
(2) Conducting any organized event that is sponsored by a group,
organization, corporation, club or individual.
(3) Conducting an event or activity that uses any inflatable game,
mechanical game or similar equipment (i.e., Moonwalk, Dunk Tank,
etc.).
(4) Reserving a park pavilion or erecting a tent or canopy.
(5) Any similar activity as those listed above.
E. Permit procedures.
(1) Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall
file an application with the appropriate director. The application
shall state:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
§ 215-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 215-8
213:512
§ 215-9. Enforcement.
(e) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(f) Any other information which the director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue hereunder.
(2) Standards for issuance. The director shall issue a permit hereunder
when he or she finds that:
(a) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park.
(b) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.
(c) The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(d) The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the city.
(e) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
(3) Appeal. Within three days after receipt of an application, the
director shall apprise an applicant in writing of the reasons for
refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to
appeal in writing within three days to the City Council, which shall
consider the application under the standards set forth in
Subsection E(2) hereof and sustain or overrule the director's
decision within 10 days. The decision of the City Council shall be
final.
(4) Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same
were inserted in said permits.
(5) Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by
any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or
persons to whom such permit shall have been issued.
(6) Revocation. The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit
upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause shown.
A. Officials. The director and park attendants shall, in connection with
their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 215-8 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 215-9
213:513
§ 215-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 216
(RESERVED)
Chapter 217
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Crimes — See Ch. 111.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Loitering — See Ch. 191.
Minors — See Ch. 197.
Possession and sale of nitrous oxide — See
Ch. 201.
Nuisances — See Ch. 203.
Obscenity and pornography — See Ch. 206.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 216.
Spray paint — See Ch. 286.
Tobacco — See Ch. 313.
§ 217-1. Disorderly persons.
It shall be unlawful in the City for any person to commit the crime of being
a disorderly person.
B. Ejection. The director and any park attendant shall have the authority
to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter.
C. Seizure of property. The director and any park attendant shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the
park, or used, in violation of this chapter.
A. Any common prostitute, any window peeper, any person who engages in
an illegal occupation or business, any person who is intoxicated in a
public place and who is either endangering directly the safety of
another person or of property or is acting in a manner that
unreasonably causes a public disturbance, any person engaged in any
indecent or obscene conduct in any public place, any vagrant, any
person found breaking into a public place, any person found loitering in
a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or
lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed, any person who
knowingly shall loiter in or about any place where an illegal occupation
or business is being conducted and any person who shall be found
jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place shall
§ 215-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 217-1
213:514
§ 217-2. Disorderly conduct. [Amended 12-27-2000 by Ord. No.
1144; 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 1161]
Any person or persons who shall make, excite, or assist in making or
exciting any noise, disturbance, contention, improper diversion, rout or riot,
in any tavern, store, grocery, manufacturing establishment, business place,
public street, public lane, public alley, public square, public park, public
building, or other public space in the City of Roseville, which unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of others, or by which the peace and good order of the City of
Roseville is unreasonably disturbed, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
Any person convicted of being guilty of disorderly conduct shall be punished
as hereinafter provided.
§ 217-3. Indecent or immoral conduct.
No person shall be guilty of using indecent or immoral language,
drunkenness or disturbing the peace nor be guilty of any indecent or
immoral conduct in any public street, lane, alley, square, park or space in
the city; and no person shall improperly, lewdly, wantonly or wrongfully
accost, ogle, insult, annoy, follow, pursue, lay hands on or by gesture,
movement of body or otherwise wrongfully molest any person in any public
street, lane, alley, square, park or space in the city.
§ 217-4. Beggars and vagrants.
Any person who, within the limits of the city, wanders about and begs in
the streets or from house to house or sits, stands or takes a position in any
place and begs from passersby, either by words, the exhibiting of a sign or
be deemed a disorderly person, and any person convicted of being
a disorderly person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Amended
4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 1161]
B. All able-bodied persons who, not having visible means of support, are
found loitering or rambling about or lodging or loitering in drinking
saloons, tippling houses, beer houses, houses of ill fame, houses of bad
repute, vessels, sheds or barns or in the open air, and not giving a good
account of themselves, all keepers or exhibitors of any gaming table or
device and all persons who, for the purpose of gaming or for the
purpose of watch stuffing, travel about or go from place to place, all
persons upon whom shall be found any instrument or thing used for the
commission of burglary or larceny or for picking pockets or locks or
anything used for obtaining money under false pretenses and who
cannot give a good account for their possession of the same and all
fortune-tellers shall be deemed disorderly persons and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as hereinafter provided.
C. Any person of sufficient ability who shall refuse or neglect to support
his or her family shall be deemed a disorderly person and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as hereinafter provided.
§ 217-1 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 217-4
213:515
by gestures, shall be deemed a beggar. Every person who wanders about
and lodges in outhouses, market places or other public buildings or places
or in the open air in the City and has no permanent place of abode or visible
means of maintenance shall be deemed a vagrant. Any person convicted
of being a beggar or vagrant within the meaning of this section shall, on
conviction, be punished as hereinafter provided.
§ 217-5. Interruption of worship services.
Any person who shall be talking, laughing or otherwise interrupt the service
of any place of divine worship shall be punished as hereinafter provided.
§ 217-6. Indecent exposure.
No person shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person in the
streets, lanes, alleys, markets or public places of the city; nor shall any
person make any indecent exposure of his or her person in an uncurtained
window or open doorway or any other place on private property where such
acts are intended to be and are seen by members of the public. Further, a
person will be found to have intended his or her act of indecent exposure
where that person exposes himself or herself at a time and place in which
a reasonable person knows or should know his or her act will be open to
public observation.153
§ 217-7. Obscene pictures and drawings.
No person shall show, sell, offer for sale, exhibit or distribute any indecent
or obscene picture, drawing, engraving, card, paper, book or pamphlet.154
§ 217-8. Assault and battery.
A. It shall be unlawful in the City for any person to commit an assault by
attempting or offering, with force and violence, to do corporal hurt to
another, with an apparent present means of carrying out the attempt.
B. It shall be unlawful in the City for any person to commit a battery upon
the person of another resulting in any injury whatsoever, be it ever so
small, actually done to the person of another in an angry, revengeful,
rude or insolent manner.
C. A person who assaults or assaults and batters an individual if no other
punishment is prescribed by law, shall be punished as provided in
§ 217-20 of this chapter. [Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 1085;
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1158]
D. An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse or
former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in
common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household, shall
153. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 206, Obscenity and Pornography.
154. Editor's Note: Former § 217-8, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125.
§ 217-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 217-8
213:516
§ 217-9. Resisting or obstructing officer in discharge of duty.
[Amended 11-28-1985 by Ord. No. 1073; 8-27-1996 by Ord. No.
1082; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1158;
8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1226]
§ 217-10. Petty larceny; larceny by trick.
be punishable as provided in § 217-20 of this chapter. [Added
8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 1085; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125;
3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1158]
E. A peace officer may arrest an individual for violating Subsections C and
D regardless of whether the peace officer has a warrant or whether the
violation was committed in his or her presence, if the peace officer has
reasonable cause to believe both of the following: [Added 8-27-1996
by Ord. No. 1085]
(1) The violation occurred or is occurring.
(2) The individual has had a child in common with the victim, resides
or has resided in the same household as the victim or is a spouse or
former spouse of the victim.
A. An individual who assaults, batters, wounds, resists, obstructs, opposes
or endangers a person who the individual knows or has reason to know
is performing his or her duties shall be punished as provided in § 217-20
of this chapter.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSTRUCT — Includes the use or threatened use of physical
interference or force or a knowing failure to comply with a command.
PERSON — Any of the following:
(1) A police officer of this state or of a political subdivision of this state,
including, but not limited to, the coroner, a motor carrier officer or
capitol security officer of the Department of State Police.
(2) A conservation officer of the Department of Natural Resources or
the Department of Environmental Quality.
(3) A sheriff or deputy sheriff.
(4) A firefighter.
(5) An officer duly authorized while serving or attempting to serve or
execute any such process, rule or order or for having served or
attempting to serve or execute the same.
(6) A court officer.
§ 217-8 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 217-10
213:517
§ 217-11. Malicious destruction of property. [Amended 6-10-1986
by Ord. No. 942]
A. It shall be unlawful in the City for any person to commit the offense of
larceny by stealing the property of another or any money, goods or
chattels or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill
of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate or any book of
accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due or to
be delivered or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or
any other valuable contract in force or any receipt, release or
defeasance or any writ, process or public record, if the property stolen
shall be of the value of $200 or less. [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord.
No. 1116]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who, with intent to defraud or cheat,
shall designedly, by color of any false token or writing or by any false or
bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by
spurious coin or metal in the similitude of coin or by any other false
pretense, cause any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or
mortgage any land or interest in land or obtain the signature of any
person to any written instrument, the making whereof would be
punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any money or personal
property or the use of any instrument, facility or article or other
valuable thing or service or, by means of any false weights or measures,
obtain a larger amount or quantity of property than was bargained for
or, by means of any false weights or measures, sell or dispose of a less
amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, if such land or
interest in land, money, personal property, use of such instrument,
facility or article, valuable thing, service, larger amount obtained or
less amount disposed of shall be of the value of $200 or less. [Amended
1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 1116]
C. Any person who shall be convicted of the crime of petty larceny or
larceny by trick shall be punished as provided in § 217-20 of this
chapter. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 3-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 1158]
A. It shall be unlawful in the City for any person to commit the crime of
malicious destruction of real or personal property, and any person who
shall willfully and maliciously injure or destroy the real or personal
property of another, if the damage resulting from such injury or
destruction is $200 or less, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
[Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 1117]
B. Any person who shall be convicted of malicious destruction of real or
personal property of a value of $200 or less shall be punishable as
provided in § 217-20 of this chapter. [Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord.
No. 1117; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
1158]
§ 217-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 217-12
213:518
§ 217-12. Harassment by telephone, telegraph or other
communications common carrier. [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No.
985]
§ 217-13. Drawing of checks without sufficient funds.
A. Any person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service
provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize,
frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person
or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the
following:
(1) Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in
the course of a telephone conversation.
(2) Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph
message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill,
has suffered death or has been the victim of a crime or of an
accident.
(3) Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between
a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and
other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by
telephone, thereby interfering with any communications service.
(4) Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone
conversation.
(5) Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking,
deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or
after the telephone call is answered.
(6) Making an unsolicited commercial call which is received between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this
subsection, "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call
made by a person or recording device, on behalf of a person,
corporation or other entity, soliciting business or contributions.
(7) Deliberately calling a telephone of another person in a repetitive
manner which causes interruption in telephone service or prevents
the person from utilizing his or her telephone service.
B. Any person violating this section may be punished as provided in
§ 217-20 of this chapter. An offense is committed under this section if
the communication either originates or terminates, or both originates
and terminates, in the City of Roseville and may be prosecuted at the
place of origination or termination. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1158]
A. Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make or draw or utter or
deliver any check, draft or order for payment of money to apply on the
§ 217-12 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 217-13
213:519
§ 217-14. Defrauding innkeeper.
Any person who shall put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe,
as a guest, and shall procure any food, entertainment or accommodation
without paying therefor, except when credit is given therefor by express
agreement, with intent to defraud such innkeeper thereof out of the pay for
the same, or who, with intent to defraud such keeper out of the pay therefor,
shall obtain credit at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe for such food,
entertainment or accommodation by means of any false show of baggage or
effect brought thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. No conviction shall be
had under the provision of this section unless complaint is made within 60
days from the time of violation thereof.
§ 217-15. Refusing fingerprinting; furnishing false information;
interfering with criminal investigation. [Amended 7-26-1988 by
Ord. No. 976; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1122; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
1158]
account or otherwise upon any bank or other depository, knowing at
the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker
or drawer has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other
depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its
presentation, shall, if the amount payable in the check is $50 or less, be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering
or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is received by
the drawee when presented in the usual course of business, shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of
insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository,
provided that such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee
thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest
fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or
order has not been paid by the drawee.
C. Where such check, draft or order is protested on the grounds of
insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be
admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest and shall
be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of
insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository.
A. Any person required to have his or her fingerprints taken under
Michigan law, who refuses to allow or resists the taking of his or her
fingerprints, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person must be advised
that his or her refusal constitutes a misdemeanor [MSA § 4.463(1)].
B. Any person who knowingly furnishes to any police officer, or other
official or employee of the City of Roseville authorized to enforce local
ordinances, a false information, including a false name, address, age or
date of birth, in connection with the investigation of the commission of
§ 217-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 217-15
213:520
any violation of this Code or any other city, state or federal law is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
C. Except as provided in this subsection, a person who is informed by a
peace officer that he or she is conducting a criminal investigation shall
not do any of the following: [Added 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 1251]
(1) By any trick, scheme, or device, knowingly and willfully conceal
from the peace officer any material fact relating to the criminal
investigation.
(2) Knowingly and willfully make any statement to the peace officer
that the person knows is false or misleading regarding a material
fact in that that criminal investigation.
(3) Knowingly and willfully issue or otherwise provide any writing or
document to the peace officer that the person knows is false or
misleading regarding a material fact in that criminal investigation.
(4) This subsection does not apply to either of the following:
(a) Any statement made or action taken by an alleged victim of the
crime being investigated by the peace officer.
(b) A person who is acting under duress or out of a reasonable fear
of physical harm to himself or herself or another person from a
spouse or former spouse, a person with whom he or she has
had a dating relationship, a person with whom he or she has
had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his
or her household.
(5) This subsection does not prohibit a person from doing either of the
following:
(a) Invoking the person's rights under the Fifth Amendment of the
Constitution of the United States or Section 17 of Article I of
the State Constitution of 1963.
(b) Declining to speak to or otherwise communicate with a peace
officer concerning the criminal investigation.
(6) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
DATING RELATIONSHIP — Frequent, intimate associations,
primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional
involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an
ordinary fraternization between two persons in a business or social
context.
PEACE OFFICER — Any of the following:
(a) A sheriff or deputy sheriff of a county of this state.
§ 217-15 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 217-15
213:521
§ 217-16. Trespassing. [Amended 12-27-2011 by Ord. No. 1248]
Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another
without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner
or occupant or agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person
being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart
therefrom by the owner or occupant or the agent or servant of either, who
shall, without lawful authority, neglect or refuse to depart therefrom, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punished by a fine not to exceed $500, and/or
jail time not to exceed 90 days.
SERIOUS MISDEMEANOR — That term as defined in Section 61 of
the William Van Regenmorter Crime Victim's Rights Act, 1985 PA
87, MCL § 780.811.
An officer of the police department of a city, village, or
township of this state.
(b)
(c) A marshal of a city, village, or township of this state.
(d) A constable of any local unit of government of this state.
(e) An officer of the Michigan State Police.
(f) A conservation officer of this state.
A security employee employed by the state under Section 6c of
1935 PA 59, MCL § 28.6c.
(g)
A motor carrier officer appointed under Section 6d of 1935 PA
59, MCL § 28.6d.
(h)
A police officer or public safety officer of a community college,
college, or university within this state who is authorized by
the governing board of that community college, college, or
university to enforce state law and the rules and ordinances of
that community college, college, or university.
(i)
A park and recreation officer commissioned under section
1606 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL § 324.1606.
(j)
A state forest officer commissioned under Section 83107 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA
451, MCL § 324.83107.
(k)
(l) An investigator of the State Department of Attorney General.
An agent of the State Department of Human Services, Office of
Inspector General.
(m)
A sergeant at arms or assistant sergeant at arms commissioned
as police officer under Section 2 of the Legislative Sergeant at
Arms Police Powers Act, 2001 PA 185, MCL § 4.382.
(n)
§ 217-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 217-17
213:522
§ 217-17. Illegal use of credit cards.
Any person who, for the purpose of obtaining goods, property, services
or anything of value, knowingly and with intent to defraud thereof, uses
a credit card which has been revoked or canceled by the issuer, as
distinguished from expired, and where notice of such revocation or
cancellation has been received by such person through registered or
certified mail or by personal service, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the
aggregate value of the goods, property, services or anything of value is $100
or less.
§ 217-18. Receiving and concealing stolen goods. [Added 6-27-2000
by Ord. No. 1139155]
§ 217-19. Embezzlement. [Added 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 1139156]
A. A person shall not buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the
concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or
property knowing the money, goods or property is stolen, embezzled or
converted. A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or
personal property or the agent, employee or representative of a dealer
or collector of merchandise or personal property who fails to
reasonably inquire whether the person selling or delivering the stolen,
embezzled or converted property to the dealer or collector, has a right
to do so or who buys or receives stolen, embezzled or converted
property that has a registration, serial or other identifying number
altered or obliterated on an external surface of the property, is
presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the
property is stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption is
rebuttable.
B. If the property purchased, received, possessed or concealed has a value
of less than $200, a person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days
and/or a fine of not more than $500.
A. A person who, as the agent, servant or employee of another person,
governmental entity within this state or other legal identity, or who, as
the trustee, bailee or custodian of the property of another person,
governmental entity within this state or other legal entity, fraudulently
disposes of or converts to his or her own use, or takes or secrets with
the intent to convert to his or her own use without the consent of his or
her principal, any money or other personal property of his or her
principal that has come into that person' s possession or that is under
his or her charge or control by virtue of his or her being an agent,
155. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 217-18, Violations and penalties,
as § 217-20.
156. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 217-18, Violations and penalties,
as § 217-20.
§ 217-17 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 217-19
213:523
§ 217-20. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125; amended 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1158]
Unless otherwise specifically provided in the violated section, any persons
violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days and/or fine of not
more than $500.
§ 217-21. Fighting on school property. [Added 2-9-2010 by Ord. No.
1234]
No person shall, while present in any building or on any property that
is owned, occupied, or otherwise used by a school, incite, participate, or
otherwise be involved in any fight or other physical confrontation with
another. This includes during and after school hours or other social or
sporting event hosted at any school. A person who violates this section is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more
than $100, plus costs. A second or subsequent violation shall result in a fine
servant, employee, trustee, bailee or custodian is guilty of
embezzlement.
B. An agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney at law,
collector or other person who receives or collects in any manner money
or other personal property that is partly the property of another person,
governmental entity within this state or other legal entity and partly the
property of the agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian,
attorney at law, collector or other person shall not embezzle,
fraudulently dispose of, convert to his or her own use or take or secret
with intent to embezzle, convert to his or her own use, the money or
personal property without the consent of the part owner of the money
or personal property.
C. Under this section, the failure, the neglect or refusal of the agent,
servant, employee, trustee, bailee or custodian to pay, deliver or refund
to his or her principal the money or property entrusted to his or her
care upon demand is prima facie proof of intent to embezzle.
D. In a prosecution under Subsection B, it is not a defense that the agent,
servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney at law, collector
or any other person was entitled to compensation out of the money or
personal property as compensation for collecting or receiving it for its
owner, but it is not embezzlement by the agent, servant, employee,
trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney at law, collector or other person to
retain his or her own reasonable collection fee on the collection or any
other valid interest he or she has in the money or personal property.
E. If the money or personal property embezzled has a value of less than
$200, a person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 93 days and/or a fine of not more than $500.
§ 217-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 217-21
213:524
up to $500, plus costs. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order
the person to perform community service.
§ 217-22. Deceased person's services. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
1245]
§ 217-23. Use of property other than intended. [Added 9-25-2012 by
Ord. No. 1254]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use real property, personal
property, a lot, parcel, building, or other structure other than intended or in
violation of the City of Roseville Code of Ordinances. The person violating
the provisions of this section shall be deemed to have committed a civil
infraction.
§ 217-24. Failure to return rented property. [Added 8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 1270]
A person to whom property had been delivered on a rental or lease basis
under a written agreement providing for its return on a date certain, who
did with the intent to defraud the lessor refuse or willfully neglect to return
the property after expiration of the time stated in the written notice mailed
by registered or certified mail to the defendant’s last known address, and
the property having a value of less than $200, shall be prohibited so long as
the notice provides for a description of the property, the date the property
was to be returned, and the location the property was to be returned to.
A. A person shall not do any of the following within 500 feet of a building
or other location where a funeral, memorial service, or viewing of a
deceased person is being conducted, or within 500 feet of a funeral
procession or burial:
(1) Make any statement or gesture or engage in any conduct intended
to incite or produce an imminent breach of the peace among
persons attending that funeral, memorial service, viewing, funeral
procession, or burial.
(2) Make any statement or gesture or engage in any conduct intended
to disrupt or disturb that funeral, memorial service, viewing,
funeral procession, or burial.
B. A person shall not intentionally obstruct, hinder, impede, or block
another person’s entry to or exit from a funeral, memorial service,
viewing of deceased person, funeral procession, or burial. This
subsection does not apply to a person conducting or assisting in the
conducting of the funeral, memorial service, viewing, funeral
procession, or burial.
§ 217-21 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 217-24
213:525
Chapter 219
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 103.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Handbills — See Ch. 165.
Ice cream vending vehicles — See Ch. 176.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Noise made by hawkers and peddlers — See
Ch. 203, § 203-3.
Vending and peddling in parks — See Ch. 215.
Temporary open-air sales — See Ch. 248, Art.
I.
§ 217-24 ROSEVILLE CODE § 217-24
213:526
ARTICLE I
Peddling
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 219 of the 1984
Code]
§ 219-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who goes about from place to place, traveling
by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other type of conveyance, selling or
offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, and includes hawkers
and hucksters.
§ 219-2. License required; exceptions.
§ 219-3. Application for license.
Application for a license shall be filed with the Roseville Police Department
in the form and manner required by such Department. Such application
shall contain, among other things, the following information:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler
without first having obtained a license from the Roseville Police
Department. No license shall be granted except upon approval of the
Chief of Police.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any
manufacturer, farmer, mechanic or nurseryman from selling his or her
work or production without a license.
A. The name and a description of the applicant.
B. The address (permanent and temporary) of the applicant.
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
D. If the applicant is employed, the name and address of his or her
employer, together with credentials establishing such relationship.
E. The length of time for which a license is desired.
F. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license number and other information that may be required.
G. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of filing such application, which photograph shall be two
inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
§ 219-1 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-3
213:527
§ 219-4. Investigation; issuance of license. [Amended 6-11-1985 by
Ord. No. 918]
§ 219-5. License fees.
Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay the fees
prescribed in Chapter 133, Fees, of this Code.
§ 219-6. Veterans; exemptions from fees.
H. The criminal record of the applicant. [Amended 6-11-1985 by Ord.
No. 918]
I. The names of two or more personal references who will certify as to the
good character and business responsibility of the applicant. [Amended
6-11-1985 by Ord. No. 918]
J. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any City ordinance and, if so, full
particulars as to the nature of the offense, the court before whom
conviction was had or a plea of guilty entered and the punishment or
penalty assessed therefor.
K. A statement by a duly licensed physician, dated not more than 10 days
prior to submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free
of any infectious, contagious or communicable disease. [Amended
6-11-1985 by Ord. No. 918]
A. The Roseville Police Department shall forward such application to the
Chief of Police who shall cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant's character and business responsibility. After such
investigation, the Chief of Police shall endorse upon such application
his or her approval or disapproval.
B. Upon the payment of the fee required in Chapter 133, Fees, of this
Code, the Police Department shall issue to the applicant a peddler's
license.
A. Any honorably discharged member of the Coast Guard, soldier, sailor or
marine of the military or naval service of the United States, who is a
resident of the state and a veteran of any war in which the United
States of America has been or shall be a participant, shall have the right
to hawk, vend or peddle his or her own goods, wares and merchandise
within the City by procuring a license therefor as herein prescribed.
Application for such license shall be made to the Roseville Police
Department in the form and manner prescribed in this article, and upon
presentation to the Police Department of a certificate of honorable
discharge from the Coast Guard, Army, Navy or Marine Corps of the
United States, which certificate shall show that the applicant is a
veteran of any war in which the United States has been or shall be a
§ 219-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-6
213:528
§ 219-7. Issuance of license plates and badge.
The Roseville Police Department shall issue to each licensee, at the time of
delivery of the license, two license plates for each vehicle to be used, and
a metal badge shall also be issued to each licensee hereunder. Such plates
and badges shall bear the words "licensed peddler," the term for which
the license is issued and the number of the license. License plates shall be
affixed to the front and rear or on both sides of the vehicle. The badge shall
be conspicuously displayed by the licensee on the front of his or her hat or
the upper portion of an outer garment at all times.
§ 219-8. Transfer of license or badge prohibited.
No license or badge issued under the provisions of this article shall be used
or worn at any time by any person other than the licensee.
§ 219-9. Operation from stationary locations and in congested
areas.
§ 219-10. Business hours.
No peddler shall engage in any business, or make any call for business
purposes, before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. or sundown,
whichever first occurs.
§ 219-11. Use of sound devices or flashing lights.
participant, a veteran's license shall be issued to the applicant without
cost.
B. Any person exempt by law from the payment of license fees as
prescribed herein shall comply with all other provisions of this article,
and upon submission of satisfactory evidence to the Roseville Police
Department of such exemption, the Police Department shall issue to
such applicant a license without requiring the payment of any fee, and
the Police Department shall indicate upon the face of the license that
same was issued pursuant to such exemption without any fee being paid
therefor.
A. No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall he or she be permitted a stationary location.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to operate in a congested area
where such operations might impede traffic or inconvenience the
public.
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any person in his or her behalf,
to shout, cry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including
loudspeakers or sound amplifiers, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks
or other public places of the City or upon any private premises for the
§ 219-6 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-11
213:529
§ 219-12. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
§ 219-13. Appeals procedure. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person aggrieved by the Chief of Police or designee in the denial or
revocation of a license may, within 10 days, file a written request for a
hearing with the City Manager. The City Manager shall set a time and place
for a hearing, and notice thereof shall be given to the appellant. Upon such
hearing, the City Council shall determine whether the license should be
denied or revoked, and such determination shall be final and conclusive.
§ 219-14. Display of license upon request.
purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise
which the licensee proposes to sell.157
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any person in his or her behalf,
to use or employ any flashing lights on any vehicle or any other device
for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell.
A. A license may be denied any applicant by the Roseville Police
Department, and any license may be suspended or revoked by the City
Manager, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made when engaging
in business as a peddler.
(3) Any violation of this article or of any other ordinance of the city.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
B. Whenever the Chief of Police or designee shall deny or revoke any
license, a notice specifying the cause of such denial or revocation shall
be given to the applicant or licensee. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 1125]
A. It shall be the duty of any police officer to require any person observed
engaged in the business of peddling to exhibit his or her license and to
otherwise enforce the provisions of this article.
157. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 203, Nuisances, § 203-3.
§ 219-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-14
213:530
§ 219-15. Maintenance of records.
The Roseville Police Department shall maintain a record of each license
issued hereunder and shall indicate therein all reports of violation.
§ 219-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-11-1985 by Ord. No.
918; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to exhibit his or her license,
upon request, to any private citizen or police officer.
§ 219-14 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-16
213:531

ARTICLE II
Soliciting and Canvassing
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 219 of the 1984
Code]
§ 219-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any individual, whether a resident of the
City or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from
street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for
future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of
the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments
on such sales or not, including any person who, for himself or herself or for
another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent,
railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment or shop or any
other place within the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery. The provisions of this definition shall not
apply to any established society, labor union, association or corporation that
is organized and operated exclusively for any educational, philanthropic,
benevolent, fraternal, charitable or reformatory purpose, not operated for
pecuniary profits, where no part of the net earnings of which inures to
the benefit of any person, private shareholder or individual and where
the solicitation of such organization shall be conducted by members or
officers thereof voluntarily and without remuneration for such solicitation
or where such solicitation may be in the form of collections or contributions
at the regular exercises of any church, religious society, lodge, labor union,
benevolent order or fraternity or similar organization or any branch thereof.
§ 219-18. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in such business
within the City without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 219-19. Application for license.
Applicants for a license under this article shall file with the Roseville Police
Department a sworn application in the form and manner required by such
Department, which shall state the following information:
A. The name and a description of the applicant.
B. The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
§ 219-17 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-19
213:533
§ 219-20. License fees.
Each applicant for a license shall, at the time of making such application,
pay the license fees specified in Chapter 133, Fees, of this Code.
§ 219-21. Veterans; exemptions from fees.
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
E. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
F. The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such
goods or products are located at the time said application is filed and
the proposed method of delivery.
G. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches
by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in
a clear and distinguishing manner.
H. The names of two or more personal references who will certify as to the
good character and responsibility of the applicant. [Amended
4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 1160]
I. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
A. Any honorably discharged member of the Coast Guard, soldier, sailor or
marine of the military or naval service of the United States, who is a
resident of the state and veteran of any war in which the United States
of America has been or shall be a participant, shall have the right to
take orders for or sell his or her own goods, wares and merchandise
within the City by procuring a license therefor as herein prescribed.
Application for such license shall be made to the Roseville Police
Department in the form and manner prescribed in this article, and upon
presentation to the Police Department of a certificate of honorable
discharge from the Coast Guard, Army, Navy or Marine Corps of the
United States, which certificate shall show that the applicant is a
veteran of any war in which the United States has been or shall be a
participant, a veteran's license shall be issued to the applicant without
cost.
B. Any person exempt by law from the payment of license fees as
prescribed herein shall comply with all other provisions of this article,
and upon submission of satisfactory evidence to the Roseville Police
Department of such exemption, the Police Department shall issue to
§ 219-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-21
213:534
§ 219-22. Investigation; issuance of license.
§ 219-23. Filing of surety bond. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Every applicant not a resident of the City or who, being a resident of the
city, represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside
of the state shall file with the Roseville Police Department a surety bond,
running to the city, in the amount provided in Chapter 133, Fees, with
surety acceptable and approved by the City Manager, conditioned that said
applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the
City and the statute of the state regulating and concerning the business
of solicitor and guaranteeing to any citizen of the City that all money paid
as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the
representations of the solicitor and further guaranteeing to any citizen of
the City doing business with said solicitor that the property purchased will
be delivered according to the representations of said solicitor. Action on
such bond may be brought in the name of the City to the use or benefit of
the aggrieved person.
such applicant a license without requiring the payment of any fee, and
the Police Department shall indicate upon the face of the license that
same was issued pursuant to such exemption without any fee being paid
therefor.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Chief of Police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character to be made as he or she deems necessary
for the protection of the public welfare.
B. If as a result of such investigation the character and the business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on the application his or her approval and shall
return said application to the Police Department, which shall issue a
license to such applicant. Such license shall contain the signature and
seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and
photograph of said licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of
goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of
issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as
the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in such soliciting or canvassing. The Police Department shall keep
a permanent record of all licenses issued.
C. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility appears to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall
endorse on such application his or her disapproval, which shall be
submitted, along with the results of the investigation, to the Police
Department, which shall not issue such license.
§ 219-21 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-24
213:535
§ 219-24. Display of license upon request.
It shall be the duty of any police officer to require any person seen soliciting
or canvassing and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to
produce the solicitor's or canvasser's license, and to enforce the provisions
of this article against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 219-25. Business hours. [Amended 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1157]
No solicitor or canvasser shall engage in business before the hour of 9:00
a.m. or after sundown.
§ 219-26. Maintenance of records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Police Department all convictions for
violation of this article, and the Police Department shall maintain a record
for each license issued and record the reports of violations therein.
§ 219-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
§ 219-24 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-27
213:536
ARTICLE III
Transient Merchants
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 322 of the 1984 Code;
amended in its entirety 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1044]
§ 219-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
ESTABLISHED MERCHANT — A person, partnership, corporation or such
other entity which has an ongoing business of selling and/or delivering
goods and/or services, or both, within the City from a fixed location within
a permanent structure, with valid and current licenses and approvals as
otherwise required pursuant to state, federal and local laws.
OPEN-AIR SALE — The sale of any goods where the goods are not sold from
a permanent or temporary structure, excluding door-to-door sales.
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from place to place by foot or any
other mode of transportation, selling and delivering goods. This definition
includes persons who sell entirely through the stock of goods on hand or the
sale of goods through samples. Peddlers shall not be considered and defined
as transient merchants unless offering goods for sale from property upon
which a temporary or permanent structure is situated and not meeting the
definition of "established merchant."
PERMANENT STRUCTURE — A structure designed and intended to exist
at a fixed location for an indefinite time. When determining whether a
structure is permanent or temporary, the following factors, along with other
relevant information, shall be considered:
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure either not designed or intended
to exist at a fixed location for an indefinite time, including but not limited to
tents, stands and booths.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person other than an established
merchant, whether acting as owner, agent, consignee or employee, who
engages in the business of selling and delivering goods within the city.
Included are persons who sell entirely through the stock of goods on hand
A. The mobility of the structure.
The ability to use the facility during various seasons and in various
types of weather.
B.
The tax assessment upon the location and whether such assessment
reflects the existence of the structure.
C.
D. The type and quality of materials used to construct the structure.
The duration of time a structure has been physically in place at the
location.
E.
F. Whether site plan approval is required for such structure.
§ 219-28 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-28
213:537
or who sell goods through samples. Peddlers shall not be considered and
defined as transient merchants unless offering goods for sale from property
upon which a temporary or permanent structure is situated and not meeting
the definition of "established merchant."
§ 219-29. License required; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in such
business without first obtaining a license therefor.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person selling goods,
wares or merchandise of any description exclusively raised, produced
or manufactured by the individual offering the same for sale at the
location where raised, produced or manufactured nor to any person
handling vegetables, fruits or perishable farm products at any
established City market.
C. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person engaged in
the sale of goods in association with a temporary fair, festival or similar
event sponsored by a nonprofit, charitable organization within the city.
All such persons engaged in such activity, nonetheless, shall be
required to submit a statement outlining the duration of the charitable
event, the method for handling parking, pedestrian traffic, sanitary
disposal and other matters as reasonably required by the City Council.
Approval by the City Council shall be required prior to engaging in any
activity pursuant to this subsection.
D. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person engaged in
the sale of goods in association with a large-scale special event. The
City shall have the right to assign the administration of the application
process, as well as the collection of the appropriate fees, to a
responsible third party in the case of a large-scale special event. The
responsible third party shall provide to the City the original application
form for each transient or established merchant, required support
documentation, such as insurance and permits, applicable transient
merchant permit fee and a comprehensive list of all special event
transient merchants a minimum of five working days prior to the special
event. Upon final review by the Chief of Police of the application, a
blanket permit shall be issued to cover the transient merchants in
compliance with the applicable sections of the City Code involving the
special event. Approval by the City Council shall be required prior to
engaging in any activity pursuant to this subsection. Such persons
engaged in such activity shall be required to submit the method for
handling parking, pedestrian traffic, security, waste disposal, sanitary
disposal, and other matters as reasonably required by the City Council.
[Added 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. 1267]
§ 219-28 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-30
213:538
§ 219-30. Open-air sales from temporary structures.158
Sale of goods in the open or from a temporary structure shall be prohibited
except under the following circumstances:
§ 219-31. Application for license for open-air sales.
A sworn application, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners
if a partnership and by the president if a corporation, with an attached
resolution authorizing the president to so sign, shall be submitted to the
Roseville Police Department, including the following:
A. The proprietor or owner of the business conducting such sales is an
established merchant.
B. An application in conformance with other provisions of this article has
been submitted and approved with all required fees fully paid and other
requirements fully complied with, including complete plans submitted
and approved.
C. Christmas tree sales shall be permitted as outdoor sales if conducted by
an established merchant upon his/her own property or if conducted by a
transient merchant licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article.
The provisions of § 219-31C shall not be required.159
D. Sales incidental to any festival conducted by a bona fide charitable
institution shall be exempt, provided that Council approval is requested
and obtained prior to undertaking such sales pursuant to § 219-29C.
E. Sales incidental to any large-scale special event shall be exempt,
provided that City Council approval is requested and obtained prior to
undertaking such sales pursuant to § 219-29D. [Added 5-13-2014 by
Ord. No. 1267]
A. The name, permanent address, date of birth and social security number
of all persons having management or supervision of the applicant's
business and an explanation of the capacity in which such person will
act and, in the event of any agency relationship, the name and address
of the principal on whose behalf the agent will act.
B. Fingerprints of each person having management or supervision or
other evidence which establishes, to the satisfaction of the Police Chief
or designee, the good character and business responsibility of such
person.
C. The location or locations in the City where it is proposed to carry on the
applicant's business and the length of time during which it is proposed
that said business shall be conducted.
158. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 248, Sales, Special, Art. I, Temporary Open-Air Sales.
159. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 103, Christmas Tree Sales.
§ 219-30 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-31
213:539
§ 219-32. Application for open-air sales by established merchant.
An application for a license for open-air sales by an established merchant
shall include the following information:
D. A copy of the proposed identification card in the form and manner as
approved by the Police Department to be displayed by all persons
carrying on such business.
E. All addresses where the business or any similar business has been
conducted by the applicant, or proprietor if the applicant is acting as an
agent, within the 12 months prior to the application; and the
anticipated permanent address of the applicant, or proprietor if such
applicant is an agent, for the following six months after the expected
business will be concluded.
F. A statement of the nature, character and quality of merchandise to be
sold, including whether the same will be sold from stock or by taking
orders for future delivery, where the goods or products proposed to be
sold are manufactured or produced and where such goods and products
are located at such time such application is filed.
G. A statement as to the nature of advertising done or proposed to be
done, including copies of all proposed handbills, circulars or newspaper
advertising.160
H. A statement as to whether the person having management or
supervision or any other persons conducting sales have been convicted
of a crime and, if so, setting forth the nature of such offense and the
punishment assessed therefor.
I. Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
persons having the management or supervision or involved in sales,
including the business or method or plan of doing business, as the
Police Department may deem proper to fulfill the purposes of this
article.
A. A sworn statement as to the business entity which will conduct
business, which in all cases shall be a business entity in which the
established merchant is the principal shareholder, partner or in a sole
ownership over.
B. Verification that the business is adjacent to the business qualifying the
applicant as an established merchant.
C. Verification that the merchandise to be sold is merchandise of an
identical kind and character or substantially kind and character to the
merchandise sold by the established merchant as part of its ongoing
adjacent business representing at least 10% of the sale revenues within
the preceding 12 months.
160. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 165, Handbills.
§ 219-31 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-32
213:540
§ 219-33. Time limit for application.
All applications shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to the issuance of
any license. An application shall be considered as submitted only when all
required information, fees and attachments have been received.
§ 219-34. Investigation; issuance of license.
§ 219-35. Duration of license.
Each license issued shall correspond to the proposed dates for such openair
sales and in no case shall exceed one year.
§ 219-36. Surety bond. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Prior to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall file with the Roseville
Police Department a surety bond or case bond in the sum as provided
D. A scale drawing setting forth the dimensions of the area within which
merchandise shall be sold, including typical detail of any temporary
structures, including but not limited to tents, stands and signs, and
denoting all parking spaces.
A. Upon receipt of any application, the Roseville Police Department shall
cause an investigation of such person's business responsibility and
moral character as necessary for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. Conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor involving
dishonesty or moral turpitude, the revocation or nonissuance of similar
licenses in other communities, the existence of outstanding unsatisfied
judgments involving allegations of fraud, misrepresentation, conversion
or other similar claims or judicial or administrative decisions finding
fraud, dishonesty, conversion, misappropriation or wrongdoing of a
similar nature shall be a basis for denial. If such character and business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be
denied.
B. Where an application involves a request for open-air sales, such
application shall be referred for review and comment by the Building
Director, who shall determine whether the proposed open-air sales shall
be no less detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing
allowable use, including reviewing pedestrian and vehicular traffic and
safety, parking, noise and lighting and whether the proposed use is in
harmony with the appearance of the adjacent business and surrounding
area. The Building Director may impose reasonable conditions which
the permit issued shall be subject to.
C. The Police Department shall keep a full record at its office of all licenses
issued. The license issued shall contain the number of the license, date
issued, date of expiration, nature of business authorized to be carried
on and the amount of the license fee paid in the place of business where
said business may be carried on under said license.
§ 219-32 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-36
213:541
in Chapter 133, Fees. Such bond shall be approved by the City Attorney
conditioned that such applicant shall comply fully with all provisions of
the ordinances of the City and all other applicable laws and shall pay
all judgments rendered against such applicant for any violation of such
ordinances or statutes, together with all judgments and costs that may be
recovered against him or her by any person for damage growing out of any
misrepresentation or deceptive practice by owners, agents or employees at
any time while conducting business pursuant to the license, whether such
business is within or without the scope of employment. Action on the bond
may be brought in the name of the City to the use of the aggrieved party.
§ 219-37. Appointment of City to receive process.
Each applicant prior to the issuance of a license shall file with the Roseville
Police Department an instrument nominating and appointing the Police
Department true and lawful agent with full power and authority to
acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of said applicant
with respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business
transacted under said license and the bond provided pursuant to this
article, including performance of the condition of said bond or any breach
thereof. The bond provided shall provide an acknowledgment of service
and consent to service upon the Police Department waiving all claim or
right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of
service. Upon receipt of process, the Police Department shall forward to the
licensee, at the address provided, by registered mail, a copy of such process
received.
§ 219-38. Posted of license; wearing of identification.
Where a license is issued permitting open-air sales, the license shall be
posted conspicuously in the licensed premises. All transient merchants,
their agents and employees shall wear, in a conspicuous place upon their
person, identification in a form and manner as approved by the Police
Department.
§ 219-39. License fee.
Each applicant for a license shall at the time of his or her application pay a
fee as specified in Chapter 133, Fees, of the Code.
§ 219-40. Sound devices prohibited.
No licensee nor anyone on such licensee's behalf shall shout, make any
outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device, including
any loudspeaker, radio or amplifying system, upon any streets, alleys, parks
or other public places in the City or upon any private premises in the City
where sound emitted or produced is capable of being plainly heard upon the
streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places or upon any adjoining
private property for the purpose of attracting any attention to any goods,
§ 219-36 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-40
213:542
wares or merchandise which the licensee or anyone acting on his/her behalf
proposed to sell.161
§ 219-41. Enforcement.
The Building Director and Chief of Police and their designees may enter the
premises of any business licensed pursuant to this article for the purpose
of ascertaining the manner in which such business is conducted and to
investigate complaints and shall at all times have access to the books and
records of any such business. As a cumulative enforcement remedy, police
officers, Code Enforcement Officers and designees of the Building Director
shall have authority to issue appearance tickets.
§ 219-42. Maintenance of records.
The Roseville Police Department shall maintain a record of fingerprints
of licensees, together with license numbers, with the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police shall report to the Police Department, and to the Building
Department where applicable, any complaints against any licensee and any
conviction for violation of this article. The Police Department, and where
applicable the Building Department, shall keep a record of all such licensees
and of complaints and violations.
§ 219-43. Revocation of license; notice and hearing.
A. The license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the City
Manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation, false or erroneous statement or
information contained in the application for license.
(2) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of this article or any other provisions
of the Code of the City of Roseville.
(4) Conviction of the licensee, or any person having management or
supervision of the licensee's business, of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving dishonesty.
(5) Failure to maintain the required bond for operating or participating
in the operation of any business subject to licensing pursuant to
this article in an unlawful manner.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and
manner and place for hearing. Such notice shall be mailed postage
prepaid to the licensee at his or her last-known address at least five
days prior to the date set for hearing.
161. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 203, Nuisances, § 203-3.
§ 219-40 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-43
213:543
§ 219-44. Appeals procedure.
§ 219-45. Compliance with applicable zoning requirements.
Any person conducting open-air sales shall comply with all provisions of the
Zoning Code pertaining to open sales.162
§ 219-46. Nuisance per se.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to
be committing a nuisance per se subject to abatement and injunctive relief.
§ 219-47. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
C. The City Manager may upon hearing revoke the license, suspend the
license for any period of time with or without conditions or impose
further additional conditions upon the continued issuance of the
license.
A. Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of an application or imposition of
conditions for a license shall appeal by filing with the License Appeal
Board, within 10 days after denial of such application, a written
statement claiming an appeal and setting forth the grounds for appeal.
The License Appeal Board shall set the date, time and place for hearing
on such appeal providing notice by mailing the same by first-class mail
to the last-known address of the applicant. The decision of the License
Appeal Board shall be final.
B. In connection with the revocation or suspension of a license, the right of
appeal shall be to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing a
written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal with the office of
the City Clerk within 10 days from the date of mailing of the notice of
the decision by the City Manager to the licensee or affected person. The
City Council shall set the time and place for hearing on such appeal and
provide notice by mailing of the same by first-class mail to the lastknown
address of the licensee.
162. Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the office of the City Clerk; see Ch. 370.
§ 219-43 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-47
213:544
ARTICLE IV
Charitable and Civic Organization Solicitation on Roadways
[Adopted 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1299163]
§ 219-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context requires a different meaning,
the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed by this
section:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — A nonprofit person or entity which
establishes proof of identification as a charitable organization through
furnishing articles of incorporation, articles of organization, United States
or state tax returns and filings, registration as a charitable organization
with the State of Michigan, or other information as determined acceptable
by the Mayor demonstrating bona fide charitable purpose.
CIVIC ORGANIZATION — An organization organized and established as
a nonprofit entity for civic-related purposes which shall be established
through presentation of articles of incorporation, articles of organization,
bylaws, federal or state tax returns and filings or other information as
determined acceptable by the Mayor.
INSURANCE — General liability insurance of a minimum of $500,000 per
person per occurrence issued with the City of Roseville, its agents and
employees as additional named insureds, primary and noncontributory, with
a notice of cancellation or nonrenewal directed to the City of Roseville,
attention Mayor, such notice to be furnished at least 30 days prior to any
cancellation or nonrenewal.
ROADWAY — The area of a paved or unpaved private or public street,
highway or road designed for vehicular travel, generally including the area
from curb to curb, or if no curb is present, from outer edge of shoulder to
outer edge of shoulder.
SOLICITATION — To, by words or other conduct, request or invite the
receipt of money or other personal property.
STANDING — To remain within the roadway other than is reasonably
necessary to traverse across the roadway, or to complete activity within
an area of the roadway necessitated by an emergency such as a traffic
accident, mechanical breakdown, or other similar event.
§ 219-49. Location restrictions.
Solicitation or standing in the roadway within the City of Roseville is only
permitted at these intersections:
163. Editor's Note: Section 3 of this ordinance also provided that any entity, organization,
employee, or person who violates the terms and provisions of this article shall be guilty of
a civil infraction punishable by a fine of up to $500, plus costs, and that each instance of
solicitation or standing is considered a separate offense subject to penalties under the
provisions of Section 3.
§ 219-48 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-49
213:545
Southbound Gratiot at Utica
12 Mile and Utica, all directions
Northbound Utica at 13 Mile
Eastbound and westbound 13 Mile at Gratiot
13 Mile and Little Mack, all directions
Westbound 12 Mile and Little Mack
Southbound Little Mack at 12 Mile
§ 219-50. Permitted solicitation; frequency of solicitation or
standing.
Only charitable and civic organizations are permitted to solicit or complete
solicitation transactions within the roadway. Any charitable or civic group
may only solicit or stand at a permitted intersection on two occasions not
more than three consecutive days in each calendar year (365 days, January
1 through December 31). Only one charitable or civic organization shall be
permitted to solicit at a time.
§ 219-51. Required attire.
All persons engaged in permitted solicitation shall wear high-visibility
safety apparel meeting the current American standards promulgated by the
International Safety Equipment Association. Safety vests shall be rented
from the Department of Public Services with the payment of a refundable
deposit and fee established by City Council resolution as provided for in
Chapter 133. In the event that such persons are acting for or on behalf
of any entity or agency, lettering identifying such entity or agency upon
clothing, a hat, or any small container utilized by such individuals shall be
provided, legible from 20 feet.
§ 219-52. Reflective cones.
Such persons shall attempt to move off the roadway portion of the road
when traffic is moving and shall locate two highly reflective cones in the
center of the roadway and attempt to operate within that area when
engaged in activity and return off the traveled portion of the roadway
when not engaged in solicitation activity and traffic is moving. Traffic cones
shall be rented from the Department of Public Services with the payment
of a refundable deposit and fee established by City Council resolution as
provided for in Chapter 133.
§ 219-53. Solicitation by minors prohibited.
No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to solicit on behalf of any
charitable or civic organization.
§ 219-49 ROSEVILLE CODE § 219-54
213:546
§ 219-54. Objects carried restricted.
Persons shall only carry or hold a container of a small size, shape and
weight so as to not impede safe pedestrian and vehicular movement as
determined by the City Manager or his/her designee. Signs and other
objects are prohibited unless approved by the City Manager or his/her
designee.
§ 219-55. Approval required.
Persons and entities shall obtain the approval of the City Council who shall
require a name, address and phone number and who shall grant approval
unless such applicant has previously violated this article within the last two
years or such approval would allow for violation of sections of this article.
§ 219-56. Solicitation during adverse weather conditions
prohibited.
Solicitation shall not occur at any time rain or snow is falling, when snow
or ice is present upon the roadway or shoulder areas, or any time the City
Manager, or his/her designee, determines there are unreasonably adverse
weather conditions.
§ 219-57. Solicitation permitted during daylight hours only.
Solicitation shall occur only during daylight hours, which are defined to
mean 1/2 hour after sunrise and 1/2 hour before sunset based on published
sunrise and sunset times on the applicable day where solicitation occurs.
§ 219-58. Work zone solicitation prohibited.
Solicitation is not permitted within any work zone.
§ 219-59. Working traffic signals required.
Solicitation shall not occur at any permitted intersection where traffic
control devices are either not present or not functioning.
§ 219-54 PARKING, OFF-STREET § 219-59
213:547
Chapter 221
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Sewers — See Ch. 256.
Water — See Ch. 354.
§ 221-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Roseville, being marked and designated as the
International Plumbing Code, including Appendix Chapters A through G, as
published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the
code of the City of Roseville for regulating the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the
City of Roseville and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such International Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition, published by the
International Code Council on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
of Roseville are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this chapter.
§ 221-2. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1, insert: City of Roseville.
B. Section 106.5.2, insert: Chapter 133.
C. Section 106.5.3, insert: 75%; 75%.
D. Section 108.4, insert: misdemeanor; $500; 90 days.
E. Section 108.5, insert: $100; $500.
F. Section 305.6.1, insert: 24 inches; 48 inches.
G. Section 904.1, insert: 12 inches.
H. Chapter 14, Codes, insert:
(1) Michigan Building Code, 2000 Edition. [Amended 10-28-2003 by
Ord. No. 1184]
§ 219-59 ROSEVILLE CODE § 221-2
221:548
Chapter 224
PROPERTY
CHARTER REFERENCES
Sale of property for unpaid taxes — See Ch. 9,
Sec. 9.22.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and junk
dealers — See Ch. 179.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 336.
(2) Standard Gas Code 1994.
(3) International Mechanical Code 1996.
(4) State of Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services
Plumbing Code Rules, Part 7.
§ 221-2 PLUMBING § 221-2
221:549

ARTICLE I
Disposition of Unclaimed Personal Property
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 224 of the 1984
Code]
§ 224-1. Custody and disposal by Police Department.
The Police Department shall be charged with the custody of such personal
property, including unclaimed or confiscated personal property, goods or
money, as may come into its possession and shall dispose of such items,
except motor vehicles, as provided in this article.
§ 224-2. Property list.
The Police Department shall make a detailed list of all personal property,
including goods and money, delivered to its possession. Said list shall
include the name of the finder, date taken into possession by the Police
Department, whether it was originally recovered, the date of original
recovery and the final disposition thereof.
§ 224-3. Time limit for holding of property by Police Department.
[Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 1084]
Such personal property, including goods and money, shall be held by the
Police Department for a period of three months, during which time every
reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner thereof.
§ 224-4. Publication of notice of list of articles held. [Amended
8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 1084]
The Chief of Police shall, from time to time, publish a notice setting forth
that the Police Department maintains a detailed list of lost and found
articles and/or confiscated articles of personal property and that if such
personal property coming into its possession is unclaimed for a period
of three months, such property will be returned to the finder or sold at
public auction, according to this article. Said notice shall be published
by posting the notice in at least three public places within the City and
by publishing the notice by and through the community information cable
television channel for the City.
§ 224-5. Turning over of goods to owner or finder.
A. While the Police Department has custody of the personal property,
goods or money, and upon reasonable proof of ownership, such personal
property, goods or money shall be turned over to the claimant.
B. In the event that the personal property, goods or money is not claimed
by the owner during said three-month period, then said property shall
be turned over to the finder thereof, upon payment of the publication
fees incurred by the City Clerk. [Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No.
1084]
§ 224-1 PLUMBING § 224-6
221:551
§ 224-6. Auction.
§ 224-7. Filing of claims by owner after notice and sale.
A. If the owner of said personal property, goods or money has not made a
claim and said property, goods or money was found by a City police
officer, fire fighter or other City employee during the course of
employment with the City of Roseville or if the finder fails to appear 30
days after notice that said personal property, goods or money is
unclaimed, then, in the case of personal property and goods, the items
shall be sold at public auction. Unclaimed money shall be delivered to
the City Treasurer and deposited in the general fund. [Amended
3-22-1983 by Ord. No. 883]
B. All articles of personal property, goods and money, which have been
confiscated by the Police Department in a legal manner, shall be sold at
public auction or, in the case of money, delivered to the City Treasurer
to be deposited into the general fund.
C. The time and place for holding such auction shall be determined by the
Chief of Police, and notice thereof, together with the articles to be
disposed of at such public auction, shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City at least once seven days
prior to the date of the holding of such public auction. The articles shall
be sold to the highest bidder, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
accounted for and delivered to the Treasurer of the City, to be deposited
into the general fund of the City. The Chief of Police or designee shall
conduct such auction and shall make a true, complete and accurate
report of the conduct of such auction, which shall be entered in the
Police Department daily log book. Any property remaining after said
sale may be disposed of as directed by the City Council.
A. After notice and sale of the items sold at auction as provided herein, the
owner may file a claim and, upon proving ownership of said property,
shall be reimbursed by the City Treasurer the amount realized from the
sale less costs, provided that such a claim must be filed with the Police
Department not later than six months after said sale. The period and
provisions for claiming ownership hereunder shall apply to any money
retained by the City, but not to personal property, goods or money
turned over to finders as provided in § 224-5B.
B. The purchaser of any property sold at auction pursuant hereto shall
own the same free of any claims by the previous owner, who shall be
limited to filing a claim under Subsection A.
C. Except as provided in this article, no claim shall be valid to obtain any
money, nor other property recovered, after notice and sale as provided
in this section, said property and money being considered as abandoned
and belonging to the City.
§ 224-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 224-8
221:552
§ 224-8. Sale of goods which cannot be preserved; disposition of
proceeds.
Any lost, abandoned or confiscated property or goods which cannot be
properly preserved shall be sold as soon as possible, and the proceeds less
any costs of sale shall be accounted for and dispersed according to the
terms of this article.
§ 224-8 PLUMBING § 224-8
221:553

ARTICLE II
Stolen Property
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 224 of the 1984
Code]
§ 224-9. Receipt or possession.
A person who buys, receives, possesses, conceals or aids in the concealment
of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property, knowing the
money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted, if the
property purchased, received, possessed or concealed is of a value of $100
or less, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 224-10. Failure to make reasonable inquiry presumption of
knowledge.
A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal property
or the agent, employee or representative of a dealer or collector, who fails
to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering the stolen,
embezzled or converted property to the dealer or collector has a legal right
to do so, or buys or receives stolen, embezzled or converted property which
has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or obliterated
on an external surface of the property, shall be presumed to have bought or
received the stolen property knowing the property to be stolen, embezzled
or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proof.
§ 224-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this article shall be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 224-9 PLUMBING § 224-11
221:555

ARTICLE III
Shopping Carts
[Adopted 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 1298]
§ 224-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PREMISES — Shall be construed to include an adjacent public parking lot
to any shops, stores, grocery markets, self-service stores, or supermarkets
in the City.
SHOPPING CART — Any rolling or nonrolling container or basket made
of wire, metal, plastic, wood, or other material commonly used in shops,
stores, grocery markets, self-service stores, or supermarkets for
transporting merchandise and/or food items within the establishments and
from the business establishments to a motor vehicle or other building.
§ 224-13. Removal prohibited.
No person shall remove a shopping cart from the premises of any shop,
store, grocery market, self-service store, supermarket, or other business
establishment in the City, regardless of any intention to convert such cart
to his or her own use. No person shall use, possess, or abandon a shopping
cart that has been taken from a shop, store, grocery market, self-service
store, supermarket, or other business establishment, on a street, alley, or
other public place in the City.
§ 224-14. Abandoned shopping carts.
Any shopping cart found abandoned on a street, alley, or public place in the
City may be impounded by the Department of Public Services, the Police
Department, or other City department. The Department of Public Services
shall then notify the owner that the shopping cart has been abandoned
and is being stored at the Department of Public Services. Such shopping
carts may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of a fee as set forth in
Chapter 133 of the City of Roseville Code of Ordinances. Any shopping cart
not being retrieved for a period greater than 30 days of impoundment, or
notice if the owner can be determined, shall be deemed the property of the
City of Roseville and disposed of.
§ 224-15. Violations and penalties.
A person found in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by 93 days in jail and/or up to a fine of $500.
§ 224-12 PLUMBING § 224-15
221:557
Chapter 225
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Open burning — See Ch. 94.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 142.
Lawns — See Ch. 183.
Littering — See Ch. 189.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Nuisances — See Ch. 203.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 221.
Rodent control — See Ch. 244.
Sewers — See Ch. 256.
Solid waste — See Ch. 285.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 336.
Weeds — See Ch. 364.
§ 224-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 224-15
221:558
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Code
§ 225-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code by reference;
revisions. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1194; 7-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 1224]
§ 225-2. through § 225-200. (Reserved)164
A. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Roseville, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2009, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Roseville, in the State of
Michigan; for the control of buildings and structures as provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, and conditions in
terms of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009, and as
amended in the future, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other sections of the
chapter.
B. The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2009 Edition, and any amendments thereto, are hereby revised to
provide as follows:
(1) In Section 101.1, insert: "City of Roseville."
(2) In Section 103.5, insert: "See City of Roseville Fee Schedule for
appropriate fees."
(3) Revise Section 112.4 as follows: "Failure to comply. Any person who
shall continue any work after having been served with a stop-work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine up to
$500 or 90 days in jail."
(4) In Section 302.4, insert: "8 inches."
(5) In Section 304.14, insert: "April 1 through October 31."
(6) In Section 602.3, insert: "January 1 through December 31."
(7) In Section 602.4, insert: "January 1 through December 31."
164. Editor's Note: Former § 225-2 through § 225-200 were repealed 4-11-2017 by Ord. No.
1296.
§ 225-1 PLUMBING § 225-2
221:559
Chapter 230
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Off-street parking — See Ch. 213. Snowmobiles — See Ch. 280.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT —
§ 230-2. Parking time limited; violations. [Amended 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. 1131]
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the
manufacturer.
A.
PICKUP CAMPER — A structure designed primarily to be mounted
on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render
it suitable for use as temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses.
B.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
C.
FOLDING TENT TRAILER — A folding structure, mounted on wheels
and designed for travel and vacation use.
D.
PRIVATE BUS — Any bus-type vehicle converted for use as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses and used other than
for public conveyance.
E.
BOATS and BOAT TRAILERS — Includes boats, floats and rafts, plus the
normal equipment to transport the same on the highway.
F.
UTILITY TRAILER — A vehicle used to transport motorcycles,
snowmobiles, go-carts and stock cars.
G.
A. It shall be unlawful to park any recreational equipment on any public
right-of-way or city street within the City of Roseville for a period longer
than 30 minutes unless such vehicle is parked with the entire vehicle
immediately adjacent to, as measured on a perpendicular line, a
residence occupied on a permanent basis or owned by the owner or
lessee of the recreational equipment. Where such vehicle is parked
adjacent in such fashion, 12 hours' time shall be permitted.
§ 225-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 230-2
230:560
§ 230-3. Special parking permits.
The Chief of Police for the City of Roseville for good cause may grant
special parking permits permitting the parking of recreational equipment
on residential streets within the City of Roseville, provided that each permit
is granted for a definite period of time.
§ 230-4. Effect on other provisions.
All other sections of the City of Roseville ordinances and Code relating to
the parking of recreational equipment on residential streets not in direct
conflict with this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 230-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 233
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
§ 233-1. Removal of locking devices.
It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to leave in a place accessible
to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box or refrigerator
or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap-lock or
other locking device thereon, without first removing the said snap or other
locking device or doors from said ice box, refrigerator or container.
§ 233-2. Violations and penalties.165
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
B. During any twenty-four-hour period, a violation shall be deemed to have
occurred if the recreational equipment is observed to be parked within
two vehicle lengths of its previously observed location more than 30
minutes or 12 hours after having been first observed, whichever is
applicable.
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 230-2 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 233-2
233:561
Chapter 240
RESTAURANTS
CHARTER REFERENCES
County and City Health Departments — See
Ch. 5, Sec. 5.4.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Food products — See Ch. 151.
Ice cream vending vehicles — See Ch. 176.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
§ 233-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 233-2
240:562
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Sanitation Requirements
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 240 of the 1984
Code]
§ 240-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who handles food or drink during preparation or
serving or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils or who
is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT — One operating for a temporary period in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, lecture,
amusement or other entertainment.
RESTAURANT — Includes coffee shops, cafeterias, short-order cafes,
luncheonettes, taverns, sandwich stands, soda fountains, coffee houses (socalled),
any place where beverages commonly known as "soft drinks" are
sold and all other eating or drinking establishments and kitchens or other
places in which food or drink is prepared for sale but is consumed
elsewhere.
UTENSILS — Includes any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery,
utensils, containers or other equipment with which food or drink comes in
contact during storage, preparation or serving.
§ 240-2. License required.
No person shall operate, conduct or maintain a restaurant or an itinerant
restaurant in the city without first procuring a license and paying the
required fee.
§ 240-3. Application for license; fee.
Application for a license shall be made to the Roseville Police Department in
the form and manner prescribed by such Department.166 The annual license
fee shall be as provided for in Chapter 133, Fees.
§ 240-4. Inspection and approval by Health Officer and Fire
Inspector.
No such license shall be granted by the Police Department unless the
application is approved in writing upon the face thereof by the Health
Officer and the Fire Inspector after these officers have inspected and
investigated the premises where the proposed business is to be operated,
conducted or maintained.
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Licensing.
§ 240-1 RESTAURANTS § 240-5
240:563
§ 240-5. Sanitary requirements.
All restaurants shall comply with the following sanitary requirements:
A. Floors. The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared
or served or in which utensils are washed shall be of such construction
as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth and shall be kept clean and in
good repair.
B. Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean
and in good repair. All walls and ceilings of any room in which food or
drink is stored or prepared shall be finished in a light color. The walls of
all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall
have a smooth, washable surface up to the level reached by splash or
spray.
C. Doors and windows. Where flies are prevalent, all openings into the
outer air shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing,
unless other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of
flies.
D. Lighting. All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared or in
which utensils are washed shall be well lighted.
E. Ventilation. All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or
served or in which utensils are washed shall be well ventilated.
F. Toilet facilities. Each restaurant shall be provided with adequate and
conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with
the laws and regulations of the state. In restaurants hereafter
constructed, toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which
food, drink or utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet
rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean
condition, in good repair and well lighted and ventilated. Hand-washing
signs shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees. In case
privies or earth closets are permitted and used, they shall be separate
from the restaurant building and shall be of a sanitary type constructed
and operated in conformity with the standards of the State Board of
Health.
G. Water supply. Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible
to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the
water supply shall be adequate and of a safe, sanitary quality.
H. Lavatory facilities. Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities
shall be provided, including hot and cold running water, soap and
sanitary towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee
shall resume work after using the toilet room without first washing his
or her hands.
I. Construction of utensils and equipment. All multiuse utensils and all
show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables,
§ 240-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 240-5
240:564
refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment or utensils used in
connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed
as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept in good repair. Utensils
containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used, provided
that solder containing lead may be used for jointing.
J. Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment.
(1) All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters,
shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks, shall be kept
clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating
material. All clothes used by waiters, chefs and other employees
shall be clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once.
(2) All multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly
cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal
process after each usage. All multiuse utensils used in the
preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly
cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal
process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if
used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose.
(3) No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poisonous substance shall be used for the
cleaning or polishing of utensils.
K. Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After bactericidal
treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from
flies, dust and other contamination and shall be handled in such a
manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Singleservice
utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be
stored therein in a clean, dry place until used and shall be handled in a
sanitary manner.
L. Disposal of wastes. All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all
garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles, in such manner
as not to constitute a nuisance.167
M. Refrigeration. All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or
below 50° F. except when being prepared or served. Wastewater from
refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of.
N. Wholesomeness of food and drink. All food and drink shall be clean,
wholesome, free from spoilage and so prepared as to be safe for human
consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and frozen deserts
served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products
shall be served in the individual original containers in which they were
received from the distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an
approved dispensing device, provided that this requirement shall not
apply to cream, which may be served from the original bottle or from a
167. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 285, Solid Waste, Art. II, Commercial Refuse Containers.
§ 240-5 RESTAURANTS § 240-5
240:565
§ 240-6. Examination of food and drink by Health Officer.
Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined
by the Health Officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of
unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Officer may condemn and
forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink
which is unwholesome or adulterated.
§ 240-7. Periodic inspections.
At least once every six months, the Health Officer shall inspect every
restaurant located in the city. The person operating the restaurant shall,
upon request of the Health Officer, permit access to all parts of the
establishment and shall permit copying any or all records of food
purchased.
§ 240-8. Employment of persons with communicable diseases.
No person, while affected with any disease in a communicable form or while
a carrier of such disease or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores
or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a food-service
establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person
contaminating food or food-contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms or
transmitting disease to other individuals; and no person known or suspected
of being affected with any such disease or condition shall be employed
in such an area or capacity. If the manager or person in charge of the
dispenser approved for such service. All oysters, clams and mussels
shall be from approved sources and, if shucked, shall be kept until used
in the containers in which they were placed at the shucking plant.
O. Storage, display and serving of food and drink. All food and drink shall
be so stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies,
vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling,
droplet infection, overhead leakage and other contamination. No
animal or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or
drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for the elimination of
flies, roaches and rodents shall be used.
P. Cleanliness of employees. All employees shall wear clean outer
garments and shall keep their hands clean at all times while engaged in
handling food, drink, utensils or equipment. Employees shall not
expectorate or use tobacco in any form in rooms in which food is
prepared.
Q. Linens, lockers, premises, etc. The premises of all restaurants shall be
kept clean and free of litter or rubbish. None of the operations
connected with a restaurant shall be conducted in any room used as
living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be
provided for employees' clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens,
coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for such purpose.
§ 240-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 240-8
240:566
establishment has reason to suspect that any employee has contracted any
disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease, he
or she shall notify the Health Officer immediately.
§ 240-9. Suspected disease transmission from employee.
When the Health Officer has reasonable cause to suspect possibility of
disease transmission from any food service establishment employee, the
Health Officer shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee
or shall make such other investigation as may be indicated and shall take
appropriate action. The Health Officer may require any or all of the
following measures:
§ 240-10. Suspension of license; revocation; reinstatement.
After any inspection of the licensed premises as herein provided, the Health
Officer shall suspend any license if it is found that any of the provisions
of this article have not been complied with or have been violated. Written
notice of such suspension and the reason therefor shall be delivered to
the licensee, either in person or by mail addressed to the licensee at the
licensed premises. Any suspended license shall be revoked at the expiration
of 10 days unless the licensee shall file with the Health Officer an
application for reinstatement of the license. Upon the filing of such
application, the Health Officer shall make another inspection; and if it is
found that the condition causing the suspension of the license has been
cured or rectified, the license shall be reinstated.
§ 240-11. Violations and penalties.168
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service
establishments.
B. The immediate closure of the food service establishment concerned
until, in the opinion of the Health Officer, no further danger of disease
outbreak exists.
C. Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
D. Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee, of
other employees and of his, her and their body discharges.
168. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 240-8 RESTAURANTS § 240-11
240:567

ARTICLE II
Fast-Service or Drive-in Restaurants
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 240 of the 1984
Code]
§ 240-12. License required.
No person shall operate a fast-service or drive-in restaurant without first
obtaining a license to do so. The procedure for obtaining such license and
the fee to be paid therefor shall be governed by Chapter 187, Licensing, and
Chapter 133, Fees, and such license shall not be unreasonably withheld.
§ 240-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAST-SERVICE OR DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any premises where food
and/or beverage of any kind is offered for sale and/or served to the public
and where such food and/or beverage is served to customers directly over a
counter and/or exterior or interior convenience window or other opening, or
both, for consumption by customers within the premises and/or in or around
vehicles parked on or passing through the restaurant premises.
§ 240-14. Employee regulations.
§ 240-15. Parking area; lighting.
A. No fast-service or drive-in restaurant shall employ or permit any person
on the premises who may be engaged in the handling of food and/or
beverage who shall not have complied with all of the applicable laws
and regulations governing persons handling, selling or serving food
and/or beverage.
B. The person physically in charge of the premises shall be responsible for
seeing that all of the applicable ordinances governing the handling,
selling and serving of food and/or beverage are complied with.
A. All fast-service and drive-in restaurants shall have adequate parking
area as defined in the City of Roseville Zoning Ordinance, Section 2005,
to accommodate the customers of such restaurant. Such parking areas
shall be surfaced as required by the City of Roseville Zoning Ordinance,
Section 2006,169 and shall have one or more entrances and exits,
suitably designated as such, from the adjoining street or streets. Such
parking area shall be enclosed by a suitable fence or wall on the sides
and rear; provided, however, that the City Council may, for good cause
shown, waive this requirement if such side and/or rear abuts business
or industrial property. The plan for the parking area shall be approved
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 240-12 RESTAURANTS § 240-15
240:569
§ 240-16. Premises to be kept free of debris.
§ 240-17. Noise and alcohol around premises.
by the Building Department of the city prior to the issuance of a
license.170
B. While a fast-service or drive-in restaurant is open for business, all
parking areas shall be lighted during the normal hours of darkness.
Such lighting shall be installed and arranged so as to provide a
minimum of 0.25 lumen per square foot of parking area as provided in
the Building Code171 and shall reflect away from any adjoining property
as provided in the Zoning Ordinance.172
A. It shall be the duty of the fast-service or drive-in restaurant, or any
person in charge of said restaurant, to keep the restaurant premises,
parking area and contiguous property free from all rubbish, waste
products and debris, including napkins, straws, paper cups and plates
and other waste material, at all times; provided, however, that no
private property shall be entered without consent of the owner or the
owner's agent.
B. In addition to the other penalties provided in this article, the proprietor
of any fast-service or drive-in restaurant may be charged with the cost
of cleaning up or removing debris found on the premises and on the
public highway or highways adjacent to said premises. The City
Manager, the Health Officer, the Chief Inspector or any other
enforcement officer shall have the right, if he or she sees debris on the
premises occupied by the fast-service or drive-in restaurant and the
highways adjacent thereto, to cause the same to be cleaned up and
removed from the premises and shall certify the costs of cleaning up
and removal to the City Manager.173
A. No owner or operator of any fast-service or drive-in restaurant shall
operate or permit any loudspeakers or shall make or permit to be made
any other loud sound or shall permit any show or exhibit on the
premises occupied by such fast-service or drive-in restaurant; provided,
however, that the owner or operator of such restaurant may use an
intercom address system solely for the purpose of taking orders from
customers on the premises. No public address, loudspeaker or other
sound produced on the premises shall exceed the limits and standards
set forth in this Code relating to sound and noise levels and its
measurement and monitoring. It shall be a violation of this section for
any customer or other person on the premises to produce any
prohibited sound.174
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
171. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Building Construction.
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
173. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 285, Solid Waste, Art. II, Commercial Refuse Containers.
§ 240-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 240-17
240:570
§ 240-18. Toilet facilities for customers and employees.
Every fast-service or drive-in restaurant shall be provided with conveniently
located toilet facilities for customers and employees, which comply with
laws and regulations of the state and the Plumbing Code of the city.176 Such
toilet facilities shall have an inside entrance.
§ 240-19. Hours of operation for automobile service.
No food or beverage shall be served to any person seated in or upon any
automobile between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., local time.
§ 240-20. Policing of premises.
It shall be unlawful for any fast-service or drive-in restaurant to operate
between May 1 and October 31, of any calendar year, after 7:00 p.m.
until its regular closing time or 3:00 a.m., whichever occurs first, without
adequate private or special police employed at its own cost to patrol the
premises for the maintenance of order, preservation of the peace and
suppression of sound and to ensure compliance with all applicable
provisions of city ordinances. Adequate policing shall be defined as one
guard for each 40 parking places on the premises. If the fast-service or
drive-in restaurant has more than 40 parking places but less than 80, two
guards will be required.
B. No owner or operator of any drive-in restaurant or any customer of a
fast-service or drive-in restaurant while parking on or adjacent to the
premises thereof or any other person while on the premises of such
restaurant shall race the motor of any car or suddenly start or stop any
car or make or cause to be made any other unlawful sound. It shall also
be unlawful for any customer of a fast-service or drive-in restaurant or
any other person on the premises of such restaurant to blow or cause to
be blown any automobile horn or motorcycle horn at any time while so
parked.
C. No customer of a fast-service or drive-in restaurant or any person on
the premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of the
automobile, shall drink any wine, beer or intoxicating liquor; provided,
however, that this provision shall not apply to any person when served
inside the building by a fast-service or drive-in restaurant duly licensed
to serve such beverages.175
174. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 203, Nuisances.
175. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 71, Alcoholic Beverages.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 221, Plumbing Standards.
§ 240-17 RESTAURANTS § 240-21
240:571
§ 240-21. Violations and penalties.177
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 240-21 ROSEVILLE CODE § 240-21
240:572
Chapter 242
RETAIL FRAUD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Crimes — See Ch. 111.
§ 242-1. Prohibited acts.178
A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity
is guilty of retail fraud in the third degree, a misdemeanor punishable as
provided in § 242-2:
§ 242-2. Violations and penalties. 179
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 244
RODENT CONTROL
§ 244-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Any building which is accessory to the main
building.
OCCUPANT — The individual, partnership or corporation that has the use
of or occupies any building, structure or vacant land.
A. While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and
replaces, conceals or otherwise misrepresents the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or
to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale.
B. While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is
offered for sale at a price of less than $200.
C. With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property
from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money or the value of the
property obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
179. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 240-21 RETAIL FRAUD § 244-1
242:573
OWNER — The individual, partnership or corporation that is listed on the
last tax assessment records of the building, structure or vacant land.
RATPROOFED — A cement rat wall being 24 inches deep and four inches
thick.
RODENT — Any variety of species of rats.
RODENT EXTERMINATION — The elimination of rats from a building,
structure or vacant land by any or all of the accepted measures, such as
poisoning, fumigation, trapping, clubbing, etc., so that there is no evidence
of rat infestation remaining.
RODENT HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or
protection for rodents, thus favoring their multiplication and continued
existence in, under or outside of a building, structure or vacant land.
§ 244-2. Conditions permitting rodent harborage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to permit a condition of
rodent harborage to exist in any building or structure or on any occupied or
vacant land.
§ 244-3. Requirements for prevention of rodent harborage.
All owners and/or occupants in the City of Roseville, in order to prevent
rodent harborage, shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Stored material, such as firewood, coal, pipe, boxes, etc., shall be neatly
stored up off the ground at least eight inches and shall be piled no
higher than four feet above ground level and shall not be stored in any
front yard or required side yard.
B. All garbage and debris shall be stored inside unless kept in metal or
ratproof containers with tight-fitting lids and shall not be placed at the
curb until the day of collection.180
C. All lots, vacant or occupied, and all buildings and structures shall be
kept free of all litter, garbage and debris at all times.
D. All accessory structures shall be erected on a cement rat wall
measuring a minimum of 24 inches deep and four inches thick. A
cement floor shall also be provided under the structure, measuring at
least four inches thick. Upon receipt of a written request by the owners
of property, the Director of Buildings and Inspection for the City of
Roseville shall be permitted to issue, in writing, variances from this
provision upon a finding in his or her reasonable discretion that
practical difficulty exists complying with the terms of this chapter and a
reasonable alternative exists meeting the spirit and intent of this
chapter after reviewing the following: [Amended 9-9-1992 by Ord.
No. 1028]
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Solid Waste.
§ 244-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 244-3
244:574
(1) Size and character of the accessory structure.
(2) Dimensions of the proposed alternative rat wall barrier.
(3) Any other circumstances necessary to make a determination, such
as unique soil conditions or other considerations.
E. No person shall feed wild birds or animals with other than commercially
approved bird food, including seed, suet and other commercially
available feed in an approved container for the distribution of such bird
seed. Such container shall be elevated at least 48 inches above ground
level. In the event the City of Roseville, through one of its designated
departments, inspectors or employees, determines that the feeding of
wild birds or animals is causing and/or contributing to rodent
harborage, it shall declare that the lot from which feeding is occurring
is a no-feeding zone for a period of no less than 60 days. [Amended
12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 1185]
F. Firewood regulations. [Added 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1191]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection:
FACE CORD — A quantity of firewood, as defined herein which,
when piled in an orderly manner, has the dimension of eight linear
feet in length, four linear feet in height, and not exceeding two
linear feet in width for a total of 64 cubic feet.
FIREWOOD — Any part of a tree which has been severed from the
ground and cut into pieces for use in any indoor or outdoor wood
burning device. This definition shall include such wood as may have
been trimmed or milled into untreated lumber.
OUTSIDE STORAGE — The stockpiling of firewood, as defined in
this section, in any place except a location completely enclosed
within a building, structure, garage, barn or shed.
STOCKPILE OF FIREWOOD — Any face cord, or fraction thereof,
as defined in this section.
YARD, FRONT YARD, REAR YARD, and SIDE YARD — Defined as
provided in the City of Roseville's Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Firewood storage prohibited. The outside storage of firewood in
any residentially zoned district or multiple family residential
district, as defined under the applicable provisions of the City of
Roseville's Zoning Code, is hereby prohibited except as provided
hereinafter.
(3) Regulations for outside storage.
(a) Location on premises. No firewood shall be stored in a front
yard or required side yard. Storage shall be a minimum of six
inches from any fence.
(b) Manner of storage.
§ 244-3 RODENT CONTROL § 244-3
244:575
§ 244-4. Inspections.
The City of Roseville, through one of its designated departments, inspectors
or employees, shall be authorized and directed to inspect every reported
rodent-infested building, structure or vacant land and to make a
determination of whether there is rodent harborage or infestation.
§ 244-5. Notice of violations.
When any structure, building or vacant land is found to be in violation of
this chapter, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified in writing, by firstclass
mail, of such violation and corrective measures that are to be taken to
eliminate such violation and that said notice shall be complied with within
a specified period of time, being no less than 10 days. Such notice may be
posted in a conspicuous part of the building, structure or vacant land.
§ 244-6. Failure to comply; extermination by city; costs.
Upon the failure of any owner and/or occupant to comply with the directives
of any notice issued by the City of Roseville pursuant to this chapter,
the City of Roseville shall be authorized to take whatever measures are
[1] All firewood shall be stockpiled in a neat and orderly
manner.
[2] Stockpiles shall be elevated not less than eight inches
above the ground and shall not exceed a total height of
four feet, eight inches, as measured from the ground.
(c) Number of face cords and length of stockpiles. The total
number of face cords permitted on the premises and the length
of stockpiles shall be no greater than two face cords and no
greater than 16 feet in length.
(4) The City Manager, or his or her designee may deviate from the
requirements set forth in this subsection when taking into account
certain extenuating circumstances, such as trees which have fallen
on the aggrieved person's property due to wind, storm, or other
similar acts of God, or proof, if it can be provided, that an unusual
amount of wood burning and storage is necessary for health or
medical reasons.
A. When any structure, building or vacant land is found to have unlawful
accumulations of any materials, debris or garbage which may constitute
a condition of rat harborage, the owner and/or occupant shall be
notified to store such accumulations as required by this chapter or to
remove such accumulations from the property.
B. When any structure, building or vacant land is found to be rat-infested,
the owner and/or occupant shall be notified to take immediate rodent
extermination measures and to continue same until all evidence of rat
infestation is eliminated.
§ 244-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 244-6
244:576
necessary to remove unlawful accumulations and to exterminate for rats,
and the costs thereof shall be collected in the manner hereinafter provided.
§ 244-7. Collection of costs as taxes.
The owner of such property as listed on the last tax assessment roll shall be
notified of the amount for such costs as incurred by the City of Roseville,
by first-class mail, at the address shown on the records. Upon failure of the
owner to pay same within 30 days after mailing of the notice of the amount,
the City of Roseville shall add same to the next city tax roll, and it shall be
collected in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of taxes
by the City of Roseville.
§ 244-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 245
ROLLER-SKATING AND IN-LINE SKATING RINKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
§ 245-1. License required.181
No person shall operate or cause to be operated within the city a rollerskating
and in-line skating rink without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 245-2. Application for license; inspection.182
Application for the establishment or operation of a roller-skating or in-line
skating rink shall be made to the Roseville Police Department, which shall
refer the same to the Chief of Police and Fire Marshal, who in turn shall
cause an inspection to be made of the premises. The application, together
with the recommendation of the Chief of Police and Fire Marshal, shall then
be referred to the City Council.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 244-6 ROLLER-SKATING AND IN-LINE SKATING § 245-3
245:577
§ 245-3. Decision of Council.
The City Council shall approve or deny the application by resolution and, if
denied, shall inform the applicant of the reason or reasons for denial, which
reasons shall be based upon the public safety, public welfare or conditions
in the locality.
§ 245-4. Issuance of license; renewals; fee.
The Roseville Police Department shall issue a license to the applicant when
so directed by the City Council, which license shall be renewed annually
on or before January 15 of each year. The annual license fee shall be as
provided for in Chapter 133, Fees.
§ 245-5. Admission of children.183
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to permit or allow
children up to and including 13 years of age in the establishment after 7:30
p.m. unless accompanied by their parents and children up to and including
16 years of age after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by one of their parents,
provided that the provision of this section can be waived by the written
permission of the Chief of Police, upon application of an organized group,
properly chaperoned.
§ 245-6. Unlawful acts not to be permitted.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to permit or allow
any act or actions upon the licensed premises which are unlawful under any
ordinance of the city.
§ 245-7. Alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to allow alcoholic
beverages to be sold, kept or used upon the premises.
§ 245-8. Business hours.
Establishments licensed under this chapter shall not be open prior to 12:00
noon on Sunday and shall be closed at 12:00 midnight every day.
§ 245-9. Transfer of license.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to transfer or
attempt to transfer the license issued without first having received an
approval of the City Council.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 245-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 245-10
245:578
§ 245-10. Inspections; compliance with regulations.
Establishments licensed hereunder are declared to be public places and
shall be subject to all reasonable inspection and control by the Police and
Fire Departments and shall comply with the fire and safety regulations of
the city.
§ 245-11. Suspension of license; appeals.
The license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension by the Chief
of Police as to police matters and by the Fire Marshal as to matters of
public safety, whenever the provisions of this chapter have been violated.
The licensee shall have the right of appeal to the City Council, which claim
of appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk within
10 days of such suspension. After hearing the circumstances surrounding
such suspension, the City Council shall affirm, reverse or modify the order
of suspension, and such decision shall be final. If no appeal is taken within
10 days as provided herein, the action of the Chief of Police or Fire Marshal
shall be final.
§ 245-12. Violations and penalties.184
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 248
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 133.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 245-10 SALES, SPECIAL § 245-12
248:579

ARTICLE I
Temporary Open-Air Sales
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as § 187-4E of Ch. 187 of the
1984 Code; amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 991]
§ 248-1. Term defined. [Amended 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 1182]
A temporary open-air retail sale is the displaying and/or selling by the
licensee, his or her agent, servant or employee of any merchandise or
services of any nature or kind, during a period of less than 90 continuous
days, from the parking area or any other area not within the enclosed
building located on the business premises of the licensee. A temporary
open-air retail sale shall not constitute events performed by local charitable,
civic or educational groups with the purpose of fund-raising for those local
charitable, civic or educational groups.
§ 248-2. Permit required; site plan; fee. [Amended 10-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 1182]
Any licensee under this article or other ordinances of this City must obtain
a permit from the Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection to
conduct any temporary open-air retail sales of merchandise or services at
the licensee's business premises by submitting an application and site plan
with a nonrefundable application fee as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, to
the Department of Buildings and Inspection.
§ 248-3. Conditions.
The application and site plan shall be submitted not less than 10 days prior
to the first day of the proposed sale, and the proposed licensee shall be
subject to and comply with the following conditions.
§ 248-4. Application requirements.
A. A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale by the licensee at
said temporary open-air retail sale; the proposed dates for the sale; the
State of Michigan sales tax number of the licensee; and the invoice
value and quality of such goods, wares, merchandise or services,
whether the same are proposed to be from stock in possession and by
sample, at auction, by direct sale or by direct sale by taking orders for
future delivery, shall be set forth.
B. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or
proposed to be done in order to attract customers shall be set forth, and
if required by the Department of Buildings and Inspection, copies of all
advertising, whether by handbills, circulars, newspaper advertising or
otherwise, shall be attached to said application exhibits thereto.
C. An application shall be filed on a form specified by the Department of
Buildings and Inspection, accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale
§ 248-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 248-4
248:581
§ 248-5. Compatibility with other activities.
The proposed use shall be compatible with and shall not conflict with
principal activities conducted on the site or upon any adjacent site.
§ 248-6. Parking and circulation.
§ 248-7. Hours and dates of operation.
§ 248-8. Compliance with other regulations.
All sanitary service, electrical lines and all other operations shall comply
with all applicable City codes, ordinances and regulations and other
applicable statutes, rules or regulations of any governmental body having
jurisdiction over the activity, and any permits required shall be obtained
by the applicant. The proposed use shall comply with any other applicable
written standards established and promulgated by the city. The Building
Director may forward the application to various City departments to
determine compliance with applicable City codes, regulations and
standards.
and setting forth the size and dimensions of the common parking area
and routes of ingress and egress for said business premises, the size
and dimensions of the area or areas to be used for said open-air retail
sales, the size and dimensions of the area to be used for off-street
parking and ingress and egress for said temporary open-air retail sales
and the size and dimensions and locations of signs, if any, to be used to
advertise said sales. Said proposed temporary open-air retail sales use
as set forth in the site plan must conform with all provisions of Roseville
Zoning Ordinance185 and any other applicable City ordinances.
D. Written verification of ownership of the subject property of the site plan
shall be provided. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
E. Written permission of the property owner shall be furnished to the
Department of Buildings and Inspection.
A. There shall be adequate parking on the site consistent with the scope of
the proposed use.
B. The proposed site shall be laid out so as to ensure safe vehicular and
pedestrian circulation.
A. The hours of operation shall be limited to specified hours which are
consistent with the nature of the use and compatible with other
activities on the site and adjacent parcels.
B. The period of operation of the proposed use shall be limited to dates
specified in the application, which shall not exceed three days.
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 248-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 248-9
248:582
§ 248-9. Erection of temporary structures.
Any temporary structures shall be erected in a safe manner in accordance
with any applicable City codes, ordinances or standards.
§ 248-10. Daily and final cleanup.
§ 248-11. Liability insurance.
The applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance in an amount no less
than $300,000, with the City as an additional insured, along with a hold
harmless agreement in favor of the City of Roseville in a form satisfactory
to the city.
§ 248-12. Signs.
Signage for the temporary use shall be limited to 32 square feet and shall
be set back not less than 12 feet from the right-of-way.
§ 248-13. Existing violations and prior complaints.
There shall be no existing violations of any applicable City code on the
proposed site nor any past complaint filed for violation of any codes,
conditions or restrictions placed upon the use if such use was previously
approved by the City for the applicant for the subject site. The issuance of
prior complaints shall be a basis for denial or administrative approval of a
temporary use.
§ 248-14. Special considerations.
The use shall not be of such a scope, nature or size or shall not have
any unusual or peculiar characteristics that necessitate special safety
considerations or sanitary considerations, require special crowd control
measures or involve hazardous material.
§ 248-15. Variances and appeals.
Applications for any variance of these regulations or an appeal by any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Department of Buildings and
Inspection regarding an application for a permit shall be made pursuant
to the appeal process provided for in Chapter 187, Licensing, § 187-12B(7)
of the Code, and any variance or reversal of a decision of the Department
of Buildings and Inspection shall be granted upon a showing that a strict
A. The property shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition and
cleaned immediately after the close of each business day.
B. Final cleanup shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be
assured by the posting of a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in
an amount determined by the Building Director to ensure performance
of cleanup within 48 hours of termination of the temporary use.
§ 248-9 SALES, SPECIAL § 248-15
248:583
application of the regulations or the decision of the Department of Buildings
and Inspection would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties
to or exceptional undue hardship upon the applicant, provided that such
relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this article. In
granting a variance, the appeal board or the City Council may attach thereto
such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the
proposed temporary use as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the
purpose of this article.
§ 248-16. Revocation of permit by Chief of Police.
The Roseville Chief of Police, or representative, in addition to and not in
lieu of any other penalties provided for violation of any City ordinances, may
revoke any permit already issued for the operation of temporary open-air
retail sales upon proof submitted of the violation of any provisions of this
article regulating temporary open-air retail sales.
§ 248-17. Closing down of operations; impoundment of evidence.
The Roseville Chief of Police, or representative, shall close down the
operation of any temporary open-air retail sale upon the revocation of
the permit to operate and may impound, as evidence, any merchandise,
vehicles, signs or other apparatus used in connection with the temporary
open-air retail sales; provided, however, that said evidence may not be
impounded unless a violator is given an opportunity for trial on the violation
charges before the 39th Judicial District Court within 10 business days of
the date any evidence is impounded for any violation.
§ 248-18. Violations and penalties. 186
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
186. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 248-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 248-18
248:584
Chapter 250
(RESERVED)
Chapter 256
SEWERS
CHARTER REFERENCES
County and City Health Departments — See
Ch. 5, Sec. 5.4.
Department of Water and Sewers — See Ch. 7,
Sec. 7.12.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 221.
Excavations — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Wastewater system — See Ch. 350.
Water — See Ch. 354.
§ 248-18 SALES, SPECIAL § 248-18
248:585

ARTICLE I
Public Sewers
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Chapter 256 of the
1984 Code]
§ 256-1. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to and in accordance with Act 94, Public
Acts of 1933, as amended.
§ 256-2. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this article, certain rules of construction apply to the
text. Words used in the present tense include the future tense and in the
singular include the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary;
and the word "may" is permissive. The word or term not interpreted or
defined by this section shall be used with a meaning of common or
standard utilization.
B. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AGENT — The Macomb County Health Department.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING — Any structure, including a mobile home, that requires a
supply of potable water and/or a means of disposal of wastewater.
BUILDING DRAIN — The drainage water pipes in a building which
convey roof drainage, footing drainage water or stormwater to the
building service drain, located five feet (1.52 meters) outside the outer
face of the building.
BUILDING SERVICE DRAIN — Any drainage water pipe extension from
a building drain outlet point, located five feet (1.52 meters) outside of a
building, to a point of connection with a public drain or with any private
drain upstream of a public drain.
BUILDING SERVICE SEWER — The sewer extension from a building
sewer outlet point, located five feet (1.52 meters) outside of a building,
to a point of connection with a public sanitary sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building plumbing system that receives the sanitary sewage from pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it from the building to the
building service sewer, located five feet (1.52 meters) outside of the
outer face of the building.
§ 256-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-2
248:587
COMBINATION SEWER or COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving
both surface runoff and sewage.
DEPARTMENT — The City Department of Water and Sewers charged
with operating and maintaining the wastewater (sewage disposal)
system.
DIRECTOR — The person appointed by the City Council to manage the
Department of Water and Sewers.[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
DRAIN or STORM DRAIN — A watercourse, ditch, drainage swale or
pipe intended for the conveyance of drainage water.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Any part or all of the property, structures,
equipment, drains, watercourses, materials and appurtenances used in
conjunction with the collection and disposal of drainage water.
DRAINAGE WATER — Stormwater, subsurface groundwater, melting
snow or ice, roof and/or other surface water runoff or unpolluted water.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or a unit thereof (including an
apartment, house trailer or mobile home) that is occupied by one or
more persons as a residence (with a single set of culinary facilities)
intended for a single family.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere
with the collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE or INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid containing
waterborne process wastes from industrial sources.
MG/L — Milligrams per liter.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or other legal entity.
pH — The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The degree of acidity or alkalinity of a solution is
measured by pH. A pH value from zero to seven indicates acidity and
from seven to 14 indicates alkalinity. Neutral water has a pH value of
seven.
POLLUTED WATER — Water which exceeds the water quality standards
established from the receiving waterway.
PREMISES — A parcel of real estate owned by a person served as
a single user by a water supply outlet and/or a wastewater disposal
outlet. Each mobile home park is considered separately as a premises.
§ 256-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-2
248:588
PRIVATE SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any septic tank
with subsurface soil absorption facilities or any other private
wastewater treatment facilities that may be approvable by the
Michigan Water Resources Commission (MWRC) or by its designated
agent, the Macomb County Health Department.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC DRAIN — A drain under the control of the City or other public
agency, which is located in public easements or public rights-of-way.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sanitary or combined sewer under the control
of the City or other public agency and located in public easements or
public rights-of-way.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Usual domestic sewage or equivalent sewage,
not including industrial sewage, as herein defined.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries sanitary sewage.
SETTLEABLE SOLIDS — Total particulate matter in water or
wastewater that will settle out of the liquid as prescribed in Standard
Methods.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for 15 minutes
of duration more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration of flows during normal operation and which adversely
affects the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
STANDARD METHODS — The laboratory procedures set forth in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods
acceptable to the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley or other rightof-
way that provides for vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting
properties by the general public, and includes the land between the
street right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard
Methods. Suspended solids includes settleable solids.
SYSTEM — The wastewater system.
TOTAL SOLIDS — Includes total suspended solids and total dissolved
solids.
§ 256-2 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-2
248:589
§ 256-3. Use of public sewers and public drains required.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water that would not cause violation of the
water quality standards established for the receiving waterway.
USER — The owner or occupants of any premises connected with and/
or using any of the facilities operated by the Department of Water and
Sewers.
WASTEWATER OR SEWAGE — Spent water which may be a
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions or other land uses,
including drainage water inadvertently present in said waste.
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL OUTLET — The point of connection with the
public sanitary sewer.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM OR SEWER SYSTEM — Any part or all of
the property, structures, equipment, sewers, materials and/or
appurtenances used in conjunction with the collection and disposal of
wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
— The Detroit Water and Sewer Department regional treatment plant
for treating wastewater and sludge.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any manner upon public or private property within the
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse or drain within the
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any wastewater or
other polluted water.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
D. The City Council finds that a wastewater system is essential to the
health, safety and welfare of the people of the City. Further, septic tank
disposal systems in the City are subject to failure due to heavy soil
conditions prevalent throughout the City. Lastly, failure or potential
failure of septic tank disposal systems poses a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, presents a potential for ill health,
transmission of disease, mortality and potential economic blight and
constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of
the City. Therefore, connection to the available wastewater system at
the earliest reasonable date is necessary in the public interest, which is
hereby declared by the City Council to be a matter of legislative
determination. The owner of a structure in which sanitary sewage
§ 256-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-3
248:590
§ 256-4. Private sanitary sewage disposal.
originates and which is located within 200 feet of a right-of-way,
easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts
upon the property upon which said structure is located, and within
which right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way a public
sewer is available for connection, shall connect to said sewer system
within 18 months after said sewer becomes available for connection.
E. All drainage water and unpolluted water, including unpolluted cooling
water and unpolluted process water, shall be deposited in a
watercourse or public drain.
F. No person, firm or corporation shall break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the wastewater system or drainage system.
A. Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of this
article, a building sewer shall be connected to a private sanitary sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
B. No private sanitary sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil
absorption facilities shall be constructed on a parcel of property which
is less than 12,000 square feet in area.
C. Capacities, location and layout of a private sanitary sewage disposal
system shall comply with all regulations and recommendations of the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources and its designated agent,
the Macomb County Health Department. [Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord.
No. 1072]
D. Before commencement of construction of a private sanitary sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the
agent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the agent, which the applicant shall supplement with any
plans, specifications or other information considered necessary by the
agent.
E. The agent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and the permittee shall notify the agent when the work is
ready for any required inspection, including final inspection.
F. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sanitary sewage
disposal system in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
City, such that polluted water shall be prevented from entering all
drains or watercourses.
G. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sanitary sewage disposal system, the building service
sewer shall be connected to said sewer within 18 months after official
notice of the availability of said sewer. Any septic tanks, cesspools and
§ 256-3 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-4
248:591
§ 256-5. Building service sewers, building service drains and
connections. [Amended 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 1039; 8-8-1995 by
Ord. No. 1072]
similar private sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned
by cleaning and filling same with suitable material.
H. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the City Council,
other applicable ordinances or laws or the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources. [Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 1072]
A. No person shall uncover, make any connections to, open, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or public drain or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Department of
Buildings and Inspection, and in the event work involves areas within
public utility easements or rights-of-way, a written permit from the
Department of Water and Sewers must also be obtained. A permit fee
shall be paid to the City at the time application is made for the permit
for each building service drain or building service sewer to public
facilities. Such charges shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
B. There shall be two classes of building service sewer construction
permits: for sanitary sewage service and for industrial sewage service.
In addition, construction of a building service drain discharging into a
public drain or watercourse requires a permit. In all cases, the owner or
his or her agent shall make application for the permit on a form
furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent by
the City.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation or subsequent repair,
maintenance or replacement of the buildings service sewer or building
service drain shall be borne by the owner or owners of the premises.
The owners or owners, jointly and severally, shall indemnify the City
from any loss or damage to the City's wastewater or drainage systems
or to third persons or their property which may result directly or
indirectly by such connections.
D. A separate building service sewer shall be provided for every building.
Sanitary sewage and industrial sewage shall not be combined in a
single building service sewer. A separate building service drain shall be
provided for each building requiring a drainage water outlet.
E. Existing building service sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when it is determined by the Plumbing Inspector that
said building service sewers meet the requirements of this article.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials and methods of construction of a
building service sewer or building service drain, including the
§ 256-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-5
248:592
connection to a public sewer or public drain and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling
the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Codes (see Chapter 88 and Chapter 221) or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of any code provisions,
not of particular subject, the materials and procedures set forth in
the American Society for Testing and Materials and Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply with regard to
materials and procedures set forth herein.
G. No person shall make connection of any roof downspouts, foundation or
footing drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff and/or
groundwater to a building sewer or building service sewer which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer.
H. The permit holder for a building service sewer or building service drain
shall notify the Department of Buildings and Inspection when the
building service sewer is ready for inspection and connection to a
public sewer or drain. The Building Inspector or representative shall
inspect such building and the plumbing construction therein, and if
construction meets all requirements applicable and as approved in the
construction permit, a connection may be constructed subject to all
applicable provisions of this article.
I. All excavations for building service sewer or building service drain
installation shall be surrounded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
into their original condition.
J. All new basement excavation and/or excavations for foundation walls
for a building served by a public sewer shall be backfilled upon
completion of construction of the basement wall or other foundation
wall. The earth surface surrounding such wall shall be graded so as to
direct the drainage water away from such wall to a point of disposal.
During stages of construction of the building, temporary downspouts
and connections thereto directing the stormwater away from the
building shall be provided. The building contractor shall provide means
to ensure drainage away from the building during the stages of
construction, and the owner shall maintain such drainage during all
times the building is connected to a public sewer.
K. All buildings, including existing and proposed, connected to a public
sewer shall be equipped with adequate eave troughs, gutters,
downspouts, splashguards and similar connections so as to discharge
stormwater through an impermeable structure or impermeable surface
to a location at least five feet (1.52 meters) perpendicularly away from
all building walls. The point of discharge to the ground, whether hardsurfaced
or otherwise, shall slope away from the building so that
surface water will be effectively disposed of away from the building.
Building service drains and other storm drainage facilities shall be
§ 256-5 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-5
248:593
§ 256-6. Use of public drains and watercourses.
§ 256-7. Use of public sewers.
designed, installed and maintained to avoid discharge upon paved
surfaces and public rights-of-way, designed for pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. The property owner and/or occupants, jointly and severally, shall
provide for appropriate design and/or maintenance to avoid hazards
from freezing and thawing.
L. Responsibility and costs of providing changes to existing building
drainage pursuant to this article is decreed to be the joint and several
responsibility of the owner, lessee and/or occupant, and the
continuation of drainage contrary to the provisions set forth herein is
decreed to be a public nuisance to be abated in the manner
hereinbefore set forth. After notification, in writing, by the Department
of Buildings and Inspection or representative as designated by the City
Council, the owner, lessee or occupant shall have 45 calendar days to
disconnect stormwater, groundwater or any unpolluted water
connections into the public sewer and/or combined sewer. In addition to
any other permitted legal remedies, violations pursuant to § 256-11 of
this article may issue upon failure to comply within 45 days.
A. All drainage water shall be discharged into public drains or
watercourses.
B. No sanitary sewage, industrial sewage, polluted water or wastes of any
kind, solid or liquid, shall be discharged into a public drain or
watercourse.
A. Except as otherwise permitted herein, all sanitary sewage shall be
discharged into public sewers. However, no new connections to public
sewers shall be allowed unless sufficient capacity for treatment of flows
from such connections is available. Such flow capacity is subject to
maximum flow limitations contained in contracts or agreements
between the City, South Macomb Sanitary District and the City of
Detroit.
B. Industrial sewage may be discharged into public sewers only upon
issuance of an industrial sewage permit by the City and only when such
sewage meets the requirements hereinafter described.
C. Drainage water and uncontaminated water shall not be discharged into
public sewers.
D. No waste or wastewater containing toxic, poisonous or corrosive solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by the interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with the wastewater system or
the sewage treatment process in use or proposed to be in use, to
constitute a hazard to humans, animals or public property, to create a
public nuisance or to have a deleterious effect on receiving waters of
§ 256-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-7
248:594
§ 256-8. Use of public sewers for industrial sewage.
the sewage treatment plant effluent shall be placed in or discharged to
a public sewer.
E. No waste or wastewater shall be discharged to the public sewer which
may damage said sewers. By way of example and not limitation, damage
may result from:
(1) Chemical reactions, either directly or indirectly, with sewer
construction materials which impair the strength or durability of
the wastewater system.
(2) Mechanical action which destroys or damages the wastewater
system.
(3) Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures or
restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of the sewer.
(4) Placing unusual demands on the wastewater treatment equipment
or process or limiting its effectiveness.
F. No solid or viscous substances in quantity or size capable of obstructing
the flow in pipes or causing other interference with the operation of the
wastewater system, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders, shall be placed in or discharged to a public
sewer.
G. No gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas shall be placed in or discharged to a public sewer.
H. No waste or wastewater causing excessive discoloration, such as but
not limited to dye wastes or vegetable tanning solutions, shall be placed
in or discharged to a public sewer.
I. No waste or wastewater shall be placed in or discharged to a public
sewer, which constitutes a slug, either in quantities of flow or
concentration, or both.
J. No waste or wastewater shall be placed in or discharged to a public
sewer, which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or which has
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
the wastewater system or treatment works.
K. The City shall conform its ordinances with all laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations and orders of the City of Detroit and the State of Michigan
with reference to wastewater characteristics, collection and disposal
and water pollution control.
§ 256-7 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-8
248:595
A. Industrial sewage shall not be discharged into public sewers except
upon issuance of an industrial sewage permit by the City. Such permits
shall be annual permits and shall be subject to review for past and
proposed conformance with all requirements of this article as a
condition of annual renewal. An annual permit fee shall be paid to the
City by the industrial sewage permit holder. The City Council may, after
proper notice and hearing, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew an
industrial sewage permit upon showing by the Director that the
permittee has persistently disregarded the provisions of this article
pertaining to the discharge of industrial sewage.
B. Compatible wastes which are discharged by industry in concentrations
greatly in excess of domestic sewage will be sampled, analyzed and
treated. The City shall assess and collect surcharges from the permittee
to cover the added cost of handling and treating the over-limit
discharge of compatible waste. Such surcharges shall be uniform
throughout the system and shall be based on samples taken at the
control manhole of each industrial and commercial user. No costs shall
be assessed unless the concentrations are greater than those found
below:
Waste
Concentration
(milligrams per liter)
Suspended solids 300
BOD 300
Hexane soluble (total grease) in
supernatant liquid after 4 hours' settling
100
Floating oil Noncollectible
Phenolic compounds 0.5
Total solids 2,000 (daily average
20,000 (any sample)
C. If any water or wastewater is discharged or is proposed to be
discharged which may damage the public sewers as described in this
article or which contains an excess of the substances or exceeds the
limitations enumerated below or which may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage system, processes, equipment or receiving waters or
which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitutes a public
nuisance, the City may:
(1) Reject the waste.
(2) Require pretreatment of incompatible wastes to an acceptable
condition for discharge to the public sewers and/or require periodic
reports on effluent volume and quality and/or require control over
the quantities and rates of discharge.
§ 256-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-8
248:596
(3) Assess and collect monitoring and surveillance fees when the limit
of incompatible wastes, as defined below, are found to be exceeded.
Soluble Incompatible
Pollutants Limits
Antimony 2.0 mg/l
Arsenic 1.0 mg/l
Cadmium 2.0 mg/l
Chromium, hexavalent (Cr+6) 5.0 mg/l
Chromium (total) 25.0 mg/l
Copper 3.0 mg/l
Cyanide (total) 2.0 mg/l
Ethyl hexyl phthalate 100 parts per trillion
Iron 50.0 mg/l
Lead 1.0 mg/l
Mercury 0.005 mg/l
Nickel 5.0 mg/l
Phosphorus 13.0 mg/l
Polychlorinated biphenyls 100 parts per trillion
Selenium 1.0 mg/l
Silver 2.0 mg/l
Sulfides 10.0 mg/l
Thallium 0.1 mg/l
Zinc 15.0 mg/l
H2S, SO2, NO (total) 10.0 mg/l
Explosive substances None detectable
Combustibles None detectable
Radioactive waste 100 microcuries/liter
Toxic gases None detectable
General Conditions Limits
Grease or oil that will solidify or
become viscous at 50° F. or
above
None detectable
Particle size Must pass a one-half-inch sieve
in any dimension
Specific gravity of suspended
solids
2.65 maximum
Temperature limit 150° F.
§ 256-8 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-8
248:597
Soluble Incompatible
Pollutants Limits
Toxic or irritating substances
not otherwise described
None detectable
D. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed by the user when the
City determines that they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes to remove grease in excessive amounts or to remove any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Interceptors shall
not be required for private dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the City, shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection and shall be
continuously maintained by the user in an operating condition to
accomplish the required result.
E. Any water or wastewater having an untreated pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.5 shall be pretreated to an acceptable condition within
these limits before discharge to the public sewers.
F. If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater
flows, the design and installation of the pretreatment facilities and
equipment shall be subject to the City's review and approval and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waste or wastewater, the owner shall maintain these facilities
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at his or her
expense.
G. Monitoring.
(1) The City may monitor any discharge of industrial sewage as
frequently as required to provide proper enforcement of this article
and, further, to assess proper charges and fees to industrial waste
dischargers. No monitoring or surveillance fees shall be assessed
to industrial users operating within the limits of this article.
(2) The Director and other authorized personnel bearing proper
identification shall be permitted to enter upon any premises or
easement for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
article. The Director and duly authorized personnel shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other processes, other
than to determine the type and source of discharge to the sewers.
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
(3) While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
City personnel shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company.
§ 256-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-8
248:598
(4) The owner of any property discharging industrial wastewater to a
sewer shall install on the industrial sewage building service sewer
a suitable control manhole or structure, together with necessary
meters, positive control devices and other appurtenances, to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastewater. Such structure shall be accessibly and safely located in
a public right-of-way or easement, allowing continuous access by
City personnel, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the City. The structure shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible to
authorized personnel at all times.
(5) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes shall be performed as prescribed by Standard
Methods and shall be determined at the control manhole or from
samples taken from said control manhole and analyzed off the
premises. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building service sewer is connected.
(6) Sampling shall be conducted in accordance with customarily
accepted methods to determine the effect of constituents upon the
wastewater treatment works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb and property. The analyses will determine
whether continuous monitoring, a twenty-four-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premises or grab sampling is appropriate. BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour
composites of all outfalls, whereas pH values are determined from
periodic grab samples or by the use of pH meters.
H. When the City determines that wastewater or wastes, either untreated
or pretreated, are of a type which may pose a threat to the public or to
the public sewer system as previously described, such discharges may
be required to provide a continuous monitoring device incorporating a
detection and warning system and a positive control device approved by
the City to prevent spills of incompatible wastewater from entering the
sanitary sewer and to provide and maintain a property damage and
personal injury liability insurance policy in whatever amount deemed
necessary, but not less than $1,000,000. Said liability shall cover claims
against the user for damage to the public sewer system which may be
caused by such abnormal and/or deleterious waste and for claims
against said user for personal injury and/or property damage generally.
I. All conditions of Detroit's Ordinance No. 129-H, regulating discharge of
waste into the wastewater system, and all subsequent amendments to
said ordinance, shall be applicable.
§ 256-8 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-9
248:599
§ 256-9. Administration and enforcement. [Added 8-8-1995 by Ord.
No. 1072]
In administering the provisions of this article, the Department of Buildings
and Inspection shall provide for administration and enforcement on private
property, and the Department of Water and Sewers shall provide for
administration and enforcement, including but not limited to taps, on public
property.
§ 256-10. Stormwater discharge on neighboring property. [Added
8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 1072]
The flow of stormwater shall not be unreasonably impeded from a
neighboring property and no unreasonable discharge of stormwater shall
be permitted upon neighboring property. Provisions of this section are not
intended to modify or abridge any rights of adjoining property owners
as may exist otherwise with respect to stormwater drainage pursuant to
applicable laws, contractual agreement and the common law.
§ 256-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
1072; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this article
shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 256-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-11
248:600
ARTICLE II
Wastewater Discharges
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 206; amended
in its entirety 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 1197]
§ 256-12. Delegation of enforcement authority.
The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department,
as the state-approved control authority, is authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this article on behalf of the City of Roseville. The
City of Roseville has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement
with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated
authority, consistent with this article, and shall allow the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control
authority pursuant to state and federal law.
§ 256-13. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is the protection of the environment and of
public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through
the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes
admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment
system under the jurisdiction of the City of Roseville and enabling the
City of Roseville to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C.
1251, et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations, being 40
CFR Part 403.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the
health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will pass inadequately treated through the system
into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or
sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous
manner; and
(4) To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the
wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to
administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the
operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the
system.
§ 256-12 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-13
248:601
§ 256-14. Authority.
By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the City of Roseville
by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water
Act," as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the 1963 Constitution
of the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being
MCL 323.1 et seq.; M.S.A. 3.521 et seq.; the City of Roseville Charter;
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for
the City of Detroit publicly owned treatment works (POTW); the consent
judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the
Eastern District of Michigan Case No.77-1100, as amended; and existing or
future contracts between the Board of Water Commissioners and suburban
communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of
common law usage of the system, this article shall apply to every user
contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or
wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City
of Detroit POTW.
§ 256-15. Definitions.
C. This article provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit
and the City of Roseville wastewater collection and treatment system
through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users
and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users,
authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and
penalties.
A. For purposes of this article and unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by this section:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting
the reports required by this article is a corporation, who is either
(a) the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or (b) the manager of one or more
manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more
than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding $25,000,000 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when
authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to
said manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or
(1)
A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this article is a partnership or
sole proprietorship respectively. (See § 256-16N.)
(2)
§ 256-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-15
248:602
AVAILABLE CYANIDE — The quantity of cyanide that consists of
cyanide ion (CN) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyanocomplexes
of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver,
determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a
Standard Method or approved under 40 CFR 136.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Programs, practices,
procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the
user which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or
minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem,
including but not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include,
but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process
or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products,
substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping,
maintenance, training, or inventory control and may include technical
and economic considerations.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quality of dissolved
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure five days at 20º C. expressed in terms
of mass and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)] as measured by
standard methods.
BOARD — The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of a waste stream from any portion
of an industrial user's treatment facility. (See 40 CFR 403.17.)
CENTRALIZED WASTE TREATMENT (CWT) FACILITY — Any facility
that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received
from off-site by tanker truck, trailer roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any
other forms of shipment, including:
CITY — The City of Roseville.
COMPATIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Wastewater that is
produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or
characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and
which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with
domestic wastewater.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Pollutants which can be effectively
removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels
for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A collection of individual samples which are
obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or
flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides
a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling
A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from offsite;
and
(1)
A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as
industrial waste received from off-site.
(2)
§ 256-15 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-15
248:603
period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the
sample is manually collected. (See 40 CFR 403, Appendix E.)
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — The information which would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. (See § 256-21.)
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department which has been officially designated as such by the State
of Michigan under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12. [See 40 CFR
403.12(a).]
COOLING WATER — The non-contact water discharged from any use
such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and the only function
of which is the exchange of heat.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a
period of time prescribed or allowed by this article.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department,
and authorized employees of the Department.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Michigan.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department, or the Director's designee.
DISCHARGER — A person who, directly or indirectly, contributes,
causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a
treatment works.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA ADMINISTRATOR
— The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where
appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA.
FACILITY — A location, which contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited
to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether
public or private, commercial or charitable.
FATS, OILS OR GREASE (FOG) — Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps,
fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal,
vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance
with standard methods.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE — A composite sample taken with
regard to the flow rate of the waste stream.
GRAB SAMPLE — An individual sample collected over a period of time
not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics
of the stream at the time of sampling.
§ 256-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-15
248:604
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The discharge or the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A person who contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited
to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether
public or private, commercial or charitable, but excludes single-family
and multifamily residential dwellings with discharges consistent with
domestic waste characteristics.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form
of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of
industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
MAY — Permissive.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c) which applies to a
specific class or category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
NEW SOURCE —
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(1)
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent
state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act,
as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA), as amended [including the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), and state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(2)
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c), which will be applicable to
such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that: (a) the building,
structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no
(1)
§ 256-15 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-15
248:605
PASS THROUGH — Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns.
pH — The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution,
calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen
ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per
liter.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
other source is located; or (b) the building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment
that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c)
the production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these
are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which
the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent
to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered; or
Construction on a site where an existing source is located,
resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility
or installation meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) of
this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment; or
(2)
Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or
operator has: (a) begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous
on-site construction program: (1) any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or (2) significant site
preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for
the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or (b) entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended
to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to
purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
section.
(3)
§ 256-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-15
248:606
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste which is discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in
combination with any other substance, can or does result in the
degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or
radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation
of wastewater.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means,
except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. [See 40 CFR
403.3(r).]
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 CFR
403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 CFR 403.5(b), and
the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c),
including the discharge prohibitions specified in § 256-16 of this Code.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or
municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including:
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental
entity.
QUANTIFICATION LEVEL — The measurement of the concentration
of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure
calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is
considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant
can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure
for monitoring of the contaminant.
Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling,
or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid
nature;
(1)
Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or
(2)
The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from
such a treatment works.
(3)
§ 256-15 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-15
248:607
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE — Any sample of wastewater, which
accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and
condition of one or more pollutants in the waste stream being sampled.
Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance
with 40 CFR Part 136.
SANITARY WASTEWATER — The portion of wastewater that is not
attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from
domestic sources, including, but not limited to, discharges from
sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for
on-site noncommercial consumption.
SHALL — Mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS — Any user of the POTW who:
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any violation which meets one or
more of the following criteria:
Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more
of process wastewater, excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and
noncontact cooling water; or
(1)
Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment
standards; or
(2)
Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant
limitations of this article; or
(3)
Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33
U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or
regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are
subject to regulation under this article as determined by the
Department; or
(4)
Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal
of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or
adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended
by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as
amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater
into the POTW, including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or
(5)
Is found by the City of Detroit or the City of Roseville to have
a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW
operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air
emissions generated by the POTW.
(6)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same parameter;
(1)
§ 256-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-15
248:608
SLUG — Any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature, including, but
not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1987, as amended.
STANDARD METHODS — Methods set forth in 40 CFR Part 136,
"Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants,"
or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time
of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 CFR
Part 136, "Guidelines for Establising Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants." Where these two references are in disagreement regarding
procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in
40 CFR Part 136 shall be followed.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer term average) that the Department determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment,
or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority;
(4)
Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date;
(5)
Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring
reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules
within 30 days after the due date;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations which the Department
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
(8)
§ 256-15 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-15
248:609
STATE — The State of Michigan.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL) — The total suspended matter which
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other
liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by
standard methods.
TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS — The sum of the individual
analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol,
4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol,
2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during
any single sampling event expressed in mg/1.
TOTAL PCB — The sum of the individual analytical results for each
of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260
during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the
quantification level being treated as zero.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical
Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or
regulations.
TRADE SECRET — The whole, or any portion or phase, of any
proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is
secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial
value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to
prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected
by the owner to have access for limited purposes, but excludes any
information regarding the quantum or character of waste products
or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the
Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system
tributary thereto.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this article or with
national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user, but excludes noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER — Any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or
permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.
WASTEWATER or WASTE STREAM — The liquid and water-carried
industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
§ 256-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-15
248:610
§ 256-16. Discharge prohibitions.
which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW, including
infiltration and inflow waters, stormwater, and cooling water.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS — Permits issued by the
Department in accordance with § 256-18 of this Code.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all
other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well
as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes.
B. For purposes of this article, the following acronyms shall have the
meanings designated by this section:
(1) BMR - baseline monitoring report.
(2) BOD - biochemical oxygen demand.
(3) CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
(4) EPA - Environmental Protection Agency.
(5) FOG - fats, oil or grease.
(6) l - liter.
(7) MDEQ - Michigan Department of Environment Quality.
(8) mg - milligrams.
(9) mg/l - milligrams per liter.
(10) NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(11) POTW - publicly owned treatment works.
(12)RCRA -Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C.
§ 6901 et seq.
(13) SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
(14) SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
(15) TSS - total suspended solids.
(16)U.S.C. - United States Code.
A. General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These
general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to
discharge into the POTW:
§ 256-15 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-16
248:611
(1) Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is
sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to
create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way
to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW.
Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW,
include, but are not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flash point of less than 140°F or 60°C using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21; or
(2) Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities
which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but
not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or
fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent
hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; or
(3) Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than
11.5 units; or
(4) Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in
sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or
constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(5) Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy which, either singly or by
interaction with other waste, is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor,
or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or
hazard to life, or is sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for
their maintenance and repair; or
(6) Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or
any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum, to
be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is
pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a
substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or
regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria,
guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic
Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used; or
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the
consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal
§ 256-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-16
248:612
District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No.
77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit; or
(8) Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater
being discharged; or
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a
public sewer which exceeds 150° F. or which will cause the influent
at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104° F. (40° C.); or
(10) Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; or
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in
compliance with applicable federal or state regulations; or
(12) Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause
interference with or pass through the POTW; or
(13) Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a
cross section dimension of 1/2 inch or greater which are sufficient
to cause interference with the POTW.
B. Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following limitations:
(1) Compatible pollutants. See Appendix C.187
(2) Noncompatible pollutants.
(a) No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
Substance
Limit
(mg/l)
Arsenic (As) 1.0
Cadmium (Cd) See Appendix C
Chromium (Cr) 25.0
Copper (Cu) 2.5
Cyanide (CN) (available) 1.0
Iron (Fe) 1,000.0
Lead (Pb) 1.0
Nickel (Ni) 5.0
Silver (Ag) 1.0
187. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 256-16 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-16
248:613
Substance
Limit
(mg/l)
Zinc (Zn) 7.3
Total phenolic compounds: 1.0 or See Appendix B188
(b) All limitations are based on samples collected over an
operating period representative of an industrial user's
discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136.
(c) The limitation for total PCB is non-detect. Total PCB shall not
be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA
Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2
ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of
demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more
samples indicate detectable levels of total PCB, the user shall
be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this
Section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data
showing that the total PCB concentration is below the
detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with
§ 256-23D.
(d) The limitation of mercury (Hg) is non-detect. Mercury (Hg)
shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S.
EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not
exceed 0.2 ugm/1, unless a higher level is appropriate because
of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or
more samples indicate detectable levels of mercury, the user
shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For the purposes
of this section, this demonstration may be made using
analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is
below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in
accordance with § 256-23D.
(e) All limitations are based on samples collected over an
operating period representative of an industrial user's
discharge, and in accordance 40 CFR Part 136.
(3) Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this
article, the Department shall notify all industrial user's operating
under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement
to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective
date of this article. The compliance report shall demonstrate the
user's compliance or noncompliance with these limitations, and, in
the event of noncompliance, include the submission of a plan and
schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no
event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the
effective date of this article. An industrial user who does not
188. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 256-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-16
248:614
demonstrate compliance may petition the Department for a second
extension as part of an administrative consent order. The
Department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and
penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a
second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon
a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to
achieve compliance with this provision.
C. National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall comply
with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and
requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 CFR
Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby
incorporated by reference, and with all other applicable standards and
requirements, provided that where a more stringent standard or
requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this
article, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be
controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR Part 403 and as established by the
Department. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards which
have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are
delineated in Appendix A.189
(1) Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to reflect the
presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the
requirements of 40 CFR § 403.15. Upon notification of approval by
the Department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the
permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until
incorporated into an industrial user's permit.
(2) Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The
Department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality,
whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal
credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40
CFR 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the
POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each
pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided that
any limitation of such pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither is
being exceeded nor poses the prospect of being exceeded as a
result of the removal credit being granted. Where such
authorization is given to the Department, any industrial user
desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the
Department, consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7 and of
this article. Any credits which may be granted under this section
may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 CFR
403.7, or as determined by the Department. A requisite to the
granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a
189. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 256-16 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-16
248:615
surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by
the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which
the Board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time
to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit
granted pursuant to this section.
(3) New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria
shall install, maintain in operating condition, and "start-up" all
pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the
shortest feasible time, and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must
meet all applicable pretreatment standards.
(4) Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical
pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of
pollutant per unit of production, the Department may convert the
limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes
of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial
users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with
40 CFR 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 CFR 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed
pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 1317(d) and
of this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the
equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical
standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
(5) Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of
categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180
days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made
upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to
such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging
into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit
to the Department a report containing the information listed in 40
CFR 403.12(b)(1-7). Where reports containing this information
have already been submitted to the Director or regional
administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 CFR
128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this
information. At least 90 days before commencement of any
discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become
industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard shall submit to the Department a report
which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-5). In
such report, new sources shall include information concerning the
method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide
estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4) and
(5).
§ 256-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-16
248:616
D. Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall
increase the use of process water or in any way dilute or attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation or requirement imposed by the City of Roseville, the
City of Detroit or by the State of Michigan.
E. Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is
hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is
subject to the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to,
permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or
solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW,
with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the
person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a
permit from the Department for unloading such waste in accordance
with the Board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be
subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as
established by the Board. Hauled-in wastewater shall only be
discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or
approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified
in § 256-18 of this Code. The Department may establish specific
limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW
treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this
article.
F. Centralized waste treatment.
(1) It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to
discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW
without a wastewater discharge permit from the Department. Any
authorization granted, or permit issued, by the Department to a
centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of
wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge
approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or
wastewater is determined by the Department to require further
authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has
submitted an application to, and received previous approval from,
the Department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain
further authorization from the Department before discharging such
wastewater.
(2) An industrial user that provides centralized waste treatment
services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of
such types of wastewater to the POTW shall provide the following
minimum information in support thereof:
(a) The general nature, source and process(es) generating the
type of wastewater. Any wastewater which is generated from
those processes and is subject to National Categorical
§ 256-16 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-16
248:617
Pretreatment Standards as delineated in Appendix A190 shall be
so designated;
(b) The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be
present in the wastewater;
(c) At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis
for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for
which application is made in Subsection F(1) of this section;
(d) A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which
addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater,
received or collected by the facility's treatment process(es);
(e) The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport
or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any
other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized
waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its
permit and/or license to the Department; and
(f) Other information requested by the Department, including, but
not limited to, information required by § 256-18C(1) through
(18) of this Code, or by rules adopted by the Board.
(3) The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility
will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater
delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 256-18 of this Code,
will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The
centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all
applicable provisions contained in § 256-18 of this Code regarding
permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the
Department may include in the permit a requirement to report at
selected intervals the information mandated in Subsection F(1)
through (6) of this section.
(4) All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records
which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and
constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and
disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the
Department.
G. Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the
Department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is
prohibited.
(1) The Department may authorize the discharge of groundwater
resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or
electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to
appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall
190. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 256-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-16
248:618
authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit.
Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its
enactment.
(2) If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from
purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and
received a permit from the Department, the Department may
authorize the discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 256-18 of this
Code, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the Board.
H. The City of Roseville right of revision. The City of Detroit and the City of
Roseville reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by
the Board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the POTW.
I. Accidental discharges.
(1) Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved
spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this article, and all significant industrial
users shall submit to the Department detailed plans which show
facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide
protection against such accidental discharges. Facilities and
measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be
implemented, provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial
user's cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an
approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing
significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan
within 60 days of the effective date of this article. New significant
industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they
commence discharging.
(a) For purposes of this section, the information provided shall
include the approximate average and maximum quantities of
such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises
in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom
and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that
are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and
constitute a concentration of five 5% or greater in the raw
material, chemical solution or waste material are required to
be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent
thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could
cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW.
(b) The industrial user shall promptly notify the Department of any
significant changes or modifications to the plan, including, but
not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance
inventory.
§ 256-16 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-16
248:619
(2) At least once every two years, the Department shall evaluate
whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug
discharges, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise
provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and
submit such a plan within 30 days of notification by the
Department.
J. Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this
article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a
discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with
federal, state or City of Roseville laws, rules, regulations or permit
requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which
has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan
prepared in accordance with Subsection I(1) of this section, the
industrial user shall telephone the Department at its control center and
notify the Department of the discharge. The notification shall include
the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of
wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited
pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being
taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days
after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and, when
required by the Department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge
permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent such
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial
user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or
any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or
property.
K. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising
employees whom to contact in the Department in the event of an actual
or excessive or prohibited discharge.
L. Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or
causes damage to or impairs the Department's POTW, or causes the
Department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the
Department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by
the Department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to
assessing such costs, the Department shall notify the user of its
determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of
such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the City's NPDES
permit and the Department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any
such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates
the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost
estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation
of this article. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
§ 256-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-16
248:620
§ 256-17. Fees.
penalties or remedies provided under this article, or this Code, or other
statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity.
M. Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into
the City of Roseville collection system, shall notify the Department in
writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261. Such
notification must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(p).
N. Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined in
§ 256-15A of this Code, may designate a duly authorized representative
of the individual designated in Subsection (1) or (2) of the definition of
"authorized representative of industrial user" in § 256-15 where:
(1) The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in
Subsection (1) or (2) of the definition of "authorized representative
of industrial user" in § 256-15;
(2) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant
manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a
position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility
for environmental matters for the company; and
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the Department.
O. Pollution prevention. The Department shall encourage and support
industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention
programs that are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant
contributions beyond the levels required by this article. The
Department may require an industrial user to implement pollution
prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as
necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the
Board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation,
maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as
provided by law or by Board action.
B. The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating,
maintaining, or improving the Department's industrial waste
control and pretreatment programs; and
§ 256-16 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-17
248:621
§ 256-18. Wastewater discharge permits.
(2) User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or
quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment
costs, including sludge handling and disposal; and
(3) Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings, including,
but not limited to, expenses regarding hearing officers, court
reporters, and transcriptions; and
(4) Other fees, which the Board may deem necessary, to carry out the
requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law.
C. For water and sewer used for nonresidential customers, a quarterly
surcharge shall be invoiced equivalent to three monthly charges from
the City of Detroit for industrial waste control meter charges as
established from time to time by the City of Detroit, Michigan Water
and Sewerage Department. [Added 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 1222]
D. For water and sewer used for nonresidential customers who release
pollutants in excess of the limits established by the City of Detroit for
industrial waste control excess strength surcharge requirements as
established from time to time by the City of Detroit, Michigan Water
and Sewerage Department, shall pay the City of Detroit at the
established rates based on City of Detroit invoices. [Added 6-23-2009
by Ord. No. 1222]
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any
wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise
not comply with the discharge prohibitions of § 256-16 of this Code. It
shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the
POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water
and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by
the Department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any
discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1) All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the
effective date of this article, shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days of the effective date of this article.
Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a
valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision.
These applications are to include all information specified in
§ 256-18C of this Code and, where applicable, any additional
information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline
monitoring report requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(2) All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The
application must include all information specified in § 256-18C of
this Code and, where applicable, any additional information that
may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 CFR
§ 256-17 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-18
248:622
403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the Department,
no discharge shall be made into the POTW.
(3) Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than
sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request
approval from the Department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days
prior to the commencement of the discharge.
B. Permit application or reapplication. The Department may require any
user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to
submit the same to the Department for determining whether the
industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the
wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of being so
notified, a user shall comply with the Department's request in the
manner and form prescribed by the Department. Failure of the
Department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to
obtain a permit as required by this article.
(1) A user which becomes subject to a new or revised National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, unless an
earlier date is specified or required by 40 CFR 403.12(b). The
existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all
the information specified in § 256-18C and G of this Code.
(2) A separate permit application shall be required for each separate
facility.
(3) Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of
90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form
prescribed by the Department.
C. Application or reapplication information. In support of an application or
reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user
shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
(1) Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal
employer identification number, address, and location of the
discharging facility;
(2) Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial
user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user
financially and legally;
(3) All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as
amended;
§ 256-18 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-18
248:623
(4) Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for
each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such
parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having
numeric limitations as enumerated in § 256-16A and B of this Code,
those pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment
standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic
pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge,
regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the
expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations
during a one-year period shall be provided. For industries subject
to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements,
the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each
categorical process waste stream. Combined waste streams
proposed to be regulated by the combined waste stream formula
shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed
in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
33 U.S.C. § 1314(g) and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by
the administrator.
(5) A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes
on the premises. Those processes which are subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall be so
designated. As pertains to Subsection C(4), of this section, identify
which pollutants are associated with each process;
(6) Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in Subsection C(4),
of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are
either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the
pollutants referred to in Subsection C(4). Any user claiming
immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of
national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity;
(7) A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each
process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven
days of the week;
(8) Denote:
(a) The average and maximum twenty-four-hour wastewater flow
rates, including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations;
(b) Each national categorical process waste stream flow rate and
the cooling water, sanitary water and stormwater flow rates
separately for each connection to the POTW; and
(c) Each combined waste stream;
§ 256-18 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-18
248:624
(9) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes
by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges
into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections
receive each national categorical process waste stream and which
connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water;
also show which lines handle each combined waste stream. This
schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information furnished in
Subsection C(8) of this section;
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production
based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards
or requirements only;
(11) A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this
article and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional
construction is required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be
reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as
appropriate, certified by a qualified professional;
(12) Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental
discharges in accordance with the requirements of § 256-16I of this
Code;
(13) Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system
for each production process;
(14) A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which
identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or
continuous process type;
(15) If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable
water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the
types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the
estimated wastewater volumes from each source;
(16) If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance
procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this article
and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
construction and/or implement the required operation and
maintenance procedures;
(17) Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization
assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible
source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to
reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at
the facility; and
§ 256-18 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-18
248:625
(18) Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare
and process a wastewater discharge permit.
D. Permit issuance.
(1) Upon receipt of an application, the Department shall review the
application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing
regarding any of the following:
(a) The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant
industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater
discharge permit;
(b) The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant
industrial user but is found by the Department to have no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater
discharge permit. The Department shall make such
determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6);
(c) The application is incomplete or the information only partially
satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12
or by the Department, and that additional information and data
are required, which shall be promptly furnished. Where
appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific
information that is missing, or that the application is
unacceptable;
(d) The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge
permit. The Department shall notify the industrial user of its
determination and the basis of the determination.
(2) The Department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant
user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or
permit application, to the Department as the control authority in
accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 403.12, or
whose discharge is in violation of this article. If the Department
determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater
discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data
furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by
certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft
permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. An industrial
user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to the
draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in
§ 256-24 of this Code, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an
appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the
Department of any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be
issued as final. Only one facility location shall be included in each
permit.
§ 256-18 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-18
248:626
E. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all
requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to
incorporate all provisions of this article, other applicable laws, rules,
regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of
Detroit or the City of Roseville without repetition therein. In addition,
permits may contain the following:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or
characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or
supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in § 256-16 of this
Code, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards;
(2) Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(3) Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the
industrial user;
(4) Restrictions on which of the user's discharge waste streams are to
be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the
POTW;
(5) Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs, which may
include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules;
(6) Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the
containment of spills or slug discharges;
(7) Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application;
(8) Additional reporting requirements:
(a) All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by
the Department, or on an alternative form approved by the
Department, indicating the status of compliance with all
conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater
discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this
article. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be
submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be
established by the Department. Analytical data generated by
the Department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's
own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge
permit.
(b) Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance
with the requirements of § 256-18E(8)(d) and (e) of this Code.
The report shall show the concentration of each substance for
which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may
§ 256-18 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-18
248:627
be identified by the Department in accordance with
§ 256-18E(9) and (11) of this Code.
(c) Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at
the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by
the Department. A compliance report shall be submitted to the
Department no later than 90 days following the final
compliance date for a standard or, in the case of a new source,
no later than 90 days following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall
be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule
established by the Department and incorporated into the
industrial user's discharge permit and in accordance with
§ 256-18E(8)(d) and (e) of this Code. The reports shall be either
on a form prescribed by the Department or on an alternate
form approved by the Department, and shall indicate the
nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process which are limited by national
categorical pretreatment standards, or for which there is a
specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by
the Department in accordance with § 256-18E(9) and (11) of
this Code. The report shall include a record of measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The
combined waste stream formula may be used for reporting
purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the
Department, provided there have been no changes to the
elements composing the combined waste stream.
(d) Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling
performed during the period covered by the report and of the
discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for
significant industrial users subject to production-based
standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related flow or
production and mass as required to determine compliance with
the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general
pretreatment regulations, being 40 CFR Part 403, or by the
Department, but no less than is necessary to assess and assure
compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
applicable regulations contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and
amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using
validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. If
an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than
§ 256-18 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-18
248:628
required by the Department using the procedures as
prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in such report. The report shall state whether
the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system
improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial
user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards.
(e) This report, and those required under §§ 256-16C(5) and
256-18E(8)(b) and (c) of this Code, shall include the following
certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this
document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry
of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing
violations." Said certification shall be signed by the facility's
authorized representative, as defined in § 256-15 of this Code.
If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative
definition must be submitted to the Department prior to, or
together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
(f) If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the
user shall notify the Department within 24 hours of the time
said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the
violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and
analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
Department within 30 days after said user becomes, or should
have become, aware of the violation.
(9) In the event the Director determines that an industrial user is
discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which
may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the
Department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits
applicable to the user. To the extent the Department seeks to
impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than
established in this article, the Department shall provide written
documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection
§ 256-18 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-18
248:629
against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES
permit;
(10) Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and
(11) Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance
with this article.
F. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period.
Except as deemed necessary by the Department, or as otherwise
provided for under this article, permits shall be issued for a specified
period of not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing
permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application
for permit reissuance to the Department, shall be automatically
extended until a permit is issued as final.
G. Permit modification.
(1) The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the Department during the term of the permit as
limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified
in § 256-16 of this Code are amended, or other just cause exists.
Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
(a) Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility
or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial
user's effluent. It shall be the industrial user's duty to request
an application form and apply for a modification of the permit
within 30 calendar days of the change;
(b) Change(s) in the Department's NPDES permit;
(c) Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a
court order;
(d) Any changes necessary to fulfill the Department's role as
control authority;
(e) An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing
permit;
(f) A change of conditions within the POTW;
(g) A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the
industrial user;
(h) Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements, including 40 CFR
Part 403 and those delineated in Appendix A of this article.191
Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the
191. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 256-18 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-18
248:630
Department for a modified permit within 90 days after the
promulgation of a new or revised national categorical
pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be
subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection
shall be confined to that information related to the newly
promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment
standard or requirement. However, information previously
submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously
submitted information continues to be current and applicable.
In addition, the Department may initiate this action;
(i) Changes in the monitoring location (see § 256-19 of this Code);
(j) Typographical errors or omissions in permits;
(k) The Department may modify the permit on its own initiative
based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or
(l) The user may request a modification of the permit.
(2) When initiated by the Department, the industrial user shall be
informed of any proposed change in its permit. The Department
will issue a draft permit, and an industrial user has 30 days to file a
response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the Department
will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with
the procedures contained in § 256-24 of this Code, the permit will
become effective 20 days after issuance.
H. Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued
to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or
sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written
approval of the Department, and providing a copy of the existing permit
to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to
notify the Department of any such change at least 30 days before the
date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive
the written approval of the Department prior to the change, shall be
null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has
occurred, the Department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place,
the Department may require the application for a new or modified
permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and
conditions of any existing permit which the Department allows to be
retained.
I. Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly
notify the Department in advance of any substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed
or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40
CFR 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and
apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to
§ 256-18 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-18
248:631
§ 256-19. Monitoring facilities.
the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered
a violation of this article.
A. Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their
own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate
monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their
discharge by the Department and the industrial user, and to enable the
Department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required
for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and
standards as provided for in this article. In the event the Department
determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit
application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified,
or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample
of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise
determined at the discretion of the Department, said facility shall be
provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the Department.
The industrial user shall provide the Department with:
(1) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes
by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges
into the POTW;
(2) A flow schematic showing: (i) which connections receive each
national categorical process waste stream, (ii) which connections
receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water, and (iii) which
lines handle each combined waste stream. This report shall be
certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user
fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time
limits, then the Department may install such structure or device
and the significant user shall reimburse the Department for any
costs incurred therein.
B. The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's
premises in a location readily accessible to the Department. When such
a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the
industrial user, the Department may allow the facility to be constructed
in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the
location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It
shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary
approvals which may be required from other government agencies for
the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be
ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether
constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
§ 256-18 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-19
248:632
§ 256-20. Inspection, sampling and recordkeeping.
Department's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. (See § 256-18G.)
A. For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any other
applicable provisions of this Code or applicable state or federal laws
and regulations, the Department may inspect the establishment, facility
or other premises of the industrial user. The Department's employees or
authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's
premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring
and/or metering activities.
B. Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and
completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon
arrival at the industrial user's premises, the Department shall inform
the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling
and/or inspection is commencing and that the facility's authorized
representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling.
The Department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed
from, carrying out its inspection or sampling duties due to the
unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe
or participate in the inspection or sampling activity.
C. While performing work on private property, employees or authorized
representatives of the Department shall observe all reasonable safety,
security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as
established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or
representatives of the Department shall bear proper credentials and
identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied
by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly
authorized Department representatives shall not be restricted from
viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or
representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this
article, which shall be maintained by the Department as confidential in
accordance with § 256-21 of this Code.
D. Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial
user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security
personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials,
personnel from the Department will be permitted to enter for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
E. Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in
accordance with the provisions of their permit. The Department may
require such samples to be split with the Department for the
Department's independent analysis.
F. Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from
monitoring activities required by this article, or by 40 CFR 403.12(n).
Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years.
§ 256-19 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-20
248:633
§ 256-21. Confidential information.
This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of
any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the
industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste
Program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the
EPA.
G. Upon the request of the Department, industrial users shall furnish
information and records relating to discharges into the POTW.
Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the
Department at all reasonable times, and allow the Department to copy
such records.
H. In the event the Department obtains samples, and analyses are made of
such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly
furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized
representative. When requested by the industrial user, the Department
employee or representative shall leave with the user a portion of any
sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or
adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of
disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed
by the Department shall be controlling unless proven invalid.
I. In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described
herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's
discharge is obtained by the Department, and then analyzed in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, and found to contain concentrations
of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric
limitations as listed in § 256-16B of this Code, or as contained in the
facility's wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall
implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to
the Department within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater
concentration and provides a description of the means by which future
discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times
the limitation in the future.
A. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Department that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the industrial user.
(1) When submitted to the Department, all information claimed to be
confidential must be clearly marked "confidential." When
requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a
report determined by the Department to disclose trade secrets or
trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as
§ 256-20 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-21
248:634
§ 256-22. Statutes, laws and regulations.
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards defined in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by
reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any
reference in this article to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted,
adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any
element or organization of government other than the City of Roseville shall
be construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in
effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this
article.
§ 256-23. Violations; upset; bypass; enforcement.
confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this article, to the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the State
Disposal System permit and/or the pretreatment programs;
provided, however, that information shall be treated as confidential
by the governmental agency, until such time as the information
has been determined to be nonconfidential by the governmental
agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the
Department releases pursuant to a request of another
governmental agency, should be handled by the other
governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality
procedures. The Department cannot control how another
governmental agency handles such confidential information, and
assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information
released to the governmental agency. The Department will use
sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the
existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim.
(2) The Department shall determine whether the information
requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the
requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The
decision of the Department shall be made in writing.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized
as confidential information.
B. Except as otherwise determined by the Department or provided for by
applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file
with the City shall be made available upon request by such user or the
user's authorized representative during normal business hours.
A. Violations. It shall be a violation of this article for any user to:
(1) Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater
constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's
discharge;
§ 256-21 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-23
248:635
(2) Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations
or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time
frames provided in § 256-18G(1)(a) of this Code;
(3) Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste
discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring;
(4) Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any
monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The
locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a
violation pursuant to this subsection, provided that upon request
reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the
Department;
(5) Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the
Department's monitoring devices, including, but not limited to,
samplers;
(6) Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial
user's wastewater discharge permit;
(7) Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of
this article, including any rule, regulation, or order issued
hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with
wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of
this article shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
requirements of this article, and such permits shall remain in effect
and be enforceable under this article until a superseding permit is
effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements on the date
specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance
schedules.
B. Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards where the requirements of Subsection B(1) of this section
are met.
(1) An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;
(b) At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures;
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the Department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of
§ 256-23 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-23
248:636
becoming aware of the upset, and where this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days:
[1] A description of the discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(2) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof;
(3) The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things,
the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost or fails.
C. Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a
violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for
essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment
system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of Subsection
C(1) and (2) of this section.
(1) Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass
shall submit notice to the Department at least 10 days in advance.
(2) Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral
notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the
industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of
the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of
the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue,
and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass.
(3) Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and
the Department may take enforcement action against a user for a
bypass, unless:
(a) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
§ 256-23 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-23
248:637
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventative maintenance; and
(c) The industrial user properly notified the Department as
described in Subsection C(2) of this section.
(4) Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in Subsection C(3)
of this section, the Department may approve an anticipated bypass.
D. Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant
defined in § 256-16B of this Code during a six-month period exceed by
any magnitude the daily maximum nondetect limit for the same
parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution
prevention initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response. The Department
may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a
BMP as a part of the Department's enforcement response. Upon
approval of the Department, these pollution prevention initiatives, or
BMPs shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge
permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical
results and certifications in support of their implementation of an
approved pollution prevention initiative or BMPs. Upon demonstration
of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this
implementation requirement.
E. Emergency suspensions and orders. The Department may order
suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the Department,
such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the
health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may
interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to
violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a
suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the
wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event the Department provides informal
notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall
be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to
comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the
Department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or
the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the Director shall
notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and
order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the Department
shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing
§ 256-23 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-23
248:638
before the Director, or his designated representative, within 10 days
of such action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement to the Department within 15 days of the occurrence
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination
of the noncomplying discharge, the Department shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater
treatment service.
F. Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened
discharge as specified in Subsection E of this section, whenever the
Department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated
or is violating this article, the Department shall serve a written notice
stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where
applicable, the Department shall pursue appropriate escalating
enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement
response plan. The failure of the Department to issue a notice of
violation shall not preclude the Department from escalating its
enforcement response.
G. Administrative actions. Whenever the Department has reasonable
grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of
its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or
requirement or any prohibition of this article, the Department may
initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action, except in the
case of emergency or flagrant violation, in order to compel the
industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as
possible.
(1) Conference; compliance schedule.
(a) Conferences. The Department may order any person who
violates this article to attend a conference wherein the
Department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or
remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable
compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at
least 10 days before the scheduled conference and shall set
forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be
conducted by a representative of the Department. The
industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving
compliance with this article. Nothing contained herein shall
require the Department to accept or agree to any proposed
plan or schedule, or to prevent the Department from
proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in
Subsection G(2) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a
compliance schedule, the user and the Department's duly
authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a
compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth
the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit
good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this article
and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder.
§ 256-23 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-23
248:639
(b) Compliance schedules. The user and the Department may
agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and
conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of
actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These
schedules may be developed as part of a compliance
agreement or an administrative consent order. Schedules
developed under this Subsection shall adhere to the following
conditions:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the
implementation of additional operation and maintenance
procedures required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable pretreatment requirements and standards,
including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, and completing construction;
[2] No single increment referred to in Subsection G (1)(b)[1]
of this section shall exceed nine months;
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the Department, including, at
a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which
it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return to the established schedule; and
[4] Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in
the industrial user being found in violation of this article.
(c) Administrative orders. The Department may order any
industrial user who violates or continues to violate this article
or a duly issued permit to install and to properly operate
devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances.
In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as
might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the
violation, including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring and management practices,
implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify
and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling
practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at
the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent
order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral
administrative order.
§ 256-23 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-23
248:640
(2) Show cause hearing. The Department may order any industrial
user who violates this article or allows such violation to occur to
show cause before the Department why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the
industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the
Department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why the action is
to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the
industrial user to show cause before the Department why any
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail
with return receipt requested, at least 10 days before the hearing.
Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or
its authorized representative.
(a) Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures adopted by the Board. A
hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take
the evidence, and may:
[1] In the name of the Board, issue notices of hearing
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved
in such hearing;
[2] Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Director for action thereon.
(b) Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this
article, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter.
(3) Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the
hearings officer shall issue order to the industrial user directing
any of the following actions:
(a) Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition,
restriction or requirement of this article, or applicable local,
state or federal law or regulation;
(b) Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment
equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing
treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time
period;
(c) Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and
quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during
a specified time period;
(d) Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity
determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final
period set by a compliance date;
§ 256-23 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-23
248:641
(e) Control of discharge quantities;
(f) Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection,
monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's
activities by the Department during compliance efforts; and/or
(g) Any such other orders as are appropriate, including, but not
limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater
treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge
permit, or orders directing that following a specified time
period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or
operation and maintenance practices have been employed.
(h) A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the
evidence that a violation either of this article or of a duly issued
permit did not occur.
(4) Public notification of significant noncompliance. The Department
shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of
Detroit and the City of Roseville a list of all industrial users which
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements at any time during the previous 12 months. All
industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be
provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before
publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its
accuracy.
H. Legal actions.
(1) Criminal action. Any user who violates any provision of this article,
including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges
imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued
pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required
under this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation per
day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The
Department and/or the City of Roseville is hereby authorized,
through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against
any person violating any provision of this article.
(2) Civil action. Whenever the Department has reasonable grounds to
believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its
wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or
requirement or any requirement of this article, the Director or City
Council may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a
court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging,
and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The
§ 256-23 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-23
248:642
§ 256-24. Reconsideration and appeal.
Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest
actions, determinations, or decisions of the Department which result from
its construction, application and enforcement of this article. The procedures
contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with
respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this article.
Department or Board and/or the City of Roseville may also seek
additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit
neither constitutes an exclusive election of remedies nor prohibits
the Department, Director, Board, or City of Detroit, and/or the
City of Roseville from commencing action in federal court for
discharges believed to be in violation of this article, state and
federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of
Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements.
In addition, the City of Detroit and/or the City of Roseville may
recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters'
fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities
or litigation against the person found to have violated this article,
or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
(3) All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of
competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water
and Sewerage Department and/or the City of Roseville.
A. Selection of reconsideration or of appeal.
(1) Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are
expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may
be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized
industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger who is
adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is
made by, or on behalf of, the Department by the Director, or an
authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or
enforces the provisions of this article.
(2) An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee,
authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger
who is adversely affected: (a) By a permit issued as final by the
Department; or (b) By an administrative order entered after a show
cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration.
(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article, a request
for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized
representative, and received at the Department's General Offices
within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action,
determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration
shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement
of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request.
§ 256-23 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-24
248:643
(4) A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by
hand delivery or by certified mail to the General Offices of the
Department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either
is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or
is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the
Director, or the Department's authorized representative, is final
and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed waived.
B. Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper
request for reconsideration, the Department shall notify the applicant
of the time and place for a hearing.
(1) A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings
officer who is designated by the Director and may be an employee
of the Department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in
the form of a recommendation to the Director and embodied in an
administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order
that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an
administrative order is appealable in accordance with Subsection C
of this section.
(2) Where improperly or untimely submitted, the Department may
reject a request for reconsideration. The Department shall notify
the requester in writing that the request has been rejected.
(3) Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing
shall be conducted neither less than 10 days nor more than 30 days
after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the
hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable
time.
(4) The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation
and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall
present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection
with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound
by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be
transcribed, and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing
transcript, as appropriate, from the Department or from the court
reporter.
(5) Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer
shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation
to the Director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the
requester by certified mail.
(6) Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the
waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in
accordance with this section shall stay the action by the
Department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration.
§ 256-24 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-24
248:644
§ 256-25. (Reserved)
§ 256-26. (Reserved)
§ 256-27. (Reserved)
§ 256-28. (Reserved)
§ 256-29. (Reserved)
§ 256-30. (Reserved)
C. Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for
an appeal, the Department shall notify the applicant in writing
regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with procedures set by the Board until rules
are promulgated pursuant to Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City
Charter. In addition:
(1) Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the
Department's action, determination or decision regarding the
request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance
with this article.
(2) Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained
in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination
or decision of the Director, or the Department's authorized
representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed
waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the Department
may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester
in writing that such request has been rejected.
(3) The Department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings
officer shall review the evidence and, within 15 days after the close
of the hearing, shall issue a written recommendation to uphold,
modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the
Department.
(4) The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be
submitted to the Board, which shall render a final decision within
thirty 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(5) In accordance with applicable law, the user or the Department may
appeal any final decision of the Board to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(6) Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the
waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance
with this section shall stay the action by the Department that is the
subject of the appeal.
§ 256-24 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-31
248:645
§ 256-31. (Reserved)
§ 256-32. (Reserved)
§ 256-33. (Reserved)
§ 256-34. (Reserved)
§ 256-35. (Reserved)
§ 256-36. (Reserved)
§ 256-37. (Reserved)
§ 256-38. (Reserved)
§ 256-39. (Reserved)
§ 256-40. (Reserved)
§ 256-41. (Reserved)
§ 256-42. (Reserved)
§ 256-43. (Reserved)
§ 256-44. (Reserved)
§ 256-45. (Reserved)
§ 256-46. (Reserved)
§ 256-47. (Reserved)
§ 256-31 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-47
248:646
ARTICLE III
Cleaning of Sewers on Private Property
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. III of Ch. 256 of the
1984 Code]
§ 256-48. Cleaning private sewer leads; fees. [Amended 4-11-1989
by Ord. No. 990; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Upon the request of the owner or occupant of any private property within
the City of Roseville, the Department of Waters and Sewers is authorized
to and may perform the necessary cleaning of sewers on private property.
The fee for such cleaning shall be as provided in Chapter 133, Fees. It is the
responsibility of the property owner to provide an accessible cleanout.
§ 256-49. Notification and billing.
The owner of any private property within the city whose sewers have been
cleaned by the Department of Water and Sewers shall be notified of such
cleaning service and shall be billed for the same. Such notice shall further
provide that, upon failure to pay said cost within 30 days after the receipt of
such bill, such cost shall be a lien upon the premises and, if not paid within
said 30 days, shall be added on the next city tax statement and collected in
the same manner as city taxes.
§ 256-48 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-49
248:647

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Systems
[Adopted 6-28-2019 by Ord. No. 1311192]
§ 256-50. Construction plan design standards for stormwater
systems.
Unless otherwise noted, the following design standards and requirements
apply to construction plans submitted for review by the City of Roseville for
all types of developments or drain-related construction activities.
§ 256-51. Prevention, control, and reduction of stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
§ 256-52. General requirements.
The following general stormwater management requirements apply to all
new developments and redevelopments in the City of Roseville.
A. With this article, the City adopts the requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the
storm drain system, or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own
expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) or watercourses through the use of these structural and
nonstructural BMPs.
B. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or
may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms
and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These
BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
C. "Reasonable protection" for the purposes of this article shall mean the
installation, operation and maintenance of the required structural and/
or nonstructural BMPs, implementation and documentation of the
BMPs operation and maintenance procedures and practices; and
pollution prevention and good housekeeping (P2/GH) procedures and
practices necessary for the establishment to comply with state and
federal stormwater regulations.
192. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. IV, Stormwater Systems, adopted
10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 1274.
§ 256-50 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-52
248:649
A. The design process shall begin by identifying sensitive areas located on
the site and laying out the site to protect the sensitive areas.
B. Best management practices. Best management practices (BMPs) that
reduce the amount of stormwater runoff and improve water quality are
required and shall be designed on a site-specific basis. Rate and volume
reduction BMPs shall be used to protect open channel storm drains. All
BMPs shall be included on the plans and will be subject to review and
approval by the City of Roseville, the Macomb County Public Works
Office (MCPWO) and the Michigan Department of Environment, Great
Lakes and Energy (EGLE formerly MDEQ), or the authorized state
regulatory agency, as necessary for permits.
(1) During construction, all sites that disturb one or more acres of
land, or are located within 500 feet of waters of the state, BMP
usage shall be monitored and recorded in the weekly soil erosion
sedimentation control (SESC) reports. In such cases, weekly SESC
reports shall also be required during construction.
(2) Land uses with potential for significant pollutant loading ("hot
spots"), including but not limited to gas stations, commercial
vehicle maintenance and repair, auto recyclers, recycling centers,
and scrap yards, will require BMPs which address regulation of the
specific hazard as determined by the MCPWO or the City Engineer.
In such cases, weekly SESC reports shall also be required.
(3) The developer/owner shall include a long-term operation and
maintenance schedule for all permanent BMPs. A maintenance
agreement between the developer/owner and the City is necessary
for permanent BMPs which shall include but not be limited to:
inspection of structural or vegetative BMPs, performance of
maintenance and corrective actions when BMPs are neglected by
the owner, and deed restrictions. All such maintenance agreements
shall be binding on the property and shall remain in effect in the
event the property ownership is transferred or sold.
C. On-site management of stormwater is required first and foremost,
unless site constraints consistent with the flow chart preclude this
approach.
D. Stormwater shall be managed using four standards: channel protection,
flood control, water quality, and pretreatment to protect both water
resources and real property.
E. Channel protection control system shall be provided on all new
developments connecting to an open drain to protect the drain's
channel and banks from erosion due to the increased flow. Direct
discharges to the Macomb County Public Works Office drains are
generally governed by MCPWO design standards. Open drains within
the City of Roseville jurisdiction shall be protected by incorporating a
restricted flow of the channel protection volume. It is required that the
postdevelopment project site runoff volume and peak flow rate must be
§ 256-52 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-52
248:650
maintained at or below predevelopment levels for all storms up to the
two-year, twenty-four-hour event. "Predevelopment level" means the
runoff flow volume and rate for the last land use prior to the planned
new development or redevelopment. Compliance with this requirement
is determined by calculating the existing ("predevelopment") and
postdevelopment runoff volume and rate for the two-year and smaller
storm events. The method is described in the Department of
Environmental Quality (DEQ) publication, Computing Flood Discharges
for Small Ungaged Watersheds, dated July 2003 (updated January 22,
2010).
(1) If it is demonstrated using the Alternative Approach Flowchart
(Exhibit A193) that the development cannot meet the required
channel protection performance standard, the development may
propose incorporation of green infrastructure [i.e., rain gardens,
green (vegetated) roofs, permeable pavement, impervious cover
removal, use of trees, etc.] This includes instances where site
conditions (e.g., space limitations or tight soils that prevent
infiltration, or soil or groundwater contamination, "hot spots")
challenge or prohibit feasibility of maintaining the project site's
predevelopment runoff levels for all storms up to the two-year,
twenty-four-hour event. Green infrastructure shall be allowed
under all circumstances consistent with the flowchart. Review of
these proposals will be consistent with the SEMCOG Low Impact
Development Manual for Michigan, 2008 or current standards.
F. Flood control shall be provided for all sites through retention or
detention. On-site detention or retention of stormwater is required of
all new developments or redevelopments to maintain the peak outflow
to a rate similar to the predevelopment runoff rate. On-site flood control
may be reduced or waived for direct discharges to large lakes and
rivers if the developer demonstrates no negative impacts, or if provided
in a regional facility with adequate upstream infrastructure.
G. Overland flow routes and the extent of high water levels for the
100-year storm shall be identified for all sites.
H. Water quality treatment shall be provided for all sites. A minimum
treatment volume equal to one inch of runoff from the project site is
required. A minimum volume of 900 cubic feet per acre is required for
directly connected disturbed pervious areas (i.e., lawns). BMPs shall be
designed to reduce postdevelopment solids loadings by 80% or to not
exceed solids loadings of 80 milligrams per liter. Developments that
disturb less than one acre, and are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale, may be exempted from the City's water quality
treatment standards as approved by the City Engineer.
193. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 256-52 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-52
248:651
I. Pretreatment is required for infiltration, filtration and detention BMPs
for ease of maintenance and to protect BMP integrity and preserve
longevity.
J. Stormwater discharges from activities with a high risk for an accidental
spill of pollutants (stormwater hot spots) shall provide spill
containment.
K. The design maximum release rate, volume or concentration of
stormwater discharged from a site shall not exceed the capacity of
existing infrastructure or cause impairment to the off-site receiving
area. Evaluation of the existing outlet must be performed and an
adequate outlet must be provided.
L. The use of many decentralized low-impact development (LID) BMPs is
not mandated but is encouraged on private sites.
M. Unless otherwise noted, hydraulic and hydrologic calculations
(including rainfall volumes and distributions) shall be based on current
EGLE standards (i.e., NOAA Atlas 14) and procedures in place at the
time of application.
N. Construction plans for a phased development shall show the existing
and/or proposed drainage systems for all prior phases of the
development, unless the drainage system for the current phase is
entirely independent of the prior phases. Furthermore, drainage plans
for a phase of a development must not be dependent upon work planned
to be performed in a future phase.
O. Plans shall include a grading plan showing existing and proposed
topographic contour lines and proposed finish floor and basement floor
elevations.
P. All existing natural or man-made watercourses shall be shown on the
plans. The proposed changes to the site must not interfere with
common law natural flow rights. Existing watercourses must be
preserved or relocated, or the flow otherwise accommodated by the
proposed plans. Provisions for the maintenance of the watercourse
must be included in the deed restriction or an equivalent legally binding
agreement. EGLE and/or the Army Corps of Engineers may also require
permits for changes made to such watercourses.
Q. No construction activities shall be allowed without approval of the City
of Roseville Building Official in a 100-year floodplain as determined by
the City of Roseville.
R. The cover sheet of the plans shall include a "permit status table"
indicating the status of all permits being obtained.
S. If an established drain is involved, construction plans shall include a
note indicating that "All work performed in the right-of-way of an
established drain shall require a permit from the Drain Commissioner."
§ 256-52 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-52
248:652
§ 256-53. Established drains.
§ 256-54. Storm sewers.
T. The engineer's seal shall be affixed to all sheets of the construction
plans.
U. Unless the storm sewers are to be owned and maintained by a single
private entity (i.e., municipal or commercial development,
manufactured housing community, etc.), all storm sewers shall be
located within an easement. The minimum easement width for a storm
sewer shall be 12 feet centered on the sewer center line. City Engineer
may require a larger easement as necessary for access and to facilitate
maintenance and future repairs. The dedication of the easement shall
be required prior to acceptance of the continuous maintenance and
service by the City.
V. Privately maintained storm infrastructure, including but not limited to
pipes, stormwater detention facility, water treatment units, bioswales,
etc., will require a maintenance agreement.
W. All existing and proposed on-site drainage easements shall be clearly
shown.
X. No public right-of-way runoff shall be routed through private storm
sewer unless approved by City Engineer. All storm sewer intended to be
public (i.e., road drainage), shall be within a public right-of-way except
as may be necessary to outlet said public storm sewer to another public
sewer.
A. No construction activities shall be allowed without approval from the
Macomb County Public Works Office for any development directly
discharging to an established county drain. All work within the right-ofway
of the established drain is subject to the design standards and
requirements of the Macomb County Public Works Office.
B. If an established county drain is involved, construction plans shall
include a note indicating that "All work performed in the right-of-way of
an established drain shall require a permit from the Macomb County
Public Works Office."
C. Where drainage is discharged to an established drain, such outlets shall
be so designed as to enter the drain at an angle of 90° or less, as
determined by the upstream center line.
A. Plans shall show boundaries and acreages of catchment areas
contributing runoff to each proposed or existing catch basin and/or
inlet. Runoff from off-site tributary areas must be accommodated in
design or rerouted.
B. The required discharge capacity for each reach of sewer shall be
determined by the Rational Method.
§ 256-52 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-54
248:653
(1) A ten-year design storm shall be used such that rainfall intensity, I
= 175/(T + 25), where T = time of concentration in minutes.
(2) The runoff coefficient, C, shall be in conformance with normal
design practice. Where a weighted average coefficient is employed,
the computations shall be submitted for review.
(3) Minimum C-coefficients for various finish surfaces are as follows:
Finish Surface Minimum C-coefficient
Water surface 1.00
Impervious pavement and roofs 0.90
Dense graded stone and pavers 0.80
Open graded stone 0.60
Lawns 0.35
Other surface C-coefficients Subject to approval by City
Engineer
(4) The following averaged C-coefficients may be used in lieu of
weighted coefficient for proposed developments:
Development Averaged C-coefficients
Single-family residential 0.35
Multifamily residential 0.55
Commercial 0.85
Industrial 0.90
C. A complete set of storm sewer design calculations shall accompany
every set of construction plans submitted for review.
(1) Sewer capacities shall be based on the Manning Equation for full
flow velocity. With Manning's "n" coefficient as follows:
Pipe Material "n" Coefficient
Smooth lined, metal, PVC or
HDPE pipe
0.011
Reinforced concrete pipe 0.013
Corrugated, metal, PVC, or
HDPE pipe
0.024
Other pipe material n-coefficients subject to
approval by City Engineer
(2) Energy losses from friction shall be based on calculated design
storm peak discharges and velocities, not Manning design (i.e., fullpipe)
capacities.
§ 256-54 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-54
248:654
(3) Energy losses from friction shall be based on typical Manning "n"
roughness values as approved by the City Engineer.
(4) Energy losses through manholes and other appurtenances shall be
included in the design calculations or reflected in friction losses
through use of conservative Manning "n" roughness values as
approved by the City Engineer.
D. The storm sewer pipe shall have a minimum diameter of 12 inches when
constructed in a public right-of-way or easement.
E. Minimum allowable pipe velocity shall be 2.5 feet per second (except
where the minimum diameter requirement makes this unachievable).
Desirable pipe velocity range shall be four to eight feet per second.
Maximum allowable pipe velocity shall be 10 feet per second.
F. Hydraulic grade lines for the ten-year storm shall be calculated and
shown as a part of all storm sewer profiles. In no case shall the
elevation of the hydraulic grade line exceed the elevation of a point
lying one foot below the rim elevation of a manhole, catch basin or inlet.
The hydraulic grade line upstream of a detention or retention storage
facility shall be calculated assuming the design high water elevation
(e.g., full detention basin) or 8/10 height of pipe, whichever is higher.
G. The storm sewer plan and profile drawing shall show the following data:
(1) Proper identification and numbering of manholes, catch basins and
inlets.
(2) Invert and casting elevations for all structures.
(3) Pipe length (C/L to C/L to structures).
(4) Pipe diameter.
(5) Pipe slope.
(6) Pipe class or designation.
(7) Detail of trench construction and type of backfill material.
H. Generally, manholes shall be placed not more than 400 feet apart for
sewers less than 30 inches diameter and 600 feet apart for larger
sewers.
I. The minimum inside diameter of all manholes, catch basins and inlets
shall be 48 inches, with the following exception: Inlet structures from
which water will be discharged directly into a catch basin may be 24
inches inside diameter. The depth of such inlets shall be no greater 5.0
feet and no less than 3.5 feet from the top of frame and cover to the
invert.
J. Manholes and inlet structures may be constructed of brick, manhole
block, precast concrete (ASTM C478) or cast-in-place concrete.
§ 256-54 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-54
248:655
K. All manhole block or brick structures shall be plastered on the outside
with one to 2.5 mix of portland cement mortar, 1/2 inch thick. No
calcium chloride or other chemical shall be added to lower the freezing
point of the mortar, as the strength of the mortar may be lessened.
L. Inlet structures in the public street right-of-way shall be spaced a
maximum of 400 feet apart (or a maximum of 400 feet on either side of a
high point). The spacing and/or number of inlet structures required to
accommodate the design flows in streets and in private drives and
parking areas shall be based on a maximum of one cubic foot per
second per 90 square inches of opening in an inlet or catch basin cover.
M. All storm sewer pipe, manholes, catch basins, and inlets shall meet
MDOT specifications.
N. Generally, drops of over 2.0 feet at manholes, from invert of higher
pipes to lower pipes, shall be avoided.
O. Joints in concrete pipe having a diameter of 30 inches or larger shall be
pointed up on inside with mortar after backfilling has been completed.
P. Where drainage is discharged to an established drain or natural
watercourse, such outlets shall be so designed as to enter the drain or
watercourse at an angle of 90° or less, as determined by the upstream
center line. Preformed end sections, grouted riprap or specially
designed outlet structures will be required.
Q. Unless the storm sewers are to be owned and maintained by a single
private entity (i.e., municipal or commercial development,
manufactured housing community, etc.), all storm sewers shall be
located within an easement. The minimum easement width for a storm
sewer shall be 12 feet centered on the sewer center line.
R. All existing and proposed on-site drainage easements shall be clearly
shown.
S. To account for energy losses, at structures a flow change of direction of
greater than 45°, a 0.10 foot drop shall be added from the upstream to
downstream pipes. Approval from City Engineer is required to waive
the requirement for sites where existing conditions do not provide
adequate storm depth to facilitate the drop.
T. At structure with a change of pipe size, the 8/10th elevation, or obvert
of the pipes shall align. Approval from City Engineer is required to
waive the requirement for sites where existing conditions do not
provide adequate storm depth to facilitate the drop.
U. Storm sewers shall have a minimum of 3 1/2 feet of cover from the
finished surface to the horizontal center line, where existing conditions
allow. City Engineer may approve less cover where existing conditions
restrict cover.
§ 256-54 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-54
248:656
§ 256-55. Open channels.
§ 256-56. Culverts.
V. An end section with prefabricated bar screen shall be installed on the
end of all storm sewers 12 inches in diameter or larger. Openings of the
bar screen shall be no more than six inches on center.
W. All connections of storm sewers shall be at structure (i.e., manhole,
catch basins etc.) locations. Blind taps or wye connections are not
allowed with the exception of sump pump connections per the City's
Stormwater Detail Sheet. All sump pumps shall be directed, via an
enclosed three-inch diameter minimum pipe, to the storm system.
A. The peak ten-year flow in each reach of open channel shall remain
within the banks of the channel. Off-site tributary area shall be included
in the design, or the off-site tributary runoff shall be rerouted around
the channel.
B. The values of Manning's "n" shall be no less than 0.040 except where
the channel is smooth and paved, in which case an "n" value of 0.013 to
0.022 shall be used.
C. The maximum velocity for grass-lined channels shall not exceed five
feet per second. Where the above velocity is exceeded, the channel
shall be protected by cobble paving or other means to prevent scour.
D. The minimum acceptable nonsiltation velocity should be 1.5 feet per
second.
E. Unless the open channels are to be owned and maintained by a single
private entity (i.e., industrial/commercial development, manufactured
housing community, etc.), all open channels shall be located within an
easement. Open channels shall have a minimum right-of-way of 40 feet
plus top width of channel centered on the center line. A consistent
right-of-way width shall be maintained along the entire reach of channel
on the proposed site. A minimum width of 20 feet must be maintained
from the top-of-bank to the edge of the right-of-way to allow for
maintenance. The above minimum width shall govern generally;
however, wider rights-of-way may be required at the discretion of the
City Engineer.
F. Side slopes of open channels shall normally be no steeper than one
vertical to three horizontal. Where conditions dictate steeper side
slopes, consideration should be given to slope paving and fencing. The
final decision in such matters rests with the City Engineer.
G. All existing and proposed on-site drainage easements shall be clearly
shown on the plans.
A. All culverts should be labeled on the plans as "existing," "proposed," or
"to be extended."
§ 256-54 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-56
248:657
B. Plans shall show boundaries and acreages of tributary areas
contributing runoff to each proposed or existing culvert on the
proposed site.
C. Proposed or extended culverts must be approved by the City Engineer.
Proposed or extended culverts may also require the approval of the
Macomb County Road Commission, the Macomb County Public Works
Commission, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and/or
the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT).
D. The Rational Method shall be used to determine the peak design flow
for the culvert, if the tributary area to the culvert is less than 20 acres.
For larger tributary areas, the SCS Method shall be used. The runoff
coefficients used should be consistent with those in standard
engineering practice, as approved by the City Engineer, and selected to
reflect the future land use of the tributary area.
E. All culverts shall be designed with consideration of both inlet and outlet
control conditions. Calculations of the ten-year and 100-year headwater
elevations for all culverts thus designed shall accompany the final
plans.
(1) The ten-year headwater elevation of each culvert shall not exceed
an elevation one foot below the road or driveway center line
elevation. The backwater shall not extend beyond the limits of the
proprietor's property.
(2) The 100-year headwater elevation of each culvert may overtop the
road or driveway center-line elevation, but must remain below
proposed finish floor elevations of all nearby existing and proposed
structures.
(3) The tailwater elevation assumed for each culvert should be
estimated as the normal depth of the peak flow in the downstream
channel, unless the tailwater is influenced by the headwater of
another downstream culvert or the confluence of another
watercourse.
F. Wing walls, headwalls, end sections, and all other culvert extremities
shall be designed to ensure the stability of the surrounding soil and to
meet the requirements of other governing agencies (e.g., Macomb
County Road Commission, MCPWO, MDOT, EGLE), if applicable.
G. Roadways over culverts or bridges may be required to be paved or
designed in such a way as to prevent the erosion of road material into
the established drain or watercourse.
H. The following data shall be provided for all proposed or extended
culverts:
(1) Length.
(2) Diameter.
§ 256-56 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-56
248:658
§ 256-57. Bioretention.
(3) Invert elevations.
(4) Material type.
(5) Protection for culvert ends.
I. Riprap must be provided for all culverts in established drains or
significant watercourses. The riprap provided for the protection of
culvert ends shall:
(1) Extend at least one culvert diameter upstream of the culvert inlet
and at least four culvert diameters downstream of the culvert
outlet;
(2) Extend across the bottom of the channel and up the banks of the
channel to at least the elevation of the crown of the culvert;
(3) Be inlayed such that it does not cause an obstruction in the
watercourse; and
(4) Have a minimum dimension no smaller than that consistent with
HEC-11 Design Guidelines for Rock Riprap and MDOT standards.
(A conservative guideline for water depths less than three feet
would be to use eight-inch-diameter riprap for flow velocities up to
six feet per second, and sixteen-inch-diameter riprap for flow
velocities up to 11 feet per second.)
J. Minimum diameter for a driveway or crossroad culvert shall be 18
inches or equivalent pipe arch.
K. The pipe used in culverts shall meet MDOT specifications and Macomb
County Road Commission standards.
A. A bioretention system consists of a soil bed planted with native
vegetation located above an underdrained sand layer. It can be
configured as either a bioretention structure or a bioretention swale.
Stormwater runoff entering the bioretention system is filtered first
through the vegetation and then the sand/soil mixture before being
conveyed downstream by the underdrain system. Runoff storage depths
above the planting bed surface are typically shallow. The adopted TSS
removal rate for bioretention systems is 90%.
B. Bioretention systems are used to remove a wide range of pollutants,
such as suspended solids, nutrients, metals, hydrocarbons, and bacteria
from stormwater runoff. They can also be used to reduce peak runoff
rates and increase stormwater infiltration when designed as a
multistage, multifunction facility.
(1) Predesign site evaluation.
§ 256-56 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-57
248:659
(a) For infiltration trench and structure practices, a minimum field
infiltration rate (fc) of 0.52 inch per hour is required; lower
rates preclude the use of these practices. For surface sand
filter and bioretention practices, no minimum infiltration rate
is required if these facilities are designed with a "day-lighting"
underdrain system; otherwise these facilities require a 0.52
inch per hour rate.
(b) Feasibility testing is to be conducted to screen unsuitable sites,
and reduce testing costs. A soil boring is not required at this
stage. However, a designer or landowner may opt to engage
concept design borings at his discretion, without feasibility
testing.
(c) Initial testing involves either one field test per facility,
regardless of type or size, or previous testing data, such as the
following:
[1] On-site septic percolation testing, within 200 feet of the
proposed BMP location, and on the same contour which
can establish initial rate, water table and/or depth to
bedrock;
[2] Geotechnical report on the site prepared by a qualified
geotechnical consultant; or
[3] Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) County
Soil Mapping showing, an unsuitable soil group such as a
hydrologic Group D soil in a low-lying area.
(d) If the results of initial feasibility testing as determined by a
qualified professional show that an infiltration rate of greater
than 0.52 inch per hour is probable, then the number of
concept design test pits shall be per the following Table D-1
(Exhibit B194). An encased soil boring may be substituted for a
test pit, if desired.
(2) Design criteria.
(a) Storage volume, depth, and duration. Bioretention systems
shall be designed to treat the runoff volume generated by the
stormwater quality design storm (two-year). The maximum
water depth during treatment of the stormwater quality design
storm shall be 12 inches in a bioretention structure and 18
inches in a bioretention swale. The minimum diameter of any
outlet or overflow orifice is 2.5 inches. The bottom of a
bioretention system, including any underdrain piping or gravel
layer, must be a minimum of one foot above the seasonal high
groundwater table. The planting soil bed and underdrain
194. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the City offices.
§ 256-57 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-57
248:660
system shall be designed to fully drain the stormwater quality
design storm runoff volume within 72 hours.
(b) Permeability rates. The design permeability rate through the
planting soil bed must be sufficient to fully drain the
stormwater quality design storm runoff volume within 72
hours. This permeability rate must be determined by field or
laboratory testing. Since the actual permeability rate may vary
from test results and may also decrease over time due to soil
bed consolidation or the accumulation of sediments removed
from the treated stormwater, a factor of safety of two shall be
applied to the tested permeability rate to determine the design
permeability rate. Therefore, if the tested permeability rate of
the soil bed material is four inches/hour, the design rate would
be two inches per hour (i.e., four inches per hour/two). This
design rate would then be used to compute the system's
stormwater quality design storm drain time.
(c) Planting soil bed. The planting soil bed provides the
environment for water and nutrients to be made available to
the vegetation. The soil particles can absorb some additional
pollutants through cation exchange, and voids within the soil
particles can store a portion of the stormwater quality design
storm runoff volume. The planting soil bed material should
consist of 10% to 15% clays, a minimum 65% sands, with the
balance as silts. The material's pH should range from 5.5 to
6.5. The material shall be placed in twelve-inch to eighteeninch
lifts. The total depth or thickness of the planting soil bed
should be a minimum of three feet. As noted above, the design
permeability rate of the soil bed material must be sufficient to
drain the stormwater quality design storm runoff volume
within 72 hours. Filter fabric should be placed along the sides
of the planting soil bed to prevent the migration of soil
particles from the adjacent soil into the planting soil bed.
(d) Vegetation. The vegetation in a bioretention system removes
some of the nutrients and other pollutants in the stormwater
inflow. The use of native plant material is recommended for
bioretention systems wherever possible. The goal of the
planting plan should be to simulate a forest-shrub community
of primarily upland type. In general, trees should dominate the
perimeter zone that is subject to less frequent inundation.
Shrubs and herbaceous species that are adapted to moister
conditions and expected pollutant loads should be selected for
the wetter zones. The number of stems per acre should
average 1,000, with tree spacing of 12 feet and shrub spacing
of eight feet.
(e) Sand layer. The sand layer serves as a transition between the
planting soil bed and the gravel layer and underdrain pipes. It
shall be a minimum thickness of 12 inches and consist of clean
§ 256-57 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-57
248:661
medium aggregate sand (AASSHTO M-6/ASTM C-33 or MDOT
Class II). To ensure proper system operation, the sand layer
must have a permeability rate at least twice as fast as the
design permeability rate of the planting soil bed.
(f) Underdrain. The underdrain piping must be rigid Schedule 40
PVC pipe. The portion of drain piping beneath the planting soil
bed and sand layer must be perforated. All remaining
underdrain piping, including cleanouts, must be
nonperforated. All joints must be secure and watertight. The
underdrain piping must connect to a downstream storm sewer
manhole, catch structure, channel, swale, or ground surface at
a location that is not subject to blockage by debris or sediment
and is readily accessible for inspection and maintenance. Blind
connections to downstream storm sewers are prohibited.
(g) Overflows. All bioretention systems must be able to safely
convey system overflows to downstream drainage systems. The
capacity of the overflow must be consistent with the remainder
of the site's drainage system and sufficient to provide safe,
stable discharge of stormwater in the event of an overflow.
(h) Tailwater. The hydraulic design of the underdrain and overflow
systems, as well as any stormwater quantity control outlets,
must consider any significant tailwater effects of downstream
waterways or facilities. This includes instances where the
lowest invert in the outlet or overflow structure is below the
flood hazard area design flood elevation of a receiving stream.
(i) Maintenance. The following requirements must be included in
the system's maintenance plan.
[1] General maintenance.
[a] All bioretention system components expected to
receive and/or trap debris and sediment must be
inspected for clogging and excessive debris and
sediment accumulation at least four times annually as
well as after every storm exceeding one inch of
rainfall. Such components may include bottoms, trash
racks, low-flow channels, outlet structures, riprap or
gabion aprons, and cleanouts.
[b] Sediment removal should take place when the
structure is thoroughly dry. Disposal of debris, trash,
sediment, and other waste material should be done at
suitable disposal/recycling sites and in compliance
with all applicable local, state, and federal waste
regulations.
[2] Vegetated areas.
§ 256-57 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-57
248:662
§ 256-58. Infiltration.
[a] Mowing and/or trimming of vegetation must be
performed on a regular schedule based on specific site
conditions. Grass should be mowed at least once a
month during the growing season. Vegetated areas
must be inspected at least annually for erosion and
scour. Vegetated areas should also be inspected at
least annually for unwanted growth, which should be
removed with minimum disruption to the planting soil
bed and remaining vegetation.
[b] When establishing or restoring vegetation, biweekly
inspections of vegetation health should be performed
during the first growing season or until the vegetation
is established. Once established, inspections of
vegetation health, density, and diversity should be
performed at least twice annually during both the
growing and nongrowing seasons. The vegetative
cover should be maintained at 85%. If vegetation has
greater than 50% damage, the area should be
reestablished in accordance with the original
specifications and the inspection requirements
presented above.
[c] All use of fertilizers, mechanical treatments,
pesticides and other means to assure optimum
vegetation health should not compromise the intended
purpose of the bioretention system. All vegetation
deficiencies should be addressed without the use of
fertilizers and pesticides whenever possible.
[3] Structural components. All structural components must be
inspected for cracking, subsidence, spalling, erosion, and
deterioration at least annually.
A. An infiltration structure is a facility constructed within highly
permeable soils that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
An infiltration structure does not normally have a structural outlet to
discharge runoff from the stormwater quality design storm. Instead,
outflow from an infiltration structure is through the surrounding soil.
An infiltration structure may also be combined with an extended
detention structure to provide additional runoff storage for both
stormwater quality and quantity management. The adopted TSS
removal rate for infiltration structures is 80%.
B. Infiltration structures are used to remove pollutants and to infiltrate
stormwater back into the ground. Such infiltration also helps to reduce
increases in both the peak rate and total volume of runoff caused by
land development. Pollutant removal is achieved through filtration of
§ 256-57 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-58
248:663
the runoff through the soil as well as biological and chemical activity
within the soil.
(1) Predesign site evaluation.
(a) Infiltration structures can present some practical design
problems. When planning for an infiltration structure that
provides stormwater quality treatment, consideration should
be given to soil characteristics, depth to the groundwater
table, sensitivity of the region, and runoff water quality.
Specifically, infiltration structures must not be used in the
following locations:
[1] Industrial and commercial areas where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded, unloaded, stored, or
applied or pesticides are loaded, unloaded, or stored.
[2] Areas where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in
the Code of Federal Regulations at 40 CFR 302.4.
[3] Areas where infiltration structure use would be
inconsistent with an NJDEP approved remedial action
work plan or landfill closure plan.
[4] Areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials such as
gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities.
[5] Areas where industrial stormwater runoff is exposed to
source material. "Source material" means any material(s)
or machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing, or
other industrial activities, that could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not limited
to, raw materials, intermediate products, final products,
waste materials, by-products, industrial machinery and
fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are
related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial
activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[6] Areas where their installation would create a significant
risk for basement seepage or flooding, cause surficial
flooding of groundwater, or interfere with the operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures. Such adverse impacts must be assessed and
avoided by the design engineer.
(b) Infiltration structures must be configured and located where
their construction will not compact the soils below the
structure. In addition, an infiltration structure must not be
§ 256-58 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-58
248:664
placed into operation until the contributing drainage area is
completely stabilized.
[1] General setback requirements for infiltration structures:
[a] Soil absorption systems for Title 5 systems: 50 feet.
[b] Private wells: 100 feet.
[c] Public wells: 150 feet.
[d] Public reservoir, surface water sources for public
water systems and their tributaries: 400 feet.
[e] Other surface waters: 50 feet.
[f] Property lines: 10 feet.
[g] Building foundations: greater than 10 feet to 100 feet,
depending upon soil types and infiltration structure
type.
(c) Soils are perhaps the most important consideration for site
suitability. In general, county soil surveys can be used to obtain
necessary soil data for the planning and preliminary design of
infiltration structures. For final design and construction, soil
tests are required at the exact location of a proposed structure
in order to confirm its ability to function without failure.
[1] Tests should include:
[a] Determination of the textural classification.
[b] Permeability of the subgrade soil at and below the
bottom of the proposed infiltration structure.
[2] The recommended minimum depth for subgrade soil
analysis is five feet below the bottom of the structure or to
the groundwater table. Soil permeability testing can be
conducted in accordance with the standards for individual
subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(2) Design criteria.
(a) Storage volume, depth, and duration.
[1] An infiltration structure must be designed to treat the total
runoff volume generated by the structure's maximum
design storm. This may either be the groundwater
recharge or stormwater quality design storm, depending
upon the structure's proposed use. An infiltration
structure must also fully drain this runoff volume within 72
hours. Runoff storage for greater times can render the
structure ineffective and may result in anaerobic
§ 256-58 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-58
248:665
conditions, odor, and both water quality and mosquito
breeding problems. The bottom of the infiltration structure
must be at least two feet above seasonal high water table
or bedrock. For surface structures, this distance must be
measured from the bottom of the sand layer. The structure
bottom must be as level as possible to uniformly distribute
runoff infiltration over the subgrade soils.
[2] To enhance safety by minimizing standing water depths,
the vertical distance between the structure bottom and the
maximum design stormwater surface in surface infiltration
structures should be no greater than two feet.
Construction of an infiltration structure must be done
without compacting the structure's subgrade soils.
Excavation must be performed by equipment placed
outside the structure whenever possible. This requirement
should be considered when designing the dimensions and
total storage volume of an infiltration structure. It is
important to note that the use of infiltration structures is
recommended only for the stormwater quality design
storm and smaller storm events. Use of infiltration
structures for larger storm events and the requirements by
which such structures are to be designed, constructed,
and maintained should be reviewed and approved by all
applicable reviewing agencies.
(b) Permeability rates.
[1] The minimum design permeability rate of the soils below
an infiltration structure will depend upon the structure's
location and maximum design storm. The use of infiltration
structures for stormwater quality control is feasible only
where soil is sufficiently permeable to allow a reasonable
rate of infiltration. Therefore, infiltration structures
designed for storms greater than the groundwater
recharge storm can be constructed only in areas with
Hydrologic Soil Group A and B soils.
Maximum Design
Structure Location
Minimum Design
Permeability Rate
(inches/hour)
Groundwater recharge
subsurface
0.2
Groundwater recharge
surface
0.5
Stormwater quality surface
and subsurface
0.5
§ 256-58 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-58
248:666
[2] In addition to the above, the design permeability rate of
the soil must be sufficient to fully drain the infiltration
structure's maximum design storm runoff volume within
72 hours. This design permeability rate must be
determined by field testing. [See § 256-57B(1),
Bioretention, predesign site evaluation.] Since the actual
permeability rate may vary from test results and may also
decrease over time due to soil bed consolidation or the
accumulation of sediments removed from the treated
stormwater, a factor of safety of two must be applied to the
tested permeability rate to determine the design
permeability rate. Therefore, if the tested permeability
rate of the soils is four inches per hour, the design rate
would be two inches per hour (i.e., four inches per hour/
two). This design rate would then be used to compute the
structure's maximum design storm drain time.
(c) Bottom sand layer. To help ensure maintenance of the design
permeability rate over time, a six-inch layer of sand must be
placed on the bottom of an infiltration structure. This sand
layer can intercept silt, sediment, and debris that could
otherwise clog the top layer of the soil below the structure. The
sand layer will also facilitate silt, sediment, and debris removal
from the structure and can be readily restored following
removal operations. The sand layer must meet the
specifications of a MDOT Class II sand. This must be certified
by a certified testing lab.
(d) Overflows. All infiltration structures must be able to convey
overflows to downstream drainage systems in a safe and stable
manner. The capacity of the overflow must be consistent with
the remainder of the site's drainage system and sufficient to
provide safe, stable discharge of stormwater in the event of an
overflow.
(e) Subsurface infiltration structures. A subsurface infiltration
structure is located entirely below the ground surface. It may
consist of a vault, perforated pipe, and/or stone bed. However,
due to the greater difficulty in removing silt, sediment, and
debris, all runoff to a subsurface infiltration structure must be
pretreated. This pretreatment must remove 80% of the TSS in
the runoff from the structure's maximum design storm.
(f) Basis of design.
[1] The design of an infiltration basin is based upon Darcy's
Law:
Q = KIA
§ 256-58 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-58
248:667
§ 256-59. Detention storage facilities.
Where:
Q = The rate of infiltration in cubic feet per second
(cfs)
K = The hydraulic conductivity of the soil in feet per
second (fps)
I = The hydraulic gradient
A = The area of infiltration in square feet (sf)
[2] From the variables shown in the figure below:
Average Hydraulic Gradient = Davg/d
Minimum Hydraulic Gradient = D1/d
Maximum Hydraulic Gradient = D2/d
(g) Maintenance. The following requirements must be included in
the system's maintenance plan.
[1] General maintenance. All infiltration structure
components expected to receive and/or trap debris and
sediment must be inspected for clogging and excessive
debris and sediment accumulation at least four times
annually as well as after every storm exceeding one inch of
rainfall. Such components may include bottoms, riprap or
gabion aprons, and inflow points. This applies to both
surface and subsurface infiltration structures. Sediment
removal should take place when the structure is
thoroughly dry. Disposal of debris, trash, sediment, and
other waste material should be done at suitable disposal/
recycling sites and in compliance with all applicable local,
state, and federal waste regulations.
A. Detention storage facilities are designed to detain runoff for a short
period of time and then release it to a watercourse where it returns to
the hydrologic cycle. The objective of detention storage is to regulate
the released runoff rate and to reduce the impact on downstream
drainage systems. Detention storage should not be confused with
retention storage (i.e., retention basins), a facility with no engineered
§ 256-58 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-59
248:668
outlet (other than an emergency-type outlet) designed to hold runoff
for a considerable length of time. The water in a retention basin is not
discharged to surface water, although it may infiltrate into the ground,
evaporate, or be consumed by plants.
B. In keeping with common law natural flow rights and the Michigan Drain
Code,195 concentrated discharges of stormwater (such as the outflow
from a detention facility) or increased surface water runoff over
property owned by others must be pursuant to a valid right-of-way,
easement, or other written permission from all property owners
affected. The outflow from a detention facility is considered to be such a
concentrated discharge of stormwater.
C. All forms of detention storage shall meet the following criteria:
(1) On-site detention (or retention, see § 256-60, Retention basins,
below) of stormwater is required of all new developments or
redevelopments to maintain the peak outflow to a rate similar to
the predevelopment runoff rate or to a discharge rate approved by
the City Engineer. In no case shall the outflow from a site exceed
the capacity of the receiving watercourse to accept the flow. In the
case where the alternative of extended detention is approved, the
channel protection volume shall be held for 48 hours or released at
the one-year/twenty-four-hour discharge rate.
(2) For development sites greater than five acres, the detention basin
volume shall be determined for the 100-year flood volume from all
tributary area, including off-site area.
(a) The tributary area shall include all acreage contributing runoff
to the detention storage facility, including any off-site tributary
area in its existing state, whether developed or undeveloped.
(b) The following equations shall be used to determine the
100-year detention volume:
Qa = Allowable release rate, cfs
Qo = Qa/(A C)
Where:
A = Tributary area in acres
C = Weighted runoff coefficient
Detention time in minutes, T = -25 + sqrt (10,312.5/Qo)
Storage volume per impervious acre, Vs = 16,500 T/(T + 25)
— 40 Qo T
Required detention volume in cubic feet, V = Vs x A x C
195. Editor's Note: See MCL § 280.1 et seq.
§ 256-59 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-59
248:669
(3) For development sites five acres and less, the detention basin
volume shall be determined for the ten-year flood volume from all
tributary area, including off-site area.
(a) The tributary area shall include all acreage contributing runoff
to the detention storage facility, including any off-site tributary
area in its existing state, whether developed or undeveloped.
(b) The following equations shall be used to determine the tenyear
detention volume:
Qa = Allowable release rate, cfs
Qo = Qa/(A C)
Where:
A = Tributary area in acres
C = Weighted runoff coefficient
Detention time in minutes, T = -25 + sqrt (6,562.5/Qo)
Storage volume per impervious acre, Vs = 10,500T/(T+25) -
40 Qo T
Required detention volume in cubic feet, Vs x A x C
(4) If the site is located near the downstream end of a watercourse or
drainage district, the City Engineer may require that the
proprietor's engineer generate and submit hydrographs of the
outflow from the existing site and from the proposed site (i.e.,
detention facility) and a hydrograph of the flow in the receiving
watercourse to verify that the detained outflow would not result in
an increase in the peak flow in the receiving watercourse. If the
detained outflow would result in an increase in the peak flow in the
receiving watercourse, then stormwater detention is not an
acceptable stormwater management option. Retention of
stormwater or other stormwater management design approved by
the City Engineer must be provided. See § 256-60, Retention
basins, for design requirements.
(5) Portions of the developing site may be allowed to drain unrestricted
(i.e., not through a detention facility) if either of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The areas draining unrestricted are not being disturbed or
altered by the construction, such that they will maintain their
existing drainage characteristics and patterns.
(b) The areas draining unrestricted are being disturbed or altered
but will be permanently stabilized to prevent erosion and will
not contain any impervious surface postconstruction. In this
case, the unrestricted flow must be draining to a receiving
watercourse with valid rights-of-way, or else written
agreement from the affected property owners would have to be
§ 256-59 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-59
248:670
obtained per common law natural flow rights and the Michigan
Drain Code.196 In addition, the postconstruction peak 100-year
flow from these areas should be calculated and deducted from
the total allowable peak flow from the detention facility (Qa).
The detention outlet(s) should be designed to restrict the basin
outflow(s) to this reduced allowable peak flow rate.
(6) Where the detention facility is to be equipped with a pump
discharge, the proprietor shall be required to furnish design data
on pump(s) and discharge force main so that the capacity of the
system can be verified. These data will include system curve
calculations, the pump performance curves, and a profile of the
system piping. The pumping station should be able to release the
first flush volume over approximately 24 hours, the bankfull flood
volume over 24 to 48 hours, and the 100-year flood volume at a rate
not to exceed 0.15 cfs/ac of tributary area. A backup generator will
be required to ensure the operation of the pumping station in the
event of power loss. The City discourages the use of pumped
outlets and will not accept responsibility for damages due to power
failure, pump malfunction, or acts of God that result in storm
conditions that exceed the design conditions of the pump station.
(7) An agreement for acceptance and maintenance of the detention
facility, if executed by the proprietor, shall be submitted to the City
of Roseville prior to final approval. The agreement both as form and
content shall be subject to the approval of the City.
D. Detention basins. A detention basin is a form of detention storage
where the stormwater is detained aboveground as surface water. In
addition to the general requirements indicated above in § 256-58,
detention basins shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Detention volume in a gravity-outlet detention basin must be
located:
(a) Above the invert of the lowest row of orifices in the outlet
standpipe;
(b) Above the elevation of the dry weather base flow in the
receiving watercourse;
(c) Above the elevation of the groundwater table. Soil boring data
used to determine the groundwater table elevation shall be
submitted with the plans.
(2) The detention basin outlet shall consist of a vertical standpipe with
multilevel orifices to control the release of stormwater from the
basin, including the first flush volume, bankfull flood volume, and
100-year flood volume (or ten-year flood volume for sites less than
five acres).
196. Editor's Note: See MCL § 280.1 et seq.
§ 256-59 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-59
248:671
(a) The standpipe shall not be less than 36 inches in diameter.
(b) The standpipe shall contain multiple rows of orifices (i.e.,
holes) to control the release of the first flush runoff volume, the
bankfull flood volume, and the 100-year flood volume (or tenyear
for sites less than five acres).
[1] First flush orifices shall be located at the elevation of the
basin floor (or permanent pool water level, if a wet basin).
[2] Additional bankfull flood orifices shall be at the elevation
of the first flush volume in the basin, where the first flush
volume is calculated as the first one-inch of runoff over the
site, or Vff (cf) = 3630 x A(acres) x C, where C is the runoff
coefficient.
[3] Additional 100-year (or ten-year for sites less than five
acres) flood control orifices shall be located at the
elevation of the bankfull flood volume in the basin, where
the bankfull flood volume is calculated as the rainfall from
a 1.5-year storm, or Vbf (cf) = 8170 x A (acres) x C.
(3) To promote improved filtering of runoff sediment from smaller,
more frequent storm events, the bankfull flood and first flush
volumes shall be based on the developing tributary site area only,
and not include off-site tributary area.
(a) Orifices should not be less than one-inch in diameter or greater
than four inches in diameter.
(b) The top of the standpipe shall consist of a grating at or above
the design (high) water level to serve as an overflow
mechanism, in addition to the overflow spillway/berm.
(c) The standpipe shall be encased in stone extending to the
design (high) water level to allow for filtering of the
stormwater prior to discharge from the basin. The encasement
stone size shall be large enough so as not to plug or pass
through the orifices in the standpipe.
(d) The standpipe shall contain a sediment sump with a depth of at
least one foot.
(e) Double standpipes (e.g., a thirty-six-inch-diameter inner
standpipe within a forty-eight-inch-diameter outer standpipe)
are encouraged. Double standpipes are believed to be less
prone to blockages of the control orifices, and therefore
require less maintenance. The inner standpipe should contain
the appropriate number and configuration of orifices to
provide the controlled release of the first flush volume, the
bankfull flood volume, and the 100-year (or ten-year for sites
less than five acres) flood volume. The outer standpipe should
§ 256-59 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-59
248:672
contain at least several times the orifice area as the inner
standpipe over the entire height of the standpipe, such that the
head loss across the outer standpipe orifices is negligible.
(f) The outlet pipe extending from the standpipe to the receiving
watercourse shall be sized to convey the calculated 100-year
(or ten-year for sites less than five acres) peak inflow to the
detention basin.
(g) The location of the outlet pipe extending downstream of the
standpipe shall be indicated on a profile drawing of the
receiving watercourse, whether or not the receiving
watercourse is an established drain. The receiving
watercourse profile shall extend at least from the upstream
end of the site to the downstream end of the site.
(4) A sediment sump shall be provided within the basin, below the
lowest orifice elevation but above the groundwater table, to
provide for sediment accumulation.
(a) The volume of the sump shall be equivalent to the first flush
volume, or one-inch of runoff over the site area. (Sump Volume,
cf = Vff = 3630 x A x C.)
(b) Appropriate precautions shall be taken to protect public safety
and to ensure that the sump does not constitute a nuisance.
(5) All detention basins must have standpipe overflow grates and
spillway berms for emergency overflow at the high water level.
(a) The standpipe overflow grate and spillway must provide
adequate capacity to overflow the peak 100-year (or ten-year
for sites less than five acres) basin inflow with no more than
one-foot of head (i.e., water level must not exceed the one-foot
of freeboard).
(b) Downstream of the overflow spillway, the stormwater overflow
must be directed (either by overland flow or via a swale or
ditch) to the receiving watercourse.
(6) A minimum of one foot freeboard shall be provided above the
design high water elevation.
(7) The side slopes shall not be steeper than six feet horizontal to onefoot
vertical. Slope protection shall be provided as necessary. Basin
side slope elevation contours shall be shown on the plans.
(8) Unless the detention basin contains a permanent pool, the bottom
of all detention basins shall be graded in such a manner as to
provide positive flow to the outlet. A minimum bottom slope of 1%
shall be provided.
§ 256-59 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-59
248:673
(9) A twelve-foot-wide minimum access easement shall be provided for
all detention basins, as measured from the top of bank.
(10) A twenty-five-foot-wide minimum setback from property lines shall
be provided for all detention basins, as measured from the top-ofbank.
(11) Detention basin configurations where stormwater must back up
into the basin (i.e., stormwater enters the conveyance system
downstream of the basin) will not be permitted.
(12) Multiple detention basins serving a single development should
function independently. If the outflow from one basin passes
through another basin before being discharged to the receiving
watercourse, a full hydraulic analysis (i.e., a computer model
simulation) will be required to ensure that the system functions
satisfactorily.
(13) If at any time the detention basin is to function as a sediment basin
(for use during the construction phase), an outlet filter shall be
provided. Such an outlet filter is to be designed in accordance with
criteria established by the Macomb County Public Works office.
Such use of a detention pond shall be considered a temporary
measure only. The proprietor shall be responsible for sediment
removal upon completion of construction.
(14) Detention basins shall meet all local ordinances and/or
requirements for "ponds."
E. Underground storage. Underground storage is a form of detention
storage where the stormwater is detained in underground pipes. Like a
detention basin, the water is released at a controlled rate to a receiving
watercourse. In addition to the general requirements indicated above in
§ 256-59, underground detention facilities shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Detention volume in an underground detention facility shall be
located above the elevation of the dry weather baseflow in the
receiving watercourse and above the elevation of the groundwater
table. Soil boring data used to determine the groundwater table
shall be submitted with the plans.
(2) To minimize sedimentation in the downstream drainage district,
sediment shall be removed from the stormwater before water
enters the underground storage facility (e.g., in first flush forebay
or within the catch basins using removable filtration inserts).
(3) The pipe material used for the underground storage facility shall
have an expected life of at least 50 years.
(4) Access manholes shall be provided along the underground storage
facility to allow for maintenance.
§ 256-59 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-59
248:674
§ 256-60. Retention basins.
A "retention basin" is a facility with no engineered outlet (other than an
emergency-type outlet) designed to hold runoff for a considerable length
of time. The water in a retention basin is not discharged to a natural
watercourse, although it may be consumed by plants, evaporate, or
infiltrate into the ground. A retention basin should not be confused with a
"detention basin," a facility designed to detain runoff for a short period of
time and then release it to a watercourse.
(5) A minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be provided between the
design hydraulic grade line in the underground storage facility and
the rim elevations of all access manholes.
(6) A twenty-five-foot-wide setback from property lines shall be
provided for all underground storage facilities.
(7) An access easement shall be provided to and above the
underground storage facility.
(8) No permanent structures shall be constructed above the
underground storage facility.
F. Parking lot surface storage is a form of detention storage where the
stormwater is detained in the parking lot surface creating temporary
flooding of the parking lot. Like a detention basin, the water is released
at a controlled rate to a receiving drain. In addition to the general
requirements indicated above in § 256-59, parking lot surface storage
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Storage elevation must be less than one foot from the finish floor
elevation of the nearest building.
(2) Storage depth shall not exceed 12 inches at any location of the
parking lot.
A. On-site retention (or detention; see § 256-59, Detention storage
facilities) is required of all new developments or redevelopments to
prevent an increase in peak flows downstream in the drainage district.
(1) Retention basins are an acceptable stormwater management
practice on sites where the soil has an infiltration rate of at least
0.52 inch per hour and a clay content of less than 30% (per
recommendations in Guidebook of Best Management Practices for
Michigan Watersheds). The required storage volume of a retention
basin is that of the runoff from a 100-year design storm as
determined using the SCS Method. On sites with soils having a
lower infiltration rate and/or higher clay content, the City Engineer
may allow retention basins with storage volume for the runoff from
two consecutive 100-year design storms.
§ 256-59 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-60
248:675
§ 256-61. Wetlands and low-lying areas.
(2) Retention basins shall accommodate runoff from off-site areas that
drain onto/across the developing site. An exception to this rule
would be if off-site runoff were to be routed around the site to a
receiving watercourse, if done in a manner such that runoff from
the developing site would not contribute to this off-site flow. If the
off-site flow were to be concentrated from overland flow to a point
discharge into a receiving watercourse without valid rights-of-way,
written agreement from the affected property owners would have
to be obtained per common law natural flow rights and the
Michigan Drain Code.197
B. One foot of freeboard shall be provided above the design high water
elevation.
C. Retention volume must be provided above the elevation of the
groundwater table. Soil boring data used to determine the groundwater
table elevation shall be submitted with the plans.
D. All retention basins must have a spillway for emergency overflow at the
high water level.
(1) The spillway must provide adequate capacity to overflow the peak
100-year basin inflow with no more than two feet of head (i.e.,
water level must not exceed the two feet of freeboard).
(2) The plans must identify where the overflow would be directed to
flow or stored in the event of an overflow.
E. The side slopes shall not be steeper than six feet horizontal to one foot
vertical unless fenced in accordance with City requirements. Slope
protection shall be provided as necessary. Basin side slope elevation
contours shall be shown on the plans.
F. A twelve-foot-wide access easement shall be provided to and around all
retention basins.
G. An agreement for acceptance and maintenance of the retention basin
system, if executed by the proprietor, shall be submitted to the City of
Roseville prior to final approval. The agreement both as form and
content shall be subject to the approval of the City.
H. If at any time during the construction period the retention basin is to
function as a sediment basin, the proprietor shall be responsible for
sediment removal prior to completion of construction. (See Macomb
County Public Works Office for requirements regarding soil erosion and
sedimentation control during construction.)
197. Editor's Note: See MCL § 280.1 et seq.
§ 256-60 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-61
248:676
§ 256-62. Oil separators.
Oil must be removed from stormwater as appropriate prior to discharge to a
receiving watercourse. The City Engineer will consider means of oil removal
on a case-by-case basis.
§ 256-63. First flush basins and sediment collection units.
When standalone BMPs such as permanent first flush basins and
prefabricated sediment collection units are proposed or required for a
specific site, the following design standards shall apply:
A. In order to help in analyzing site hydrology and the predevelopment
runoff rate, soil types, the normal groundwater table, and an accurate
delineation of wetlands must be provided as part of preliminary plats/
plans. The City Engineer may require confirmation of the absence or
presence of regulated wetlands from EGLE through its wetland
assessment program. Construction activities to be performed within a
regulated wetland may require a permit from the EGLE.
B. Any regulated wetlands or other wetlands that will be part of the
drainage system shall be designated as a common area and placed
within a conservation easement.
C. If existing wetlands or low-lying areas are to be used for stormwater
storage, all requirements under either § 256-59D, Detention basins, or
§ 256-60, Retention basins, would apply, depending on whether the
wetlands/area would have an outlet.
D. If any disturbed or impervious surfaces will drain into an existing
wetland or low-lying area, calculations may be required to be submitted
indicating that the wetland will accommodate runoff from a 100-year
design storm without exceeding the finished grade elevation of any
adjacent existing or proposed structure.
E. If a wetland will be used for stormwater storage, a sediment forebay
shall be provided upstream of the wetlands to reduce the stormwater
velocity and encourage sedimentation. Additionally, a permit from the
EGLE may be required.
A. A settling pond (first flush pond) is a means to detain the first flush
volume so that a minimum of 80% of the TSS settle to the bottom of the
pond.
B. A settling pond may be standalone or adjacent to a detention pond as a
settling forebay.
C. The bankfull volume is calculated as the rainfall from a 1.5-year storm
while the first flush volume is calculated as the first one inch of runoff
from the on-site impervious tributary area, or
Vff (cf) = A x C x 3630 cf/ac-impervious
§ 256-61 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-63
248:677
§ 256-64. Discharge requirements.
D. The outlet of a first flush basin or sediment collection unit shall be
designed to release the first flush volume over 24 to 36 hours.
E. The outlet of a first flush basin or sediment collection unit shall not be
submerged by the receiving watercourse at a ten-year design level.
F. The first flush basin or sediment collection unit shall contain a bypass
structure and/or berm to allow the ten-year peak flow to bypass without
hydraulic interference.
A. Discharge prohibitions.
(1) Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(a) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater.
(b) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as provided in § 256-64A(2).
(2) The following discharges if identified as not being a significant
contributor to violations of water quality standards (WQS) are
excluded from discharge prohibitions established by this article:
(a) Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
(b) Landscape irrigation runoff, lawn watering runoff, and
irrigation waters.
(c) Diverted stream flows and flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands.
(d) Rising groundwaters and springs.
(e) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration and seepage.
(f) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, except for
groundwater cleanups specifically authorized by NPDES
permits.
(g) Foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps, footing
drains, and basement sump pumps.
(h) Air-conditioning condensation.
(i) Waters from noncommercial car washing.
(j) Street wash water.
§ 256-63 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-64
248:678
§ 256-65. Inspection and monitoring requirements.
Monitoring of discharges.
(k) Dechlorinated swimming pool water from single-, two-, or
three-family residences. (A swimming pool operated by the
permittee shall not be discharged to a separate storm sewer or
to surface waters of the state without NPDES permit
authorization from the EGLE).
(l) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities if identified as
not being significant sources of pollutants to waters of the
state.
(m) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(n) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a "Notice of
Intent to Treat" under the General Rule 97 Certification of
Approval to be obtained from EGLE prior to the
commencement of the test.
(o) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain
system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges, facilities associated with industrial activity, and those
having construction activity.
B. Access to facilities.
§ 256-64 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-65
248:679
(1) The City of Roseville shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the City.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(3) The City shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such
devices as are necessary and/or required by the MS4 permit to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
(4) The City has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this
article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES
permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity
commits an offense if the person denies the authorized
enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this article.
(7) If the City has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 256-65 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-66
248:680
§ 256-66. Enforcement; illicit discharge elimination plan and total
maximum daily load.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the City of Roseville or other enforcing
agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. The City of Roseville Illicit Discharge Elimination Plan and Total Daily
Maximum Load, as amended from time to time, and as adopted via
resolution by the City of Roseville City Council, is hereby incorporated
herein by reference.198
198. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 256-66 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-66
248:681

ARTICLE V
Stormwater System Utility Fees199
[Adopted 5-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1302]
§ 256-67. Fees established.
§ 256-68. Calculation of fees; appeals.
A. All users shall pay a stormwater utility fee proportional to the volume of
stormwater which is projected to discharge into the combined sewer
system and/or stormwater sewer system from their property.
B. The City Council shall, by resolution, set stormwater utility fees at a
rate which will recover from each user its share of the costs of the
stormwater sewer system attributable to the discharge of stormwater
from the users' property to the stormwater system. The City shall use
the revenues of the stormwater utility fees to pay the costs of the water
treatment operation and maintenance of the stormwater sewer system
and for necessary improvements and additions to the stormwater sewer
system.
C. The City may also collect from users fees imposed to pay the
implementation and operation of any of the following:
(1) Monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
(2) Reviewing discharge procedures and construction;
(3) Discharge permit applications; or
(4) Other fees as the City may deem necessary to operate the
stormwater sewer system.
A. Single-family residential ESWU. All single-family residential properties
in each of the lot-size categories are assigned the same ESWU for that
category. The ESWU values for the single-family residential categories
are summarized in the fee schedule.
Property Type SFR Class
Single-family residential, 0.125 acre or less Class A
Single-family residential, 0.126 acre to 0.250
acre
Class B
Single-family residential, 0.251 acre to 0.500
acre
Class C
Single-family residential, 0.501 acre to 0.750
acre
Class D
199. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1311, adopted 6-28-2019, renumbered former §§ 256-63
through 256-67 as §§ 256-67 through 256-71, respectively.
§ 256-67 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-68
248:683
Property Type SFR Class
Single-family residential, 0.751 acre to 1.000
acre
Class E
Single-family residential, 1.001 acres or larger Class F
B. Non-single-family ESWU. The stormwater utility fee for non-singlefamily
lots shall equal the number of ESWUs for a given lot, multiplied
by the annual rate established by the City Council per ESWU per year.
The formula for determining the number of ESWUs per non-singlefamily
lot shall be calculated from the amount of pervious and
impervious lot area as follows:
Number of ESWU = 0.15 (TA 0 IA) + 0.90 (IA) average runoff potential
of the standard unit/ESWU where TA = total area of each lot (reported
in square feet); IA = impervious area of each lot (reported in square
feet).
C. Any non-single-family residential property owner liable for a
stormwater utility fee may appeal the determination that the property
utilizes the stormwater system or the amount of a stormwater utility
fee, including a determination on a reduction in or the elimination of
the fee. An appeal may be based on the quantity of stormwater runoff
generated, the reductions established, the reductions allocated, or any
other matter relating to the determination of the stormwater utility fee.
D. A single-family residential property owner may appeal the
determination that the property utilizes the stormwater system;
however, such an appeal shall be limited to the following reasons:
(1) The size of the lot has been miscalculated, or
(2) All or part of the stormwater runoff drains to an open drainage
course, such as a river, lake or creek, which affects the quantity of
the stormwater runoff generated that gets into the stormwater
sewer system; or
(3) Eligibility for credits.
E. An appeal under Subsection C shall be heard by a stormwater utility
appeals board appointed by the local unit of government. The appeals
board shall consist of three members, one of whom shall have plan
review experience.
F. An appeal of a stormwater utility fee shall not be brought more than one
year after the fee was billed.
G. To prevail in an appeal of a stormwater utility fee, the appellant shall
demonstrate in accordance with the requirements of the plan for a nonsingle-
family residential property that the use of the system by the
property is less than the amount used by the local unit of government in
the calculation of that property's stormwater utility fee, or for all
§ 256-68 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-68
248:684
§ 256-69. Credits.
properties the classification of the property type is in error, or there
was a mathematical error in the calculation of the fee.
H. The sole remedy for a property owner who prevails in an appeal of a
stormwater utility fee is a prospective correct recalculation of the
stormwater utility fee.
I. If in an appeal of a stormwater utility fee the appeals board finds that
the requirements of Subsection G have not been met, that finding is
conclusive until the property is modified to either increase or decrease
the utilization of the system. The property owner remains eligible for
reduction or elimination of fees under the Stormwater Utility
Ordinance.
J. A property owner making an appeal shall provide the appeals board
with information necessary to make a determination.
K. A person aggrieved by a decision of the appeals board on an appeal
under this section may appeal to the circuit court in which the property
is located. An appeal to the circuit court must be filed within 30 days of
the appeals board's decision.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide for each property owner's
control over contributions of storm flows to the stormwater utility
system and the related stormwater utility fees and to advance
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
B. The City shall offer credits on an annual basis that will enable any
property owner, through voluntary action, to reduce the stormwater
utility fees calculated for that property owner's property and will
provide a meaningful reduction in the cost of service to the stormwater
system or that shall be reasonably related to a benefit to the stormwater
system.
(1) Credits will only be applied if requirements outlined in this chapter
and other applicable sections of the City Code are met, including,
but not limited to: completion of ongoing maintenance, guaranteed
right of entry for inspections, and submittal of annual selfcertification
reports.
(2) Credits will be defined as either set fee reduction or percent
reductions applied as a credit adjustment to the fee calculation
equation.
(3) Credits are additive to each credit category.
(4) As long as the stormwater facilities or management practices are
functioning as approved, the credit reduction will be applied to the
fee. If the approved practice is not functioning as approved or is
terminated, the credit reduction will be cancelled and the fee will
§ 256-68 SALES, SPECIAL § 256-69
248:685
§ 256-70. Billing.
The billing for the stormwater utility may be combined with the billing for
other utility services. Final determinations on measurements per ESWU will
be determined by the Director of the Department of Public Services or his/
her designee.
§ 256-71. Collection of unpaid fees.
Unpaid stormwater utility fees shall constitute a lien against the property
affected. Fees which have remained unpaid for a period of six months prior
to April 30 may be certified to the City Treasurer who shall place the fees on
the next tax roll of the City. In the alternative, the City Council may direct
the City Attorney to take appropriate legal action to collect unpaid fees.
return to the baseline calculation. Once the credit reduction has
been cancelled, a customer may not reapply for credit for a period
of 12 months and only then if the deficiency has been corrected, as
determined by City inspection.
(5) Credits will be applied to the next complete billing cycle after the
application has been approved.
C. The Director of the Department of Public Services, or his/her designee,
shall define a method for applying and granting credits on an annual
basis, as well as criteria for determining the credits a property owner
may receive. The Director may, by regulation, establish credits for one
or more of the following:
(1) Installation and maintenance of rain barrels, rain gardens,
bioswales, cisterns, dry wells, infiltration trenches, porous
pavement or pavers, or disconnecting footing drains;
(2) Installation and maintenance of a stormwater control facility or
other water quantity controls; and
(3) Other actions of the property owner that, in the judgment of the
Director of the Department of Public Services, or his/her designee,
result in a measurable reduction in stormwater runoff.
§ 256-69 ROSEVILLE CODE § 256-71
248:686
Chapter 264
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Posting of signs regarding sale of alcohol to
minors — See Ch. 71, Art. I.
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Handbills — See Ch. 165.
Temporary signs for open-air sales — See Ch.
248, Art. I.
Traffic control devices and street signs — See
Ch. 316.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 264-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance."
§ 264-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the City of Roseville, including but not limited to defining
and regulating signs in order to promote aesthetics, to avoid danger from
sign collapse and to regulate sign materials, avoid traffic hazards from sign
locations and size, avoid visual blight and provide for the reasonable and
orderly use of signs.
§ 264-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set forth in
this section:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a
bona fide business, lessor, service owner, product or activity and for which
no legal owner can be found through records of the city.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing or color changes
requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of power
supply. This definition does not include revolving signs or time-andtemperature
displays.
AREA OF SIGN — The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the
limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character,
together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral
part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background
against which it is placed, and excluding the necessary supports or uprights
on which such sign is placed; provided, however, that any open space
contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign or between
any component, panel, strip or figure of any kind composing the display
face shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign, whether
§ 256-71 SIGNS § 264-3
264:687
such open space is enclosed or not by a frame or border. Where a sign
consists solely of lettering or other sign elements mounted on a wall of a
building without any distinguishing border, panel or background, only the
area of a tightly drawn imaginary rectangle enclosing each such letter and
other sign elements shall be treated as a single sign for the purposes of
area computation. For double-faced signs, only one display face shall be
measured or counted in computing sign area or items of information where
the sign faces are parallel or where the interior angle formed by the faces is
60° or less; if the two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the
area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face.
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the
surface of an awning.
BANNER SIGN — A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no
enclosing framework.
BENCH SIGN — A sign painted on, printed on or attached to a structure
designed for or suitable for seating.
BUILDING DIRECTOR — The department head of the Department of
Buildings and Inspection or a designee of such department head.
BUILDING FACADE — That portion of the front elevation of a building,
extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, which fronts
on any street or public right-of-way.
CHANGEABLE COPY PANEL — A sign panel which is characterized by
changeable copy, regardless of the method of attachment.
COMMUNITY EVENTS SIGNS — Signs advertising community events or
public entertainments.
CONSTRUCTION SIGNS — Any sign announcing the names of the
architects, engineers, contractors or other individuals or firms involved with
the construction, alteration or repair of a building, but not including any
advertisement of any product, or announcing the character of the building
enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended or indicating
the presence of underground public utility structures to avoid damage to
structures by excavation.
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS — Incidental on-premises signs designated to guide
pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
DISTRICT — A zoning or land use district specified in the City of Roseville
Zoning Ordinance.200
ELIGIBLE ADVERTISER — Any person legally entitled to occupy premises,
advertising by means of a sign a business activity located on the premises.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The Director of Buildings and Inspection or
designated alternate.
200. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 264-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-3
264:688
FACADE IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which identifies only the name
of the business located on the premises and/or its street address (must be a
wall sign).
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign completely or principally supported by one
or more columns, uprights or braces placed in the ground.
GASOLINE PRICE SIGN — Any sign which is used to advertise the price of
gasoline. In the event that the brand identification sign is common with a
sign advertising price, the portion of the sign used for advertising price will
be considered the price sign.
HOUSE OR BUILDING ADDRESS SIGN — Any sign which sets forth the
house or building address.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign in which an artificial source of light is
employed in order to light the sign or make the message readable. This
definition includes internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized,
glowing and radiating signs.
INDIVIDUAL PROPERTY SALE OR RENTAL SIGNS — Any on-premises
sign announcing the name of the owner, manager, realtor or other person
directly involved in the sale or rental of the property or announcing the
purpose for which it is being offered.
INSTALLED SIGN[Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 1184] —
INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD — A sign upon which is displayed
only the name and/or address of the religious institution, school, library,
community center, eleemosynary organization or similar institution which
occupies the premises and announcements concerning its service or
activities.
INTEGRAL SIGNS — Names of buildings, dates of construction,
commemorative tablets and the like, when carved into stone, concrete or
similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of
construction and made an integral part of the building or structure.
MARQUEE — A permanent roofed structure attached to a building and
projecting over public property.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to or constructed on the face of a
marquee.
INSTALLED THROUGH THE USE OF or SECURED WITH
FOUNDATIONS OR FOOTINGS — A foundation or footing complying
with the design requirements of the Michigan Building Code, 2000
Edition and its amendments.201
A.
PERMANENTLY ATTACHED TO THE BUILDING — Secured to the
building in compliance with the design requirements of the Michigan
Building Code, 2000 Edition and its amendments.
B.
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Building Construction.
§ 264-3 SIGNS § 264-3
264:689
MENU BOARD — A sign which is used in conjunction with a drive-through
business, the area of which shall not exceed 50 square feet or a height of 10
feet.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which contains a message unrelated to any
business, activity or service actually carried on upon the premises.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which carries only advertisements strictly
incidental to a lawful use of the premises on which it is located, including
wording or devices indicating the business or activity transacted, services
rendered, goods sold or produced on the premises, name of the business
and the person, firm or corporation occupying the premises.
PERSON — An individual person, association of persons, firm, company,
corporation, partnership or organization of any kind.
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign used to identify and/or promote a political
candidate standing for election to public office and subject to voter approval
by residents of the City of Roseville, or political signs identifying or
promoting a valid question subject to being voted upon by electors in the
City of Roseville.
PORTABLE SIGN — A freestanding sign not permanently anchored or
secured to either a building or the ground, such as but not limited to an Aframe,
T-shaped or an inverted T-shaped sign.
PRIVATE TRAFFIC DIRECTION AND RELATED SIGNS — Signs directing
traffic movement onto a premises or within a premises, when such signs are
located on the premises, do not exceed five square feet in area for each sign
and, if freestanding, do not exceed five feet in total height. Such signs are
considered to include parking directions, exit or entrance signs, drive-up
window signs, rest room signs and the like. Horizontal directional signs on
and flush with paved areas are exempt from these standards.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which projects from and is supported by a
building wall, any part extending more than 18 inches beyond the building
wall.
PUBLIC SIGNS — Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, to include
safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating
scenic or historic points of interest, memorial plaques and the like, and all
signs erected by or on order of a public officer in the performance of a
public duty.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which revolves 360° but does not exceed eight
revolutions per minute.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a
building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
SHOPPING CENTER SIGN — A sign which identifies a group of three
or more contiguous stores, offices or shops, whether or not under single
management, served by a common off-street parking lot located on private
property.
§ 264-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-3
264:690
SIGN — Any structure, material, display, sculpture, flag, string of lights,
image, object or device which advertises, publicizes or calls attention to a
business, goods, services, institution, person, activity, location or idea, or is
intended to do so, by a word, image, color or shape or combination thereof
and which is visible from any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley or
other public property.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure which supports or is capable of
supporting any sign. A sign structure may consist of one or more poles or
columns and may or may not be an integral part of a building.
SUBDIVISION SIGNS — Any sign announcing the names of architects,
engineers, contractors or other individuals or firms involved with the
subdivision or development of property, but not including any advertisement
of any product, or announcing the character of the subdivision or the
purpose for which it is intended.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is intended to advertise community or
civic events projects, construction projects, real estate signs advertising
property for sale or lease or another special event on a temporary basis.
TIME-AND-TEMPERATURE SIGN — A sign which displays the current time
or outdoor temperature, or both, and which displays no advertising other
than the name of the business occupying the premises. Cycle time shall not
be less than 30 seconds.
UNDERGROUND PUBLIC UTILITY WARNING SIGNS — Standard types
of warning signs marking the routes of underground public utility pipes,
conduits and cables.
UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN — A lighted or unlighted sign attached to the
underside of a marquee.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than
18 inches from the wall of a building or awning. This definition includes
painted signs, individual letters, cabinet signs and signs on a mansard.
§ 264-4. Signs not expressly permitted deemed prohibited.
A sign not expressly permitted is prohibited.
§ 264-5. On-premises signs.
The following types of on-premises signs (illuminated or nonilluminated) are
permitted in the following districts:
A. Freestanding signs.
(1) In Local Business, Community Business, General Business and
Expressway Service Districts:
(a) Each eligible advertiser is permitted one sign per 300 feet of
business frontage thereafter, except that no on-premises
freestanding sing is permitted if an on-premises projecting or
roof sign exists on the same frontage.
§ 264-3 SIGNS § 264-5
264:691
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 150 square feet.
(c) The maximum height of the sign, measured from ground level
to upwardmost extremity, shall be 25 feet at minimum setback
line, one foot per two feet additional setback up to 45 feet
maximum.
(d) Signs shall not extend over the public right-of-way.
(2) Light Industrial District:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one.
(b) The maximum area of the sign shall be 200 square feet.
(c) The maximum height of the sign, measured from ground level
to upwardmost extremity, shall be 40 feet at minimum setback
line, plus one foot of height per two feet additional setback up
to a maximum height of 60 feet.
(d) Signs shall not extend over the public right-of-way.
(3) General Industrial District:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one.
(b) The maximum area of the sign shall be 300 square feet.
(c) The maximum height of the sign, measured from ground level
to upwardmost extremity, shall be 40 feet at minimum setback
line, plus one foot of height per two feet additional setback up
to a maximum height of 60 feet.
(d) Signs shall not extend over the public right-of-way.
(4) Multiple-Family Residential (Low-Rise) District:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one.
(b) The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
(c) The maximum height of the sign, measured from ground level
to upwardmost extremity, shall be 10 feet.
(d) There shall be a ten-foot setback.
(5) Multiple-Family Residential (High-Rise) District:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one.
(b) The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
(c) The maximum height of the sign, measured from ground level
to upwardmost extremity, shall be 10 feet.
(d) There shall be a ten-foot setback.
§ 264-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-5
264:692
(6) Office Service District:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one.
(b) The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
(c) The maximum height of the sign, measured from ground level
to upwardmost extremity, shall be 25 feet.
(d) There shall be a ten-foot setback.
B. Wall signs and wall-mounted signs. The maximum area of all wall signs,
regardless of location, may be based on the largest building elevation
but may not exceed 15% of any building facade.
(1) Office Service District:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of signs permitted.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 15% of the building facade
area, not to exceed 150 square feet maximum.
(c) Signs shall not stand beyond the top or ends of the wall surface
on which they are placed, nor project more than 18 inches from
the building facade.
(2) Local Business District:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of signs permitted.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 15% of the building facade
area, not to exceed 150 square feet maximum.
(c) Signs shall not stand beyond the top or ends of the wall surface
on which they are placed, nor project more than 18 inches from
the building facade.
(3) Community Business District:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of signs permitted.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 15% of the building facade
area, not to exceed 150 square feet maximum. Buildings in
excess of 100 feet from all rights-of-way may utilize 10% of
their building facade area with no maximum on the signage
allowance.
(c) Signs shall not stand beyond the top or ends of the wall surface
on which they are placed, nor project more than 18 inches from
the building facade.
(4) General Business District:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of signs permitted.
§ 264-5 SIGNS § 264-5
264:693
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 15% of the building facade
area, not to exceed 150 square feet maximum. Buildings in
excess of 100 feet from all rights-of-way may utilize 10% of
their building facade area with no maximum on the signage
allowance.
(c) Signs shall not stand beyond the top or ends of the wall surface
on which they are placed, nor project more than 18 inches from
the building facade.
(5) Expressway Service District:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of signs permitted.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 15% of the building facade
area, not to exceed 150 square feet maximum. Buildings in
excess of 100 feet from all rights-of-way may utilize 10% of
their building facade area with no maximum on the signage
allowance.
(c) Signs shall not stand beyond the top or ends of the wall surface
on which they are placed, nor project more than 18 inches from
the building facade.
(6) Light Industrial District:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of signs permitted.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 20% of the building facade
area, not to exceed 200 square feet maximum.
(c) Signs shall not stand beyond the top or ends of the wall surface
on which they are placed, nor project more than 18 inches from
the building facade.
(7) Light Industrial District:
(a) There shall be no limit on the number of signs permitted.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 20% of the building facade
area, not to exceed 200 square feet maximum.
(c) Signs shall not stand beyond the top or ends of the wall surface
on which they are placed, nor project more than 18 inches from
the building facade.
C. Projecting signs.
(1) Office Service District:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one per
eligible advertiser, except that no on-premises projecting sign
is permitted if an on-premises freestanding or roof sign exists
§ 264-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-5
264:694
on the same frontage. Upper-level businesses are not allowed
projecting signs.
(b) The maximum height and projection of the sign shall be nine
feet minimum clearance above the ground. No sign shall
extend above the portion of the roof immediately adjacent to
the sign. No sign shall project more than five feet from the face
of the building to which it is attached.
(c) The maximum area of the sign shall be 15 square feet.
(d) Signs shall not extend over any public right-of-way, except that
if a business is within a building, the face of which is less than
five feet from the property line, the projecting sign may extend
up to three feet over the public right-of-way.
(2) Local Business, Community Business, General Business and
Expressway Service Districts:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one per
eligible advertiser, except that no on-premises projecting sign
is permitted if an on-premises freestanding or roof sign exists
on the same frontage. Upper-level businesses are not allowed
projecting signs.
(b) The maximum height and projection of the sign shall be nine
feet minimum clearance above the ground. No sign shall
extend above the portion of the roof immediately adjacent to
the sign. No sign shall project more than five feet from the face
of the building to which it is attached.
(c) The maximum area of the sign shall be 20 square feet.
(d) Signs shall not extend over any public right-of-way, except that
if a business is within a building, the face of which is less than
five feet from the property line, the projecting sign may extend
up to three feet over the public right-of-way.
(3) Light Industrial and General Industrial Districts:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one per
eligible advertiser, except that no on-premises projecting sign
is permitted if an on-premises freestanding or roof sign exists
on the same frontage. Upper-level businesses are not allowed
projecting signs.
(b) The maximum height and projection of the sign shall be nine
feet minimum clearance above the ground. No sign shall
extend above the portion of the roof immediately adjacent to
the sign. No sign shall project more than five feet from the face
of the building to which it is attached.
(c) The maximum area of the sign shall be 30 square feet.
§ 264-5 SIGNS § 264-5
264:695
(d) Signs shall not extend over any public right-of-way, except that
if a business is within a building, the face of which is less than
five feet from the property line, the projecting sign may extend
up to three feet over the public right-of-way.
D. Roof signs.
(1) Local Business, Community Business, General Business and
Expressway Service Districts:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one per
eligible advertiser, except that no on-premises roof sign is
permitted if an on-premises freestanding or projecting sign
exists on the same premises.
(b) The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet as measured
from that part of the roof immediately below the sign.
(c) The maximum area of the sign shall be three square feet per
front-foot of business frontage up to a maximum of 200 square
feet.
(d) Signs must be located wholly within the roof area of the
structure.
(2) Light Industrial and General Industrial Districts:
(a) The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one per
eligible advertiser, except that no on-premises roof sign is
permitted if an on-premises freestanding or projecting sign
exists on the same premises.
(b) The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet as measured
from that part of the roof immediately below the sign.
(c) The maximum area of the sign shall be three square feet per
front-foot of business frontage up to a maximum of 200 square
feet.
(d) Signs must be located wholly within the roof area of the
structure.
E. Gasoline price signs.
(1) Number of signs. There shall be allowed only one price sign for
each gas station; however, those gas stations which are located on
the corner of a major road intersection shall be allowed to have one
price sign facing each road.
(2) Size. Price signs shall be no larger than 10 square feet in area.
(3) Location. The price sign shall be firmly attached to a stationary
pole and shall not project over the public right-of-way. The bottom
of the sign shall be at least seven feet above grade. The top of the
§ 264-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-5
264:696
§ 264-6. Off-premises signs.
§ 264-7. Signs permitted on private property in all districts.202
Signs specified in this section are permitted in all use districts, in addition
to the signs permitted in the respective use districts, but are restricted
to private property in all use districts unless specifically permitted by this
chapter to be placed on public property or rights-of-way and are subject
to the conditions and limitations set forth herein. Permits are unnecessary
unless required by the particular subsection.
sign shall be no higher than 12 feet above grade. Gasoline price
signs shall be permitted in only General Commercial and Light and
General Industrial Districts.
A. Freestanding off-premises signs. Freestanding off-premises signs are
permitted in the following districts on property only, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Light Industrial and General Industrial Districts:
(a) The sign must be at least 1,000 feet from the closest offpremises
freestanding sign.
(b) The maximum area of the sign shall be 300 square feet.
(c) The maximum height of the sign shall be 50 feet.
(d) Signs shall not extend over the public right-of-way.
B. Prohibited off-premises signs. Off-premises signs, other than
freestanding signs permitted under § 264-6A, are prohibited.
A. House or building address sign.
B. Integral signs.
C. Public signs.
D. Flags bearing the official sign of a nation, state, municipality or
educational institution. Flags permitted shall be erected in full
compliance with Section 2102 of the Zoning Ordinance203 or any
subsequent amendment.
E. Institutional bulletin boards: one per eligible advertiser per frontage,
but no such sign shall exceed a height of 10 feet nor an area of 50
square feet (permit required).
F. Private traffic direction signs and related signs.
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
203. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 264-5 SIGNS § 264-7
264:697
G. Community events signs, subject to the following conditions:
(1) If located on public property, such signs shall not exceed 10 feet in
area. Placement and location must be approved by the enforcement
official, and any sign may not be installed earlier than 15 days prior
to the event and must be removed within 10 days after the event is
over.
(2) Banners over public streets must be approved by the City Council
and must be removed within 10 days after the event is over.
H. Political campaign signs. Political signs shall be permitted subject to the
following:
(1) No political sign shall exceed 32 square feet of display area unless
such sign is the message contained on a permanent approved pylon
billboard.
(2) Political signs are restricted to 32 square feet of display area (per
sign) or combination of signs for each 75 feet or portion thereof of
property frontage along a public thoroughfare. Where frontage is
less than 75 feet, the sign area shall be restricted to 32 square feet
for each sign or signs. For corner lots fronting on more than one
public way, the longest frontage on a single public way will be used
to assess maximum allowable signage. No individual sign in any
area, either zoned or used for residential purposes, shall exceed 10
square feet.
(3) Political signs shall not be erected or placed more than 45 days
prior to an election and shall be removed within seven days after
the election. Where more than 45 days exist between a primary and
general election, signs may not be continuously placed between the
primary and general election.
(4) A person desirous of placing political signs shall register his or her
intent with the City Clerk prior to the erection of political signs
completing the form prescribed by the City Clerk, including the
name, address and telephone number of the candidate or person
responsible for the placement of political signs, a description of
political signs and adequate details so that they may be reasonably
identified and an attestation that the candidate or person placing
political signs has received permission from the owners of all
property on which the political signs will be placed.
(5) All signs shall carry the name and address identifying the person
placing the sign.
(6) Political signs shall be constructed of durable materials and
constructed so as to avoid collapse from inadvertent contact with
wind or weather and shall utilize construction materials and
techniques so that no dangerous surface results, including but not
limited to protruding nails or sharp edges.
§ 264-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-7
264:698
(7) Political signs shall be placed so as to avoid obstructing the view of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(8) Political signs shall not be located on or project into or overhang
any public right-of-way.
I. Time-and-temperature display signs. No such signs shall exceed the
height of the building to which it is accessory, nor an area of 20 square
feet (permit required).
J. Underground public utility warning signs.
K. Theater-hotel marquee advertising, provided that said advertising is
wholly contained within the basic marquee face.
L. Merchandise showcases (outdoor), which may be displayed in
reasonable quantities. Such racks or showcases may contain a single
sign not exceeding 10% of the largest visible face area not more than
one square foot per rack or showcase and must meet the placement
requirements set forth for freestanding signs. Such signs must contain
messages relating only to the merchandise for sale on such rack or
showcase.
M. Vending machines and structures used for storage and sale of ice and/or
beverages. Two signs shall be permitted. The total area of said signs
shall not exceed 10% of the wall surface area of the side of the
structures on which such signs are located or, in any case, a maximum
area of 10 square feet for all of such signs. All portions of such signs
shall be located within the face of the structure.
N. Signs painted on or attached to any motor vehicle, trailer, wagon, cart
or other vehicles which are normally used upon the highways for
transportation of persons, goods or equipment, but no person shall
cause or allow any vehicle to be parked on a street or highway, public
thoroughfare or right-of-way or between said thoroughfare and the
existing building line for the principal purpose of advertising any
business or activity being conducted upon nearby private property by
means of a sign or signs painted upon, supported by or attached to such
vehicles.
O. Individual property sale or rental signs.
(1) Signs may be freestanding or wall-mounted only. Signs may not
emit direct illumination and must be removed within 14 days after
the sale or rental of the property.
(2) Signs shall conform to the following standards:
(a) Single-Family Residential and Two-Family Residential
Districts:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
§ 264-7 SIGNS § 264-7
264:699
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 10 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be five feet.
[4] The location of the sign shall be within a ten-foot minimum
setback, but wholly upon the premises.
(b) Multiple-Family Residential District:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet.
[4] The location of the sign shall be within a ten-foot minimum
setback, but wholly upon the premises.
(c) Office Service District:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet.
[4] Signs shall conform to the setback requirements for
structures in the applicable districts.
(d) Local Business, Community Business, General Business,
Expressway Service Districts:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 75 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 15 feet.
[4] Signs shall conform to the setback requirements for
structures in the applicable districts.
(e) Light Industrial and General Industrial Districts:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 100 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 20 feet.
[4] Signs shall conform to the setback requirements for
structures in the applicable districts.
§ 264-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-7
264:700
(f) Complex, wall and multifamily unit rental signs.
[1] An apartment complex, shopping center, highway plaza or
industrial complex is permitted one sign per frontage up to
200 feet and one additional sign for each 300 feet
thereafter.
[2] Wall signs shall not extend beyond the top or ends of the
wall surface on which they are placed.
[3] Rental signs for multiple-family units that have an
occupancy rate of greater than 75% are not to exceed 10
square feet.
P. Subdivision signs.
(1) These signs shall be confined to the site of the subdivision and shall
be permitted for one year from the date of the erection of the first
of such signs. If development of the subdivision is not completed
within one year after the erection of the signs, the sign shall be
permitted to exist an additional period not to exceed one year.
(2) Signs shall conform to the following standards:
(a) Single-Family Residential and Two-Family Residential
Districts:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet.
[4] The location of the sign shall be within a ten-foot minimum
setback, but wholly upon the premises.
(b) Multifamily Residential District:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet.
[4] The location of the sign shall be within a ten-foot minimum
setback, but wholly upon the premises.
(c) Office Service District:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 50 square feet.
§ 264-7 SIGNS § 264-7
264:701
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet.
[4] Signs shall conform to the setback requirements for
structures in applicable districts.
(d) Local Business, Community Business, General Business and
Expressway Service Districts:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 75 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 15 feet.
[4] Signs shall conform to the setback requirements for
structures in applicable districts.
(e) Light Industrial and General Industrial Districts:
[1] The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision.
[2] The maximum area of the sign shall be 100 square feet.
[3] The maximum height of the sign shall be 20 feet.
[4] Signs shall conform to the setback requirements for
structures in applicable districts.
Q. Construction signs.
(1) Such signs shall be confined to the site of the construction,
alteration or repair and shall be removed within 21 days after the
completion of the work.
(2) Signs shall conform with the standards provided for individual
property sale or rental signs in Subsection O of this § 264-7.
R. Temporary signs. Temporary signs, banners and pennants may be
approved by the building official subject to reasonable conditions and
temporary placement in conjunction with an event approved under
Section 2204-2 of the Zoning Ordinance204 or any amendment thereto.
S. Menu boards.
T. Residential window signs. One sign may be displayed in the window of a
dwelling in a residentially zoned area, provided that it does not exceed
four square feet in size and does not advertise a home occupation
unless it has been approved pursuant to Section 402-11 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 264-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-8
264:702
§ 264-8. Special provisions for shopping centers.
Any parcel which is found eligible for a shopping center identification
sign may erect up to 50 square feet of signage for this purpose. This is
in addition to the maximum amount of signage they are allowed under
§ 264-5A of this chapter.
§ 264-9. Prohibited signs.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any
district, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter:
A. Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving lights.
B. Banners, pennants, spinners and streamers except as permitted in
§ 264-7G.
C. String lights used in connection with commercial premises for
commercial purposes, other than Christmas decorations.
D. Any sign which has any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or
visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent
visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical
means, including intermittent electrical pulsations or by action of
normal wind currents, but automatic change-of-message with cycle
time of not less than 30 seconds is permissible.
E. Any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe or which
constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment or which is not kept in good
repair or which is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely
to come in contact with it.
F. Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or
manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or detriment to
traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers or by obstructing or
detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on
public streets and roads.
G. Any sign which obstructs free ingress or egress from a required door,
window, fire escape or other required exitway.
H. Signs which make use of words such as "Stop", "Look" or "Danger" or
any characters or shapes generally used as public safety symbols or
other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
I. Any sign or other advertising structure containing any obscene,
indecent or immoral matter.
J. Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
§ 264-8 SIGNS § 264-9
264:703
§ 264-10. Sign erection permits.
K. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona
fide business conducted or a product sold.
L. Portable signs.
M. Bench signs, whether such benches are permanent or portable, which
are prohibited where benches are located outside of a fully enclosed
structure.
A. Permits required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall
be unlawful for any person to erect, alter or repair any sign message or
to relocate or maintain, within the City of Roseville, any sign as defined
herein without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Department of
Buildings and Inspection and making payment of any fee required by
this chapter.
B. Application. Application for sign erection permits shall be made upon
forms provided by the Department of Buildings and Inspection and shall
contain or have attached thereto the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location of the building, structure or lot to or on which the sign
is to be attached or erected.
(3) The position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures
and property lines.
(4) Two drawings of the plans and specifications and method of
construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
(5) A copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary,
showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind
pressure.
(6) The name and address of the person, firm, corporation and
association erecting the structure.
(7) Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign.
(8) Such other information as the Chief Building Official may require to
show full compliance with this chapter and all other applicable laws
of the City of Roseville and the State of Michigan.
C. Permit fees. A fee shall be paid for the issuance of sign erection permits
in accordance with a schedule of fees which shall be adopted and
amended from time to time by the City Council. Such schedule of fees
shall be designed to reimburse the City for all of its direct costs
incurred in the inspection and regulation of signs and issuance of
permits.
§ 264-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-10
264:704
§ 264-11. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
The Chief Building Official shall have the power to adopt and promulgate
rules and regulations to interpret and implement any provisions of this
chapter and to secure the intent thereof. Any such rules and regulations
shall not become effective until approved by resolution of the City Council
and, upon such approval, shall be as complete and binding as if specifically
set forth herein. A violation of any such rule or regulation shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be distributed to the public
upon request.
§ 264-12. Authorized sign erectors.205
No person shall engage in the business of erecting, repairing or dismantling
of signs for which sign erection permits are required by this chapter without
first being licensed as an authorized sign erector.
D. Servicing and maintenance. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to the changing of advertising on a sign specifically designed for
the periodic change of the message without change in the sign
structure, such as a bulletin board or similar type of sign.
A. License fee. No such license shall be issued until such license fee as
may be established by the City Council by resolution is paid. The City
Council shall establish such reasonable license fees as will reimburse
the City for its costs in processing and issuing such licenses.
B. Bond. Permits may be issued to sign erectors only upon the following
conditions:
(1) Insurance certificates. Before a permit is issued for the erection of
a sign, the installing company shall submit for filing with the City
Clerk a certificate of insurance for public liability in the amount of
$100,000 for injuries to one person and $300,000 for injury to more
than one person and property damage insurance in the amount of
$25,000 for damages to any property due to the actions of himself
or any of his or her agents or employees.
(2) Lapsing of insurance. At any time the insurance of any sign erector
is permitted to lapse, his or her right to obtain permits shall
automatically be revoked.
(3) Notification of change. A sign erector shall notify the Department
of Buildings and Inspection of any change in address and, if a firm
or corporation, any change in ownership or management, if other
than that indicated on the insurance certificates.
C. Revocation of licenses. Such erectors' licenses may be revoked by the
City Council for cause, but only after the holding of a public hearing
205. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 126, Electrical Standards.
§ 264-10 SIGNS § 264-12
264:705
§ 264-13. Construction requirements.
Requirements concerning details of construction, materials, loads and
stresses are governed by the provisions of the City of Roseville Official
Building Code,206 and every sign shall be erected in compliance with such
provisions.
§ 264-14. Nonconforming signs.207
concerning the proposed revocation of license, at which time the
licensee will be given an opportunity to present relevant evidence and
defend himself. "Cause," as used herein, means failure to construct
signs in accordance with this chapter and other relevant provisions
of City ordinance or state statute or failure to comply with lawful
directions given to the licensee by the Department of Buildings and
Inspection concerning the construction, reconstruction and removal of
signs.
A. Combustible materials. Every sign for which any erection permit is
required shall be constructed of noncombustible material, except that
combustible structural trim may be used thereon.
B. Fastenings. Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely
and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or
approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support
safely the loads applied. All building fastenings must be of galvanized
noncorrosive materials.
C. Wind loads. For the purpose of design, wind pressure shall be taken
upon the gross area of the vertical projection of all signs and sign
structures at not less than 25 pounds per square foot for those
structures above ground. In calculating wind pressure on curved
surfaces, such as cylindrical or spherical signs or sign structures, this
pressure shall be assumed to act on 6/10 of the projected area. In all
open-frame signs or sign structures, the area used in computing wind
pressure shall be 1/2 times the net area of the framing members
exposed to the wind.
A. Intent. It is the legislative intent to recognize that the eventual
elimination of existing signs that are not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter is a valid objective of the police power, but it
is also the legislative intent that such elimination of nonconforming
signs shall be brought about over a period of time and in such manner
as to avoid the invasion of vested rights of owners of nonconforming
signs and the infliction of unnecessary hardship. The provisions of this
section shall be construed to that end.
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Building Construction.
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 264-12 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-14
264:706
§ 264-15. Board of Appeals; variances; appeals procedure.
B. Nonconforming signs. Any signs in existence prior to the adoption of
this chapter and which are now in conflict with any of its provisions
shall be considered nonconforming. These signs must be installed
through the use of a footing or a foundation or be permanently attached
to the building. Signs rendered nonconforming by the provisions of this
chapter shall be maintained in a condition of good repair pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, but not such nonconforming signs shall:
(1) Be changed to another nonconforming sign.
(2) Have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the
message displayed on the sign, unless the sign is a changeable copy
panel sign, bulletin board sign or substantially similarly type of sign
specifically designed for periodic change of the sign message.
(3) Be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or
changed in shape, size, type or design.
(4) Have the face or faces changed when it is of the type of
construction which permits a complete change of face.
(5) Continue to be used or allowed to remain in place after the activity,
business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 90
days or longer.
(6) Be reestablished after its removal or repaired or replaced after
damage or destruction if the expense of repair exceeds 50% of the
cost of repair or replacement.
(7) Continue to be used or allowed to remain in place upon a change in
occupancy or tenancy where the sign has been nonconforming for
three years or more.
(8) Continue to be used or allowed to remain in place upon a change in
ownership where the property is subsequently occupied by the
owner or an affiliated entity and where the sign has been
nonconforming for three years or more.
C. Nonconforming signs situated on property other than that owned by the
owner of the sign. Signs situated on property other than that owned by
the owner of the sign shall be subject to removal following the adoption
of this chapter within 60 days for any and all signs which are not
secured with foundations or footings.
A. Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals, appointed pursuant to
Article 7 of the City Zoning Ordinance,208 shall act as Board of Appeals
pursuant to this chapter.
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 264-14 SIGNS § 264-15
264:707
B. Powers of the Board. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in connection with the enforcement of this
chapter. The Board of Appeals shall also have the power to authorize a
variance from the strict application of this chapter where such
application will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship to
the person owning or having the beneficial use of the property or sign
for which a variance is sought. Prior to the granting of a variance by the
Board of Appeals, the Chief Building Official shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to study the appeal or request for variance and make
recommendations thereon to the Board. The concurring vote of 2/3 of
the appointed members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative
official or to grant any variance from the strict application of this
chapter.
C. Variances.
(1) A variance may be allowed by the Board of Appeals only in cases
involving practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and only
when the evidence in the official record of the appeal supports all of
the following affirmative findings:
(a) That the alleged practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship,
or both, is exceptional and peculiar to the property of the
person requesting the variance and results from conditions
which do not exist generally throughout the city.
(b) That the alleged practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship,
or both, which will result from a failure to grant the variance
includes substantially more than mere inconvenience.
(c) That, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by
this chapter, the individual hardship that will be suffered by
failure to grant the variance and the rights of others whose
property would be affected by the allowance of the variance,
allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being
done.
(2) The above findings of fact shall be made by the Board of Appeals,
which is not empowered to grant a variance without an affirmative
finding of fact on the categories above. Every finding of fact shall
be supported in the record of proceedings of the Board. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed to empower the Board of
Appeals to change the terms of this chapter nor to add to the uses
permitted in any district.
(3) If approved, the variance is only in effect as long as the petitioner
occupies the property.
D. Appeals procedure.
§ 264-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-15
264:708
§ 264-16. Enforcement; removal and disposal of prohibited signs.
(1) Appeals shall be commenced by a person filing a notice of appeal
with the Department of Buildings and Inspection on a form to be
supplied by the Department of Buildings and Inspection. The notice
of appeal shall specify the particular grounds upon which the
appeal is based and shall be signed. It shall also specify the
regulations from which a variance is sought and the nature and
extent of such variance.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
appeals and shall give due notice thereof to all the owners of
property within 300 feet of the premises in question and to the
occupants. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail
carrying the address of the respective owners, tenants or
occupants at the address given on the last assessment roll.
(3) Any person shall be accorded the right to appear in person or to be
represented by a duly authorized agent.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall prepare an official record for each
appeal and shall base its decision on this record. The official record
shall include:
(a) The relevant administrative records and the administrative
orders issued thereon relating to the appeal.
(b) The notice of appeal.
(c) Such documents, exhibits, photographs or written reports as
may be submitted to the Board for its consideration.
(5) The requisite written findings of fact, the conditions attached and
the decisions and orders by the Board of Appeals in disposing of the
appeal shall be entered into the official record. This shall be done
only after they have been signed by the Chair or Mayor of the Board
and after written notice of the disposition of the appeal has been
served, either in person or by mail, upon the parties to the appeal,
the Department of Buildings and Inspection and the City Clerk. The
Chair or Mayor shall, within 10 days after the date the Board has
reached its final decision on an appeal, sign the necessary orders to
effectuate the decision of the Board.
(6) A copy of the official record of an appeal shall be made available for
the parties to the appeal upon request and after payment of such
fee therefor as may be provided by the rules and regulations of the
Board of Appeals.
A. The Chief Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Whenever
necessary, the officials of other departments of the City shall give such
assistance as is consistent with the usual duties of their respective
§ 264-15 SIGNS § 264-16
264:709
departments. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Chief
Building Official or duly authorized representative may enter, at
reasonable times, any premises when necessary to the performance of
any duty imposed upon him by this chapter.
B. Except for signs not permitted to be placed in public rights-of-way or
signs constituting an immediate threat to the safety of the public,
whenever it shall appear to the Chief Building Official or authorized
representative that any sign has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, or after a
permit for a sign has been revoked or become void, or that a sign is
unsafe or in such condition as to be a menace to the safety of the public,
the enforcement official shall issue a notice, in writing, to the owner or
lessee of the sign or the owner of the premises upon which the sign is
erected or maintained. Such notice shall inform such person of the
violation and shall direct him or her to make such alteration, repair or
removal as is necessary to secure compliance with this chapter, within a
reasonable time limit, which reasonable time limit shall be considered
as not less than 24 hours nor more than 15 days. Upon failure of the
sign owner to comply with the terms of the notice of violation, the
enforcement official shall immediately remove or cause to be removed
any sign not in compliance with this chapter or shall immediately
request the City Manager, in writing, to institute the appropriate legal
action. Except as otherwise provided, the enforcement official may
immediately remove without notice or cause to be immediately
removed without notice any sign not permitted to be placed in a public
right-of-way or any sign which, in his or her opinion, is in such condition
as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public. Any
removed sign or signs shall be stored by the City of Roseville for a
period of not less than seven days. Removed signs will be released to
the owner only upon request by the owner. A sign owner who has failed
to retrieve the sign within the seven-day period has forfeited his or her
right to the same. Disposal of the signs will be at the City of Roseville's
discretion. The City Attorney shall institute appropriate action against
the owner of any sign or signs removed for the recovery of costs
incurred by the City of Roseville in the removing of any sign or signs not
in compliance with this chapter.
C. A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon
which the sign is located when the business which the sign advertises
no longer is conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to
remove the sign, the enforcement official shall notify the owner or
lessee in writing and shall allow 15 days for removal. Upon failure of the
owner or lessee to comply with the notice, the enforcement official shall
immediately request the City Manager, in writing, to institute the
appropriate legal action.
D. Signs may be inspected periodically by the enforcement official for
compliance with this chapter and with other ordinances of the city. All
§ 264-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 264-16
264:710
§ 264-17. Violations and penalties.209
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, enlarge,
alter, move or convert any sign in the City of Roseville or cause or permit
the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 267
SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER-SKATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 82.
§ 267-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have their meanings set forth in
this section:
PARKING STRUCTURE — Any public structure or parking lot designed for
the parking of motor vehicles.
PEDESTRIAN — A person on foot, on roller skates or on a skateboard,
excluding a person on foot walking a bicycle or moped.
PLAZA — That open space area between the main entrance to a building
and the street.
ROLLER SKATES — Any shoe-like device with wheels attached, including
but not limited to roller skates, in-line skates or roller blades.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway designed or ordinarily used for
pedestrian travel.
SKATEBOARD — Any surfboard-like object with wheels attached, including
but not limited to vehicles commonly referred to as "scooters," being
surfboard-like objects with wheels attached and a handle coming up from
the board end of the surfboard area.
§ 267-2. Prohibitions and operation.
Notwithstanding their status as pedestrians, skateboarders and roller
skaters operating on sidewalks shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicular
traffic and to all other pedestrian traffic upon the sidewalk. Any person
signs and their component parts are to be kept in good repair and in a
safe, sanitary condition.
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 264-16 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER-SKATING § 267-2
267:711
roller-skating or riding a skateboard upon a sidewalk or other paved surface
intended for use by pedestrians shall not approach, overtake or pass a
pedestrian in a reckless or careless manner.
§ 267-3. Locations where prohibited.
§ 267-4. Impoundment of skateboards.
A law enforcement officer apprehending a person for violating this chapter
may impound the skateboard. If a person is 18 years of age or older,
the skateboard shall be released by the Police Department if the accused
appears at the Police Department and provides identification. To obtain
release of the skateboard, a person under the age of 18 years of age must
appear at the Police Department with a parent or guardian; however, if no
such parent or guardian resides in the city, the skateboard may be released
if its owner provides a letter from a parent or guardian requesting that it
be released. Law enforcement officers shall also have the right to impound
as evidence any set of roller skates or a skateboard that is used contrary to
this chapter, pending prosecution of such alleged violation of this chapter.
A. The City Council may, by resolution, designate locations and times in
which skateboards and roller skates may not be operated on sidewalks
or other public property. The restrictions contained in any such
resolution shall be posted on signs in the area designated by the
resolution. No person shall operate a skateboard contrary to the terms
of the resolution.
B. Skateboarding and roller-skating is expressly prohibited at the
following city-owned properties:
(1) City Hall Plaza.
(2) Library Plaza.
(3) Parks and Recreation Plaza.
(4) 39th District Court and Police Department Plaza.
(5) Roseville Eastland Senior Building premises.
(6) Roseville Lawn Street Housing Development premises.
(7) All Fire Department station plazas.
C. Skateboarding and roller-skating shall be prohibited on any surface
that deviates from the adjacent sidewalk elevation, including but not
limited to ramps, steps, retention walls, handrails, planters, curb or
gutter edges, barriers and barricades, benches and picnic tables and
monument or sculpture surfaces located on all property owned or
operated by the city.
§ 267-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 267-5
267:712
§ 267-5. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to a fine of not more
than $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense and $100 for the
third offense and each offense committed thereafter.
Chapter 280
SNOWMOBILES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Parks and Recreation — See
Ch. 7, Sec. 7.14.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreational equipment — See Ch. 230.
§ 280-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
OPERATE — To be in or upon and in physical control of a snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE — Any motorized vehicle designed or adapted for travel
primarily on snow or ice, steered by wheels, skis or runners, including such
vehicles commonly referred to as "all-terrain vehicles."
§ 280-2. Operation on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon any
highway or street, sidewalk or other public property, or private property
that is generally open to public use, unless said operation is otherwise
permitted by other provisions of this chapter.
§ 280-3. Operation on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon private
property, easements or utility corridors, without the express written
authorization of the owner thereof.210
210. Editor's Note: Former § 280-4, Operation in designated public areas, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II.
§ 267-5 SNOWMOBILES § 280-4
280:713
§ 280-4. Violations and penalties.211
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
Chapter 284
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Buildings and
Inspection — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 280-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 280-4
280:714
ARTICLE I
Administration of Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 284 of the 1984
Code]
§ 284-1. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Sediment Ordinance" and will
be referred to herein as "this article."
§ 284-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to control soil erosion and resulting
sedimentation within the City of Roseville by requiring proper provisions
for water disposal and the protection of soil surfaces during and after
construction, in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and
general welfare of the community.
§ 284-3. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Act 347, Public Acts of
1972, known as the "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1972,"
being MCLA §§ 282.101 through 282.117.
§ 284-4. Enforcing agent. [Amended 10-11-2016 by Ord. No. 1292]
The Department of Buildings and Inspection of the City of Roseville, or its
designee, and the Office of the Macomb County Public Works Commissioner,
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Division, in conjunction with each
other, are hereby designated as the city enforcing agent responsible for
the administration of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the
provisions of Act 347 of the Public Acts of 1972 of the State of Michigan and
this article.
§ 284-5. Rules and regulations adopted by reference. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
The rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto, promulgated by
the Department of Buildings and Inspection of the City of Roseville relative
to Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1994, P.A. 451, as
amended, shall be adopted by reference from time to time by resolution of
the Roseville City Council to be effective upon publication; and said rules
and regulations shall be available for public distribution, at a reasonable
charge, with not less than 10 copies to be available for public inspection at
the office of the City Clerk.
§ 284-6. Issuance of building permits.
No building permit shall be issued until a permit required by this article
has been secured from the City of Roseville Department of Buildings and
Inspection.
§ 284-1 SNOWMOBILES § 284-7
280:715
§ 284-7. Inspection and investigation.
All premises affected by this article will be subject to inspection by persons
designated by the Department of Buildings and Inspection of the City
of Roseville, who are trained and experienced in soil erosion and
sedimentation control practices. Such designated persons may enter at all
reasonable times in or upon any private or public property for the purpose
of inspecting and investigating conditions or practices which may be in
violation of this article.
§ 284-8. On-site inspections.
On-site inspections before, during and after any earth-change activity for
which a permit has been issued will be performed as required by the extent
and erosion potential of the activity.
§ 284-9. Notification of activity.
The permit holder shall notify the office of the Department of Buildings
and Inspection of the City of Roseville at least 48 hours before starting any
earth-change activity for which a permit was issued.
§ 284-10. Invalidation of permit.
If, upon inspection, existing site conditions are found not to be as stated in
the application and on the approved plan, the permit will be invalidated. No
earth-disrupting work is to be undertaken or continued until revised plans
have been submitted and valid permits issued.
§ 284-11. Requests for revisions.
Requests for revisions must be submitted to and approved by the City of
Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection in writing, before being
put into effect.
§ 284-12. Violations of permit requirements; stop-work order.
Violations of permit requirements will initially be brought to the attention
of the individual in charge of on-site construction activities by the City
of Roseville Department of Buildings and Inspection, or its authorized
representatives. Should efforts toward immediate compliance be
unsuccessful, a stop-work order may be issued, said order to contain a
description of the specific alleged violation and the steps deemed necessary
to bring the project back into compliance.
§ 284-13. Requirements of stop-work order.
This order, when issued, shall require all work covered by the approved
permit to be stopped. A copy of same is to be immediately submitted to
the Department of Natural Resources, Water Resources Commission, in
Lansing, Michigan.
§ 284-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 284-14
280:716
§ 284-14. Suspension of other permits.
A stop-work order issued under this article will suspend all other permits
issued under the City Code, and all work of any trade engaged in an earthchange
activity on site shall stop until the order is rescinded.
§ 284-15. Certificate of occupancy.
A certificate of occupancy, either temporary or permanent, shall not be
issued for all or any part of the project by any City department while a stopwork
order issued under this article is in effect.
§ 284-16. Court action.
Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy, the City of
Roseville may maintain an action in its own name in a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain
or prevent the violation of this article.
§ 284-17. Formal complaint.
A formal complaint may be filed by the City of Roseville Department of
Buildings and Inspection with the 39th Judicial District Court calling for the
arrest and trial of the parties responsible for any willful violations of this
article or approved permits issued thereunder.
§ 284-18. Application for variance.
Application for any variance of any provisions or requirements of this
article shall be made to the Roseville City Council in the form of a written
application delivered to the City Clerk for an erosion control permit as
set forth in said application. The applicant shall present a statement and
adequate evidence showing that:
§ 284-19. Granting of variance.
In all cases where the City of Roseville shall grant the variance of any
provision or requirements of this article, the Roseville City Council shall find
that:
A. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the proposed soil erosion controls referred to in the
application, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally
to any other soil erosion controls.
B. The granting of such application will not, under circumstances of the
particular case, materially affect adversely the health, safety or welfare
of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood and will not,
under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the immediate
neighborhood or the City at large.
§ 284-14 SNOWMOBILES § 284-19
280:717
§ 284-20. Bond or letter of credit required on certain projects.
A bond or letter of credit made out to the City of Roseville in the amount
of the estimated total cost of all temporary and permanent erosion control
measures included in the approved plan will be required on all projects
where this cost may exceed $500.
§ 284-21. Bond or letter of credit for lesser projects.
On lesser projects, at the sole discretion of the City of Roseville Department
of Buildings and Inspection, a bond or letter of credit may be required
where it is deemed advantageous to preserve the public health, safety or
welfare.
§ 284-22. Failure of permit holder to comply.
In the event of failure of the permit holder to comply with conditions set
forth in the approved plan, the City of Roseville may draw on the bond or
letter of credit to complete the work required by this article.
§ 284-23. Return of bond or letter of credit.
Upon permanent restabilization of all disrupted earth areas, the bonds or
letters of credit (or residual remaining balance) will be returned to the
permit holder along with an accounting of any funds used.
§ 284-24. Fee schedule. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
The amount of permit fees and delinquent account service fees to be
charged for services performed in connection with this article shall be as
provided in Chapter 133, Fees, of the Code of the City of Roseville.
§ 284-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person or entity violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the proposed soil erosion controls referred to in the
application, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally
to any other soil erosion control use.
B. The granting of such application will not, under circumstances of the
particular case, materially affect adversely the health, safety or welfare
of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood and will not,
under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the immediate
neighborhood or the City at large.
§ 284-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 284-25
280:718
ARTICLE II
Fees
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 284 of the 1984
Code]
§ 284-26. Plan review charges.
The charges to be paid to the City of Roseville for plan review at the time a
plan is submitted for review shall be based on a fixed cost per gross acre of
land where earth disruptions are expected to occur.
§ 284-27. Earth disruption permit.
A permit will be required for each earth disruption. The permit will be valid
for one calendar year.
§ 284-28. Charges for inspections. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
§ 284-29. Delinquent account service charge.
When invoices are tendered for inspection, it will indicate a due date. There
shall be a delinquent account service charge added to any account left
unpaid by the due date. The amount of the delinquent account service
charge shall be determined monthly by applying a one-percent-per-month
rate times any amount left unpaid in the account and shall be made on the
same date of each subsequent month thereafter until the account is paid in
full.
A. A minimum deposit for inspection will be required at the time a permit
is issued. Should the earth change require additional inspection, an
invoice will be tendered for charges listed in Chapter 133, Fees. The
charges per gross acre shall be based on the conditions listed in
Chapter 133, Fees, and shall be nonrefundable.
B. A charge of one hour per inspection will be considered minimum. Any
inspections made during other than normal working hours will be at the
rate of 1 1/2 times the rates indicated in Chapter 133, Fees. Emergency
inspections will require a minimum four-hour charge.
§ 284-26 SNOWMOBILES § 284-29
280:719
Chapter 285
SOLID WASTE
CHARTER REFERENCES
General powers regarding refuse
collection — See Ch. 3, Sec. 3.1.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 7, Sec.
7.11.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 49.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Handbills — See Ch. 165.
Littering — See Ch. 189.
Nuisances — See Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 225.
§ 284-29 ROSEVILLE CODE § 284-29
280:720
ARTICLE I
Residential Refuse Collection
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 234 of the 1984 Code;
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 285-1. Authority of Department of Public Works; title.
§ 285-2. Police power.
The Director of Public Works and those assistants and employees
designated by the Director shall be authorized to issue warning violations
and bring court complaints, civil or criminal, for violations of the provisions
of this article. When enforcing the provisions of this article, the Director
of Public Works and the assistants and employees shall be and are hereby
constituted ordinance officers and shall have all the powers conferred upon
ordinance officers by the general laws of this state for the purpose of
enforcing this article.
§ 285-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context early indicates a different meaning:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Solid waste, but excluding unacceptable waste.
ACT 641 — Act No. 641 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 [MCL
§ 299.401 et seq.; MSA § 13.281(1) et seq.], as amended, and the
administrative rules promulgated thereunder from time to time by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
FACILITY or FACILITIES — Either the material recover facility (MFR) or the
landfill, or when used in the plural, means both the MRF and the landfill.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
A. The Department of Public Works, established by the Charter, shall have
vested in it all powers provided by the City Charter and this article to
provide for the removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclable
materials generated and accumulated from residential dwellings or
premises receiving municipal refuse service, and to enforce the terms,
provisions and penalties of this article.
B. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Refuse
Service Ordinance."
Any material or substance which, by reason of its composition or
characteristics, is:
Toxic or hazardous waste, as defined in either the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., or Section 6(e) of the Toxic
Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2605(e), or any rules,
(1)
A.
§ 285-1 SNOWMOBILES § 285-3
280:721
MRF — A material recovery facility.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are designated to be separated
from solid waste prior to the collection of refuse from sites of generation
and delivered to the MRF, including but not limited to plastics, glass, cans,
newspapers and yard waste.
REFUSE — The miscellaneous waste material resulting from housekeeping,
also referred to as "rubbish."
SITE OF GENERATION — Residential dwellings and premises receiving
municipal refuse service in or on which solid waste and recyclable materials
are generated and accumulated.
SOLID WASTE — Waste which may be disposed of in a Type Two sanitary
landfill, pursuant to Act 641 and any regulations, rules or policies
promulgated thereunder.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE —
regulations or policies promulgated thereunder; or any laws of
similar purpose or effect, and any rules, regulations or policies
promulgated thereunder.
Special nuclear or by-products materials within the meaning of the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
(2)
Any waste managed under Act No. 64 of the Public Acts of Michigan
of 1979 [MCL § 299.501 et seq.; MSA 13.30(1) et seq.] as amended,
being MCL § 299.501 et seq., and known as the Hazardous Waste
Management Act.
B.
Any other materials which the State Department of Natural Resources
or any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction
shall determine from time to time is ineligible for disposal in the landfill,
whether by reasons of being harmful, toxic, dangerous or otherwise.
C.
A. Hazardous waste.
Includes drums, barrels, containers explosives, including but not
limited to dynamite, hand grenades, blasting caps, shotgun shells,
fireworks, gasoline, kerosene, turpentine, waste oil, ether, batteries,
naphtha, acetone, solvents, paints, alcohol, hydraulic oil, petroleum,
caustics, sewage or process wastewaters, leachate, sewage sludge,
foundry sand, dusty type material, flammable or volatile liquids, any
other liquids, chemical liquid wastes, acids, paste or sludge, asbestos,
infectious, pathological, chemotherapeutic, biological and other
medical waste, ashes of any kind, including but not limited to fly ash
or incinerator ash, radioactive materials, human or animal remains,
agricultural and farm machinery and equipment, tar, tree stumps or
tree limbs over two inches in diameter, and vehicular bodies, and any
other material determined from time to time to be unacceptable by the
landfill.
B.
§ 285-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 285-3
280:722
WASTE HAULER — A private company or organization in the business
of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste and
recyclable materials generated within the city. Waste hauler specifically
includes the contractor hired by the city to collect, process and dispose of
solid waste and recyclable materials from sites of generation.
YARD WASTE — Miscellaneous waste material resulting from the
maintaining of landscaping of a residence which includes but is not limited
to grass, weeds, shrub and bush clippings, leaves, brush and tree
trimmings.
§ 285-4. Rules and regulations; appeal.
§ 285-5. Special charged collections.
A. It is the intent of the city that this article be liberally construed for the
purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of collecting,
processing and disposing of solid waste and recyclable materials from
sites of generation. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to
make such rules and regulations from time to time that appear to be
necessary to carry out this intent; provided, however, that such rules
shall not be in direct conflict with this article or other ordinances of the
city.
B. Persons aggrieved by a regulation or a fee charged by the Director of
Public Works shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager who
may confirm, modify, or repeal any such regulation or fee.
A. Charges may be assessed by the Director of Public Works for the special
collection of acceptable or unacceptable waste or refuse. Such fees are
based on cost of labor, equipment used, disposal fees and other
applicable costs or charges. If this special charged collection is
conducted, violations and penalties as described herein (§ 285-13) may
become void.
B. Special collections can be authorized by the Director as a result of
violation of provisions of this article, as well as violations of approved,
printed and distributed rules and regulations relative to residential
refuse collection of the Department of Public Works and/or the waste
hauler.
C. The owner, lessee, or occupant shall be provided proper notice. A
minimum of 18 hours shall elapse from the time notice is given before a
special charge collection is undertaken. Emergency situations or
incidents where the health, safety or welfare of the public may be at
issue may warrant a reduction or elimination of the waiting period.
[Amended 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 1195]
D. Proper notice shall be the posting of notice of violation at a conspicuous
place on the premises or residence, hand delivery of written notice, or
the first class mailing of written notice. [Amended 5-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 1195]
§ 285-3 SNOWMOBILES § 285-5
280:723
§ 285-6. Storage of refuse between collections.
Between weekly collections of solid waste and recyclable materials, the
owner, lessee or occupant of any site of generation shall store such
materials as follows:
§ 285-7. Placement of waste and recyclables for collection; removal
of containers. [Amended 4-14-2015 by Ord. No. 1278]
E. Delinquent or nonpayment of special collection charges are hereby
made a lien on all parcels of property where special collections took
place.
A. Refuse containers. [Amended 4-14-2015 by Ord. No. 1278]
(1) Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee receiving residential
refuse collection shall be provided and maintain refuse containers
of sufficient number and size in order to store such refuse tending
to accumulate on such premises during the week between
collections. Said containers shall be ninety-six-gallon containers to
be provided by the Department of Public Services, and/or its waste
hauler. The first ninety-six-gallon refuse container shall be provided
by the City at no cost to the person receiving residential refuse
collection. Any additional containers or replacement containers
shall be paid for by the person receiving residential refuse
collection. Refuse containers that deteriorate or otherwise fail to
meet the requirements of this section may be claimed as refuse
and, after due notice to the parties responsible for such container,
shall be collected as refuse.
(2) These portable refuse containers shall be made of synthetic
material and shall not be less than 96 gallons in capacity, unless
otherwise provided by the City of Roseville's refuse policy,
watertight and verminproof, with handles so that such containers
can be conveniently emptied.
B. Recycling bins. Recyclable materials, other than yard waste, placed
curbside or at the end of the driveway for collection shall be in the
approved eighteen-gallon recycling bin or the sixty-four-gallon
recycling cart as provided by the Department of Public Works or the
approved waste hauler. Replacement or additional carts may be
obtained from the City for purchase by the person receiving residential
refuse collection. [Amended 4-14-2015 by Ord. No. 1278]
C. Storage of containers. The refuse containers and storage area of same
must be maintained in a sanitary condition. This storage area shall be at
or near the rear of the residence or property and in a location where
there will be no interference with the healthful enjoyment of adjoining
property.
§ 285-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 285-7
280:724
§ 285-8. Recycling program.
§ 285-9. Antiscavenging.
All materials shall become the property of the city or approved waste hauler
at the time these materials are placed out for collection. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person other than the city or its approved
waster hauler to collect, remove or pick up, or cause to be collected,
removed or picked up, any such materials.
§ 285-10. Disposal restrictions.
Owners, lessees or occupants shall not dispose of any solid waste or
recyclable materials generated at residences within the city other than by
means of the city's or approved waste hauler's collection. This provision
shall not prevent a person from transporting solid waste or recyclables
from a person's private property to a transfer station or similar facility or
recyclables to the city's recycling dropoff center.
§ 285-11. Approval of waste haulers; conditions.
A. All solid waste and recyclable materials shall be placed curbside or the
end of the driveway pursuant to the policies and procedures of the City
of Roseville Department of Public Works for weekly collection by 7:00
a.m. on the scheduled day of collection, but not before 6:00 p.m. of the
day preceding this collection. The area for collection is in front of the
curb or driveway in front of the residence, or side, if approved by the
waste hauler. Containers shall be placed in such a way as to not be
obstructed by vehicles, and containers shall be readily accessible for
collection. In the event of snow on the street/road surface, the
containers may be placed at the end of the driveway of the residence.
The Department of Public Works shall have authority to designate the
location for collection, if necessary.
B. Containers must be removed from the collection area to the storage
area by 12:00 noon of the day following collection.
A. Bin recycling. All owners, lessees or occupants of any site of generation
should separate recyclable materials, excluding yard waste, from solid
waste and prepare the recyclable materials for pickup on the scheduled
collection day. These recyclables shall be placed out for collection in the
provided recycling bin and as per the approved, printed and distributed
rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works and/or the
waste hauler as provided for in this article.
B. Mandatory yard waste separation. Owners, lessees or occupants of any
site of generation must separate yard waste from solid waste and place
same out for pickup on the scheduled collection day as per the
approved, printed and distributed rules and regulations of the
Department of Public Works and/or the waste hauler as provided for in
this article.
§ 285-7 SNOWMOBILES § 285-11
280:725
§ 285-12. Littering and dumping.
§ 285-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any lawful order
issued in pursuance of the provisions hereof shall be punished as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. The city shall determine the need for and conditions of approval of a
waste hauler to perform the city's collection, disposal, processing of
solid waste, recyclables and yard waste generated from city residences.
B. The waste hauler approved and contracted by the city shall be
considered licensed upon entering agreement with the city. The
approved waste hauler should comply with all the following:
(1) All provisions of this article.
(2) All applicable federal, state, county and local laws, statutes, rules
and regulations, including but not limited to regulations
thereunder, pertaining to the collection, transportation, delivery
and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste.
(3) All applicable provisions of the agreement and contract and the
rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the landfills or
similar facilities for the administration and operation of same.
A. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, sort, scatter, throw,
drop or leave any waste, recycling materials, including yard waste,
refuse or garbage, on any public or private place in the city.
B. Raking or depositing of leaves or grass/weeds onto the street surface is
a violation of this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, dumped or deposited any bottles, glass, crockery,
cans, scrap metal, junk, waste paper, garbage or old automobiles or
parts thereof; refuse of whatever nature; rubbish, either domestic or
commercial; or any noxious things on or along any public highways,
streets, alleys or public places; within the limits of any highway, street
or alley right-of-way; on land or waters adjoining a public highway or
street without the consent of the owners of such land and the Director
of Public Works. It also shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump
or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown, dumped or deposited any
such refuse or thing hereinabove referred to over the sides or
approaches of any bridge or culvert or into any stream, canal, ditch,
watercourse or body of water.
§ 285-11 ROSEVILLE CODE § 285-13
280:726
ARTICLE II
Commercial Refuse Collection
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch. 236 of the 1984 Code;
amended in its entirety 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
§ 285-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL UNIT — Any business or commercial establishment or
business or multiple dwelling unit which does not receive residential refuse
collection.
CONTAINERS — Rigid metal or synthetic material receptacles of
substantial construction, inclusive of dumpster-type receptacles, in which
all refuse from a commercial unit is stored until collection. All containers
must have lids or covers.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetable wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, storage and consumption
of food.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish, street cleanings and commercial and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible waste material resulting from housekeeping, business
enterprises and institutions, and includes, among other items, paper,
cardboard, packing boxes, cartons, excelsior, tin cans, bottles, glassware,
earthenware, rubber, rags, wood, leather, grass, leaves, furniture,
household appliances and other similar material.
§ 285-15. Refuse containers.
Owners, occupants or users of a commercial unit within the city shall
provide a refuse container/containers in which all refuse emanating from
such property can be stored until collected. Such containers shall be of
substantial construction with covers and handles or other devices to
facilitate loading into a refuse truck and shall comply with all federal and
state regulations governing such containers or shall be of a type approved
by the Director of Public Works. Such containers shall be covered at all
times.
§ 285-16. Maintenance of collection area and containers; service of
notice; emergency situations.
It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or user of a commercial unit
to maintain the collection area as well as the container/containers in a
clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. Nonconforming containers
as well as unsanitary and unsightly collection areas must be brought into
compliance upon being served proper notice by the Department of Public
§ 285-14 SNOWMOBILES § 285-16
280:727
Works. Being served proper notice is the posting of the notice in a
conspicuous place or delivery of same to the commercial unit's personnel.
Up to an eighteen-hour waiting period shall be allowed before Department
of Public Works intervention. Emergency situations may warrant a
reduction or elimination of the waiting period.
§ 285-17. Container location.
Commercial refuse containers shall be maintained on the commercial or
business premises at a location where the container shall not interfere with
the healthful enjoyment of adjoining property or access to the premises for
fire protection purposes.
§ 285-18. Arrangements for disposal.
§ 285-19. Hours for collection.
§ 285-20. Failure to comply; removal by city; costs to become lien.
Should the owner, occupant or user of a commercial unit fail to comply
with the preceding sections of this article, the Department of Public Works
may enter upon such premises and remove any and all refuse which has
accumulated on such property. Any costs incurred by the Department of
Public Works shall be a lien upon the premises and shall be assessed against
A. Every owner, occupant or user of a commercial unit shall personally
collect, convey and dispose of such refuse or shall make arrangements
with a private refuse collecting company to have such refuse hauled
away at the owner's, occupant's or user's expense. Refuse accumulated
by commercial establishments shall be collected at least once each
week. Where necessary to protect the public health, the Director of the
Department of Public Works shall have the authority to require that
more frequent collections be made.
B. Owners, occupants or users of a commercial unit may also arrange for
weekly collection of refuse by requesting same from the Department of
Public Works. To qualify and be included in the residential refuse
collection, the items must be placed out for collection in the right-ofway
in proximity of requesting commercial unit as well as meet the
conditions and requirements of the preceding article (Solid Waste,
Chapter 285, Article I, Residential Refuse Collection) pertaining to
acceptable waste, unacceptable waste, rules and regulations and
containers.
A. All commercial refuse shall be collected by a private refuse collecting
company only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
B. Commercial refuse placed in the right-of-way to be collected with the
city's residential refuse collection must be placed out by 7:00 a.m. of
the scheduled day of collection, but not before 11:00 p.m. of the day
preceding this collection.
§ 285-16 ROSEVILLE CODE § 285-20
280:728
the premises, and if not paid within 30 days after notice has been given to
the owner, occupant or user of the commercial unit that such costs have
been incurred by the city, such costs, together with interest, shall be added
on the next city tax statement.
§ 285-21. Director of Public Works authorized to make additional
regulations; appeal.
The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to make regulations
concerning the type and location of waste containers and such other
matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal of all refuse
accumulated from commercial units in the city as he or she shall find
necessary and to change and modify the same after notice as required
by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions
hereof. Any person aggrieved by the regulation made by or fee charged by
the Director shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager, who shall
have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation or fee.
§ 285-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
§ 285-20 SNOWMOBILES § 285-22
280:729

ARTICLE III
Composting
[Adopted 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 1035]
§ 285-23. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPOSTING — The process of maximizing the natural decomposition of
permitted organic matter to produce stable humus in a short time.
§ 285-24. Permitted composting.
Composting shall be permitted in accordance with the following
restrictions:
A. Location. Composting areas shall be located only in rear yards a
minimum of five feet from any lot line and 15 feet from any residence
located on adjacent property. Composting upon an easement is
permitted if it meets the above setback limitations.
B. Size. Composting shall not exceed four feet in height and shall be less
than 35 square feet in area.
C. Contents. Compost piles may include the following:
(1) Yard waste.
(2) Weeds.
(3) Grass clippings.
(4) Stalks/stems.
(5) Wood ashes.
(6) Coffee grounds.
(7) Vegetable scraps.
(8) Fruit peelings.
(9) Peanut shells.
(10) Bark.
(11) Leaves.
(12) Brush.
(13) Horse manure.
(14) Tea leaves.
(15) Citrus rinds.
§ 285-23 SNOWMOBILES § 285-24
280:731
§ 285-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
(16) Eggshells.
(17) Nutshells.
§ 285-24 ROSEVILLE CODE § 285-25
280:732
Chapter 286
SPRAY PAINT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minors — See Ch. 197.
§ 286-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPRAY PAINT — Containers, including but not limited to cans, of paint,
varnish, lacquer, stain or similar solvent or substance used in painting or
applying finishes to surfaces and applied by a spraying method or similar
technique.
§ 286-2. Possession by minors prohibited.
No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase or possess any
containers of spray paint.
§ 286-3. Exceptions.
Possession of spray paint containers by a minor shall be permitted only
where the minor has in his or her immediate possession written consent,
including date and description of materials, signed by his or her parent or
legal guardian, or upon real property owned or lawfully occupied by the
minor's parent or legal guardian.
§ 286-4. Aiding and abetting prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to
violate any provision of this chapter.
§ 286-5. Violations and penalties.212
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a civil infraction, and penalties
shall be $100 for a first offense and $300 for any second or subsequent
offense. Any person in default of payment of any fines or costs shall not
be entitled to the issuance of any license or permit otherwise subject to
issuance by the city.
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-25 SPRAY PAINT § 286-5
286:733
Chapter 290
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHARTER REFERENCES
General powers — See Ch. 3, Sec. 3.1.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 7, Sec.
7.11.
Tax liens — See Ch. 9, Sec. 9.16.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Accumulation of water by car washes — See
Ch. 98, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Nuisances — See Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 225.
Solid waste — See Ch. 285.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Illegal possession of street signs — See Ch.
316.
Street trees — See Ch. 324, Art. I.
§ 286-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 286-5
286:734
ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 290 of the 1984
Code]
§ 290-1. Permit required.
Hereafter no person shall excavate or disturb the surface of any public
street, sidewalk or curb within the city for the purpose of installing utilities
or any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk.
§ 290-2. Application for permit.
The Clerk shall furnish applications for permits and, upon receipt of an
application properly completed, shall issue, upon payment to the City
Treasurer of the fees as hereafter set forth, a permit, provided that the
Clerk shall not issue any permit without said application having been first
approved by the City Engineer. The application shall contain the following
information:
§ 290-3. Permit fees. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Fees for required permits shall be as indicated in Chapter 133, Fees.
§ 290-4. Maintenance and performance bond.
The City Clerk may require that an applicant file, as a condition to receiving
a permit under this article, a bond to guarantee to the city that the
excavation and repair of the road shall be done in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein. Said bond shall provide that, in the event that
it is necessary for the city to complete the restoration of the street, curb
or sidewalk, the cost thereof shall be deducted from said bond, or said cost
may be recovered from the permittee.
A. The name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the property
abutting the proposed work area.
B. The name and address of the party doing the work.
C. The location of the work area.
D. Attached plans showing details of the proposed alteration.
E. The estimated cost of the alterations.
F. Such other information as the City Engineer shall find reasonably
necessary to the determination of whether a permit should issue
hereunder.
§ 290-1 SPRAY PAINT § 290-5
286:735
§ 290-5. Indemnification of city.
The applicant shall indemnify the city against any and all claims for
damages or injury to other persons by reason of such excavations.
§ 290-6. Performance standards.
Every person making or causing to be made any excavation as hereinbefore
set forth shall perform the work in accordance with the following standards:
§ 290-7. Supervision of operations.
All operations for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the
direction and supervision of the City Engineer.
§ 290-8. Order to alter curb cut.
§ 290-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. The work shall be performed according to the standard specifications of
the city for public work of like character, which standards are equal to
the standard specifications of the Michigan State Highway Department.
B. The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic nor the means of egress to and from the property
affected and adjacent properties.
C. The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably
impaired.
D. The roadway shall be restored to like or better condition than it was
prior to the excavation and shall be properly attended to until such time
as all settling has occurred.
A. Where the use, convenience and necessity of the public requires, the
City Engineer shall have the authority to order the owners or agents in
charge of property adjacent to which curb cuts are maintained to alter
the curb cut in such manner as he or she shall find reasonably
necessary under the circumstances.
B. The notice required by this section shall:
(1) Require compliance by the permittee within 15 days of said notice.
(2) Be in writing.
(3) Be served upon the permittee by regular mail to the address on the
permit, or personally.
§ 290-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 290-9
286:736
ARTICLE II
Driveway Approaches
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 290 of the 1984
Code]
§ 290-10. Paving required.
Any person owning or occupying buildings adjacent to paved streets within
the city, serviced by a driveway, shall pave or cause to be paved the
approach to such driveway between the paved street and the public
sidewalk; provided, however, that no owner or occupant shall be charged
with violation of this article unless he or she has been notified by the City
Clerk.
§ 290-11. Permit for curb cut required; fees. [Amended 7-27-1999
by Ord. No. 1125]
No person shall install a driveway approach within the city where it is
necessary to cut or alter the street curb without first having obtained a
permit therefor. Fees for required permits shall be as indicated in Chapter
133, Fees.
§ 290-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. Notice; mailing; posting. Such notice shall be deemed to be served upon
the owner of the premises when deposited in the United States Mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the owner
of record as listed on the tax rolls for the city, and in addition, such
notice shall be posted upon the premises in a conspicuous place, except
in the case of vacant property when such posting shall not be required.
B. Failure to pave; cost; lien. Such notice by the City Clerk shall inform the
owner that he or she shall have 30 days in which to install the driveway
and that, in the event of failure to so install the driveway, such
installation shall be done by the city and the costs thereof made a lien
upon the property.
§ 290-10 SPRAY PAINT § 290-12
286:737

ARTICLE III
Installation of Sidewalks and Driveways
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. III of Ch. 290 of the
1984 Code]
§ 290-13. Compliance required.
No person shall engage in the business of installing sidewalks and/or
driveways within the city without first complying with the provisions of this
article.
§ 290-14. Filing of cash or surety bond.
Any person engaging in the business of installing sidewalks and/or
driveways within the city shall first file with the City Clerk either a cash or
surety bond guaranteeing to the city that the person so engaged shall:
§ 290-15. Installation by defaulters prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to install sidewalks and/or driveways within
the city if said person is a defaulter under the terms of this article, until
such time as such default is cured to the satisfaction of the Department of
Buildings and Inspection.
§ 290-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
A. Install sidewalks and/or driveways in a workmanlike manner in
accordance with the specifications of the ordinances of the city.
B. Indemnify the city against any defect in workmanship or materials in
said installations for a period of five years from after the date of said
installation.
C. Guarantee the repair of any sidewalks and/or driveways installed within
the city within 10 days after the receipt of a notice of the Department of
Buildings and Inspection of the city of defects arising from
workmanship or materials.
D. Indemnify the city against any liability whatsoever arising out of defects
in the installation of sidewalks and/or driveways due to workmanship or
materials within said five-year period.
§ 290-13 SPRAY PAINT § 290-16
286:739

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Obstructions
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. IV of Ch. 290 of the
1984 Code; amended 1-25-1977 by Ord. No. 754; amended in its
entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 290-17. Enumeration of public nuisances; purpose; removal
required.
§ 290-18. Time limit for removal of ice and/or snow. [Amended
7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1225]
In the case of snow and/or ice, the same shall be removed from sidewalks
within the City of Roseville within 24 hours after the cessation of any
snowfall, or in the case of commercial or business districts, by the beginning
of business hours of the next business day following such weather event,
whichever period is shorter.
§ 290-19. Time limit for removal of other obstructions.
In the case of dirt, wood, concrete, construction materials, weeds or
shrubbery, or any other object, which obstructs such sidewalks or makes
the same offensive or hazardous to the public health or safety, the person or
entity responsible shall remove the same within 24 hours after notification
by the Department of Buildings and Inspection that the accumulation of the
foreign manner herein referred to in this section constitutes an obstruction
upon the sidewalk or makes the same offensive to the public health or
safety; provided, however, that this section shall in no way relieve the party
responsible for keeping the sidewalk clear from its duty to do so.
A. Any accumulation of snow, ice, dirt, wood, concrete, construction
materials, weeds, shrubbery or any other object, which obstructs any
sidewalk in the City of Roseville or which makes the same offensive or
hazardous to the public health or safety, is declared to be a public
nuisance.
B. It is the intent and purpose of this article that the City of Roseville may
enforce this article either by the provisions hereof requiring any person
or entity to abate the nuisance and, in default thereof, applying the
penalties herein provided or by the city causing the nuisance to be
abated and assessing the cost against the land and premises involved.
C. It shall be the duty of any person or entity owning, controlling or
occupying any property within the city to remove from and keep free of
the sidewalk immediately adjacent to their premises any accumulations
of snow, ice, dirt, wood, concrete, construction materials, weeds or
shrubbery, or any other object, which obstructs such sidewalk or which
makes the same offensive or hazardous to the public health or safety.
§ 290-17 SPRAY PAINT § 290-20
286:741
§ 290-20. Failure to remove obstructions. [Amended 7-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 1225]
§ 290-21. Notice of removal requirement to be published; appeals.
[Amended 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 1225]
On or before the 15th day of November of each year, the City Clerk shall
cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City a notice to all persons or entities owning, controlling or occupying
property within the City of Roseville that such persons or entities must
remove from and keep free of the sidewalks immediately adjacent to their
property within the city, any accumulated snow and/or ice within 24 hours
after the cessation of any snowfall. Such notice shall further provide that,
upon the failure to remove such ice or snow, the Department of Buildings
and Inspection, through a proper department or contractor of the City, may
cause such snow and/or ice to be removed and that any costs incurred in
connection therewith shall be a lien upon the premises and, if not paid
within 30 days of receipt, shall be added on the next regular tax statement.
Any person aggrieved by the costs incurred may have the right of appeal to
the City Manager.
A. In the event that the snow or ice is not removed by the responsible
party within the time prescribed in § 290-18 hereof or the other objects
enumerated in § 290-19 hereof are not removed within 24 hours after
notice to remove, as prescribed in § 290-19 hereof, then the
Department of Buildings and Inspection, through a proper department
or contractor of the City, may cause such snow and/or ice to be removed
and may cause such other objects that constitute a public nuisance to
be removed and make the sidewalks clear and usable. The costs
incurred by the City for such removal shall be a lien upon the premises
and shall be assessed against the premises and, if not paid within 30
days of receipt, shall be added on the next regular tax statement and
collected in the same manner as City taxes.
B. In the event that the Department of Buildings and Inspection, through a
proper department or contractor of the City, clears the sidewalk of snow
and/or ice or removes any other foreign objects from the sidewalks and
makes the same free for passage, it shall then be the duty of the City
Manager or his or her designee to cause the costs incurred to be
charged against the premises and collected according to the provisions
of this article. Any person aggrieved by the costs incurred may have a
right of appeal first to the Building Director, and if determination at that
level is unsatisfactory, he/she may appeal it further to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall have the right to affirm, overturn or modify the
decision of the Building Director in whole or in part. The decision of the
City Manager shall be final.
§ 290-20 ROSEVILLE CODE § 290-22
286:742
§ 290-22. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalty which may be prescribed by this article, any
person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 290-22 SPRAY PAINT § 290-22
286:743

ARTICLE V
Repair and Replacement
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. V of Ch. 290 of the 1984
Code]
§ 290-23. Notification of dangerous condition. [Amended 4-11-1989
by Ord. No. 992]
Whenever in the opinion of the City Engineer, any public sidewalk, driveway
approach or entrance walk, convenience walk or driveway in the public
right-of-way is dangerous or in such a condition as to constitute a hazard to
person using such sidewalk, driveway approach, entrance walk or driveway,
the Engineer shall notify the owner of the property appearing on the tax
rolls of the city of such condition.
§ 290-24. Contents of notice. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 992]
Such notice by the Engineer shall inform the owner that he and/or she
shall have 30 days in which to repair or replace the sidewalk, driveway
approach, entrance walk, convenience walk or driveway, which extends into
the public right-of-way, whichever, in the opinion of the Engineer, is deemed
advisable; in the event of the owner's failure to so repair or replace the
sidewalk, driveway approach, entrance walk, convenience walk or driveway,
such repair or replacement shall be done by the city and the costs thereof
made a lien upon the property, and that the owner so neglecting to repair or
replace the sidewalk, driveway approach, entrance walk, convenience walk
or driveway shall be liable to the City of Roseville for all damages which
shall be recovered against the City of Roseville for any accident or injuries
occurring by reason of such neglect.
§ 290-25. Service of notice.
Such notice shall be deemed to be served upon the owner of the premises
when deposited in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, with postage
prepaid thereon, addressed to the owner of record as listed on the tax rolls
for the city, and in addition, such notice shall be posted upon the premises
in a conspicuous place, except in the case of vacant property when such
posting shall not be required.
§ 290-26. Failure to repair. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 992;
12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1062; 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1086]
A. If the owner has not repaired or replaced the sidewalk, driveway
approach, entrance walk, convenience walk or driveway which extends
into the public right-of-way, at the expiration of the thirty-day period,
the City Engineer shall cause the same to be repaired and replaced.
B. Unless payment arrangements as provided herein are made, the costs
for such repair and/or replacement shall be assessed against the
property and placed upon the tax rolls and shall constitute a lien
§ 290-23 SPRAY PAINT § 290-26
286:745
§ 290-27. City participation in the cost of defective pavement
repair. [Added 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1062; amended 11-26-1996
by Ord. No. 1086]
Where pavement damage to sidewalks extending in the public right-of-way
has occurred as a result of trees situated, with the consent and permission
of the city, in the right-of-way, the city shall participate in the costs of
pavement repair or replacement. City participation shall be equivalent of up
to two flags as determined by the city for sidewalk repair or replacement
for each tree where pavement has been damaged by such tree situated in
the right-of-way. Where property owners have performed their own work,
reimbursement shall be at the owner's replacement cost or the city's
estimated cost, whichever is less. Reimbursement shall only occur where
application has been submitted upon forms approved by the Building
Official prior to the owner commencing work, a permit has been obtained
and the Building Official or designee has verified that the tree is the cause
of the defective pavement.
§ 290-28. Paving required for driveway approaches onto
thoroughfares. [Added 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1062]
Where unpaved driveway approaches exit onto thoroughfares as
determined in the opinion of the City Engineer, the Engineer shall notify the
owner of property appearing on the tax rolls of the city of such condition.
Notice shall provide 30 days in which to install, in compliance with all
applicable codes and laws, a sidewalk with all necessary permits procured
from all required governmental entities. Upon failure to install within 30
days, the city may undertake such installation with the costs thereof made a
lien upon the property. Installation shall occur only in areas of public rightof-
way or easement. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as
created by the Charter for city taxes, and the owner failing to install such
driveway approach shall be liable to the city for all damages resulting in
whole or in part from any occurrence against the City of Roseville by reason
of such neglect.
against the premises for the amount of the cost of such repairs and/or
replacement, including interest as provided by Charter for city taxes.
Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by the
Charter for city taxes, and the owner so neglecting to repair and/or
replace the sidewalk, driveway approach, entrance walk, convenience
walk or driveway shall be liable to the City of Roseville for all damages
which shall be recovered against the City of Roseville for any accident
or injuries occurring by reason of such neglect.
C. Upon request by the property owner, installment payments, as
approved by the City Controller, shall be permitted up to one year with
six-percent-per-annum interest. Upon default on any installment
payment, the lien process set forth above shall be forthwith
commenced.
§ 290-26 ROSEVILLE CODE § 290-29
286:746
§ 290-29. Entrance walk, driveway or convenience walk in public
right-of-way subject to repair. [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 992]
Any entrance walk or driveway in the public right-of-way which extends
from the public walk to the residence or place of business, or any
convenience walk in the public right-of-way that extends from the public
walk to the street shall be included in the definition of sidewalk or driveway
approach. Repair or replacement of the public walk which results in a grade
difference or vertical separation between the public walk and driveway,
driveway approach, entrance walk or convenience walk, or creates any
other hazardous condition, shall be considered reason for replacement
of entrance or convenience walk, driveway approach or driveway as
determined by the City Engineer.
§ 290-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
In addition to any other penalties herein prescribed, any person guilty of
violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 290-29 SPRAY PAINT § 290-30
286:747

ARTICLE VI
Street Obstructions
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as § 144-17 of Ch. 144 of the
1984 Code]
§ 290-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic,
including but not limited to private streets or access lanes, as well as all
public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality.
§ 290-32. Street obstructions prohibited.
A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps,
fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type
of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the municipality
without the permission of the Police and/or Fire Department.
§ 290-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
§ 290-31 SPRAY PAINT § 290-33
286:749
Chapter 294
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 45.
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 126.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Fire Prevention Code — See Ch. 142, Art. I.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 195.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 221.
Sewers — See Ch. 256.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 284.
Trees — See Ch. 324.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 290-33 ROSEVILLE CODE § 290-33
294:750
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 294-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance
of the City of Roseville."
§ 294-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-1
294:751

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 294-2. Interpretation; legislative intent.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among other
purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for permanently
wholesome community environment, adequate municipal services and safe
streets.
§ 294-3. Applicability; greater restrictions to control.
This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision
created and recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter unless said
lot or lots are divided, reoriented or resubdivided in some manner; nor is
it intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances or with
private restrictions laced upon property by deed, covenant or other private
agreement or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the
city is a party. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land
than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance,
contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 294-4. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the City Council.
§ 294-2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-4
294:753

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 294-5. Definitions and word usage.
A. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of these regulations, the following words, phrases and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BLOCK — An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets, highways or ways, except alleys; or by streets, highways
or ways, except alleys, and the exterior boundary or boundaries of a
subdivision.
BUILDING LINE — The line marking the minimum distance from the
front property line upon which a building may be erected in
conformance with the Zoning Ordinance213 or a line on the plat
indicating a greater setback limit upon which buildings may be erected.
COUNCIL — The City Council.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or
portions by description as on a subdivision or record survey map, or by
metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan adopted by the Planning
Commission and Council, which indicates the physical development of
the city and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted
and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the city.
PLAT — The map on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is
presented.
STREET — A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
lane or place or however otherwise designated, and includes the land
between the street boundaries and may comprise pavement, sidewalks,
parking areas, planting strips and other areas.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map or drawing indicating
the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Commission for its consideration.
(1)
FINAL PLAT — The final map or drawing of a subdivision prepared,
and its accuracy certified, by a registered engineer or land
surveyor in accordance with requirements of the Plat Act (Act 172,
Public Acts of 1929, as amended).
(2)
213. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 294-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-5
294:755
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation or trust or any other legal entity
commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of
land hereunder for himself or herself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into five or more lots
or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership or building development or, if a new street is involved,
any division of a parcel of land, provided that a division of land for
agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of 10 acres or more and not
involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term
includes resubdivision of a recorded subdivision lot into three or more
parcels and the redivision of vacated plats.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Planning
Commission members appointed by the Chair of the Planning
Commission for the purpose of giving detailed consideration to
subdivision proposals in the preapplication and preliminary plat states
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and such other duties
relating to land subdivision as may be conferred on this Committee by
the Planning Commission.
ALLEY — A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
(1)
ARTERIAL STREET — A street used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic and as a traffic artery for intercommunication among large
areas.
(2)
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which carries traffic from minor
street to the major system of arterial streets, including the
principal entrance streets of a large residential development and
streets for circulation within such a development.
(3)
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement.
(4)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street which is parallel
to and adjacent to arterial streets and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(5)
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
(6)
WIDTH OF STREET — The shortest distance between the lines
delineating the right-of-way of a street.
(7)
§ 294-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-5
294:756
ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Procedure
§ 294-6. Subdivision Committee.
A Subdivision Committee is hereby delegated to represent the Planning
Commission in preapplication negotiations with the subdivider and to
perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Chair of the
Planning Commission. The planning consultant is an ex officio member of
the Subdivision Committee.
§ 294-7. Submission of preliminary plat.
Five copies, 18 inches by 24 inches in size, of the preliminary plat and
supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Commission with written application for conditional approval at
least 15 days before the meeting at which it is to be considered.
§ 294-8. Preliminary plat data.
The following shall be shown on the preliminary plat when applicable:
§ 294-9. Additional required data on sanitation proposals.
The subdivider shall present data on existing site conditions and proposals
regarding:
A. Scale optional, but not to show more than 200 feet to one inch.
B. Boundary lines: bearings and distances.
C. Easements: location, width and purpose.
D. Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract: name, right-of-way width
and location.
E. Location of existing property lines, buildings, watercourses, railroads,
marshes, public spaces and other physical features within or on the
borders of the proposed plat.
F. Names, location and widths of proposed streets, building lines, alleys,
easements, parks and open spaces.
G. Lot lines and major dimensions.
H. Title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, description of
land to be platted, names and addresses of owner and technical author
of the plan.
I. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and
conditions of such dedication.
J. Date, cardinal points and scale.
§ 294-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-9
294:757
§ 294-10. Submission of draft of protective covenants.
A draft of protective covenants, whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development, shall be submitted with the copies of the preliminary plat.
§ 294-11. Review by Planning Commission.
A. Sewage disposal. Preliminary sanitary sewer plans providing for
disposal by a method approved by the Council and the County
Department of Health.
B. Water supply. Preliminary plan of water system or, if individual wells are
proposed, adequate proof of satisfactory quality and quantity of water.
C. Storm drainage. Type of system proposed and adequate evidence that
flooding or ponding will not occur; and a statement that no county
drains are involved or, if county drains are involved, a statement from
the County Drain Commissioner that the proposals made are
acceptable.
A. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall check the submittal for
completeness and, if complete, assign it a case number and place the
proposal on the agenda of the next Planning Commission meeting. If
any important data has been omitted, the Secretary shall immediately
notify the subdivider of the additional data required for review and shall
delay further Planning Commission action until such data is received.
B. The Secretary shall immediately forward one copy of the preliminary
plat to the City Engineer for his or her information and
recommendations as to the proposed development. The submission is
then assigned to the Subdivision Committee for review and
recommendations.
C. The Planning Commission shall consider the application not later than
the first regular monthly meeting following its presentation by the
Secretary, at which time the various reviewing bodies shall make known
by letter or in person their recommendations.
D. Following review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted
for conformity thereof to these regulations, and after negotiations with
the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
improvements to be made by him or her, the Planning Commission
shall, within a reasonable time, pass upon the preliminary plat as
originally submitted or modified.
(1) When the Planning Commission is satisfied that all conditions have
been satisfactorily met, it shall express its approval as conditional
approval. The Chair shall make a notation to that effect on each
copy of the plat, return one copy to the subdivider, forward one
copy to the Council with recommendations for preliminary approval
and retain one copy for the Planning Commission records.
§ 294-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-11
294:758
§ 294-12. Review by Council.
§ 294-13. Submission of final plat.
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved.
(2) If the Planning Commission's approval is tentative and subject to
certain conditions, no recommendation shall be sent to the Council
until said conditions have been satisfied by the subdivider. The
revised application shall be reentered on the Planning Commission
meeting agenda 10 days in advance and presented for Planning
Commission review, whereupon it may receive preliminary
approval as heretofore stated.
E. If the Planning Commission rejects the plat, it shall record the reasons
therefor in its minutes.
F. Within 10 days following the regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning
Commission shall inform the subdivider that the studies and the data as
submitted, or as modified, do or do not meet the objectives of these
regulations. When the Planning Commission finds that the studies and
data do not meet the objectives of these regulations, it shall express its
reasons therefor. A copy of the minutes may satisfy these requirements.
A. The Council will not receive nor review a preliminary plat until it has
received the recommendations of the Planning Commission. Following
receipt of such application and recommendations from the Planning
Commission, it shall consider the case at its first regular meeting
thereafter. If rejected, the reasons shall be entered in the minutes.
Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the Planning Commission, the
subdivider and the City Engineer.
B. Preliminary approval by the Council shall confer upon the subdivider
the following rights for a one-year period from the date of approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions under which preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed.
(2) That the subdivider may submit, on or before the expiration date,
the whole or only that portion of the approved preliminary plat
which he or she proposes to record and develop at the time;
provided, however, that such a portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
approval within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the
Council, otherwise, approval of the preliminary plat shall become null
and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Council.
§ 294-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-13
294:759
B. Six copies of the final plat shall be prepared and presented in
accordance with the provisions of Act 172, Public Acts of 1929, as
amended (Plat Act), and, in addition, shall show building lines and
easements properly dimensioned when, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, this requirement is desirable. Any plat submitted to the
Planning Commission shall have attached or shall contain the name and
address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent.
C. Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing,
with the plat copies, to the Secretary of the Planning Commission at
least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning
Commission.
D. If a master thoroughfare plan or master plan has been adopted and
recorded, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed final plat in conformance with Section 15 of Act 285, Public
Acts of 1931, as amended.
E. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the final plat shall
be approved or disapproved and shall give notice to the subdivider in
the following manner:
(1) If approved, such approval shall be entered in writing on the six
copies of the final plat by the Chair or Secretary of the Planning
Commission and shall be submitted, along with the certificate of
title, to the City Clerk.
(2) If disapproved, the Chair or Secretary of the Planning Commission
shall attach to the plat a statement of the reasons for such action
and shall return it to the subdivider.
(3) In any case, a notation of the action taken and requisite reasons
therefor shall be entered in the records of the Planning
Commission.
F. Until a master thoroughfare plan or master plan is approved and
recorded, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall refer the plat
to the Subdivision Committee for review and checking as to compliance
with the approved preliminary plat.
(1) If the plat is in close agreement with the approved preliminary plat,
the Subdivision Committee shall prepare a letter to the Council
setting forth the approval of the Planning Commission and the date
thereof and shall immediately forward the plat, certificate of title
and other pertinent data, with the recommendation, to the City
Clerk. A copy of the approval letter shall be presented at the next
Planning Commission meeting for inclusion in its records.
(2) If the plat does not conform closely to the street agreement and
other basic aspects of the approved preliminary plat, the
Subdivision Committee shall refer the plat to the Planning
Commission as a whole for action. If disapproved, the Chair or
§ 294-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-13
294:760
§ 294-14. Commencement of construction.
Secretary of the Planning Commission shall attach to the plat a
statement of the reasons for such actions and shall return it to the
subdivider.
(3) In any case, a notation of the action taken and requisite reasons
therefor shall be entered in the records of the Planning
Commission.
G. The City Clerk shall present any final plat received from the Planning
Commission, as approved, to the Council at its next regular meeting.
The Council shall approve or reject a plat within 30 days after it is filed
with the City Clerk. However, before approval is given, the Council
must be satisfied that all improvements required in Article VI have been
constructed or satisfactory arrangements made for their completion.
H. Upon approval by the Council of the final plat, all data will be forwarded
to the City Engineer for preparation of final plans and specifications
connected with the proposed subdivision developments.
A. At least 10 days prior to commencing any phase of construction on any
approved subdivision, it shall be the duty of the person, company or
corporation responsible for said construction to file with the office of
City Engineer a statement of intent to initiate construction. Contained
within such statement shall be the proposed starting date of
construction, the name of the builder or contractor, the contemplated
completion date and any other related information as may be required
by the City Engineer.
B. Review by Engineer.
(1) Upon receipt from the developer of the statement of proposed
starting date of construction, it shall be the duty of the City
Engineer to review all plans, specifications and related data and to
relate the initial proposed subdivision to actual condition at the
location of the proposed subdivision.
(2) Any deviation from the accepted subdivision plat will be just cause
for the City Engineer to deny permission for commencement of
construction by the contractor.
(3) After complete inspection of field conditions, the City Engineer will
either grant or deny, in writing, permission for commencement of
construction. One copy of such grant or denial shall be given to the
contractor, and one copy shall be attached to the original
subdivision plat and related data, and one copy shall remain in the
files of the City Engineer.
C. After initiation of construction upon any subdivision, the City Engineer
shall, from time to time, conduct field inspections and may, if he or she
deems fit, take any necessary steps to ensure that said construction
§ 294-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-14
294:761
complies with all regulations of the City of Roseville as well as with
sound engineering principles.
D. A final overall inspection of the subdivision improvements shall be
conducted by the City Engineer prior to acceptance of the subdivision
by the city in accordance with the state plat law. It shall be the duty of
the City Engineer to order corrected any deviations from the original
subdivision as well as any unsound construction features located in the
subdivision at that time.
E. As evidence of good faith, the contractor shall be required to deposit
with the City Treasurer a sum not to exceed 5% of cost of construction
of streets, sidewalks, sewers and waterlines. This money shall remain
on deposit for a period of one year from the date of acceptance of the
subdivision improvements by the city, at which time the unused portion
of the deposit will be returned to the contractor. The deposit will be
utilized to correct any deficiency in material or workmanship that may
appear within the subdivision within the year following acceptance of
the subdivision improvements. Said deposit shall be made before any
construction is commenced.
F. The owner shall deposit a copy of his or her contracts and performance
bonds for the installation of sewer, water, paving, backyard drainage
and/or sidewalks according to plans and specifications, as approved by
the City Engineer, with the City Clerk at the time the owner presents
the plat for acknowledgment of City Council approval.
G. It shall be the duty of the developer to furnish to the city the names and
addresses of those individuals purchasing homes within the
subdivision. These names shall be submitted immediately upon their
receipt by the seller. In any event, the names and addresses of the
purchasers must be in the hands of the city at least 10 days prior to
request for final inspection of the homes. This section shall only apply to
those cases where sale of the house has been made prior to final
inspection of the home in question.
§ 294-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-14
294:762
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 294-15. General requirements.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Master Plan or master thoroughfare plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic
conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
A. Where such is not shown on the Master Plan or master thoroughfare
plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the Planning
Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing
streets impracticable.
B. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
C. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a private nonaccess
easement having a minimum width of 12 feet along the rear and/or side
property line or such other treatment as may be desirable for protection
of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.
D. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited-access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such
right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such
distances shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations.
E. Certain proposed streets, as indicated by the Planning Commission,
shall be extended to the boundary line of the subdivision to provide for
satisfactory future circulation within the neighborhood.
F. Alleys will not be approved in those parts of the proposed subdivision
located in one- or two-family residential zoning districts.
G. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets unless a new street is a continuation of or
§ 294-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-15
294:763
§ 294-16. Street design.
Street design shall be as follows:
a proposed extension of an existing street on the Master Plan. Street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
H. Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the property owned by
the subdivider, a plan of the prospective future platting of the
unsubmitted part shall be furnished, and the street system of the part
submitted shall be considered in light of adjustments in connection with
the street system of the part not submitted.
I. Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building lots,
such parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets.
J. Subdivisions showing unplatted strips or private streets controlling
access to public ways will not receive approval.
A. Half streets shall be prohibited except where absolutely essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations and where the Planning Commission
finds that it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other
half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Whenever a half-street
is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall
be platted within such tract.
B. Street jogs within center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided as far as practical.
C. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
D. When street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than
10°, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to
ensure a sight distance of not less than 200 feet for minor streets, 300
feet for collector streets and of such greater radii as the Planning
Commission shall determine for special cases.
E. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60°.
F. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
10 feet or of a greater radius where the Planning Commission may
deem it necessary for safety. The Planning Commission may permit
comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
G. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the Master Plan and,
where not shown therein, shall not be less than as follows, unless the
Planning Commission considers that the existing street pattern
requires a practical adjustment:
§ 294-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-16
294:764
§ 294-17. Alleys.
Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that
the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite
and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
§ 294-18. Easements.
Street Type
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Arterial and mile roads 120
Collector and one-half-mile roads 86
One-fourth-mile road when a
secondary collector
66
Minor and marginal access 60
H. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Cul-de-sac streets designed to be so permanently shall not be
longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet
and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. The property
line at the intersection of the turnaround and the straight portion of
the street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 20 feet.
(2) Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, it is desirable to
provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets
shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
Such dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary
turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet.
I. No street grade shall be less than 4/10 of 1% nor more than 5%, with
due allowance for reasonable vertical curves.
A. The width of an alley shall be 20 feet.
B. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
C. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible but, if unavoidable,
shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end,
as determined by the Planning Commission.
A. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
§ 294-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-18
294:765
§ 294-19. Blocks.
§ 294-20. Lots.
The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for
the type of development and use contemplated.
drainage right-of-way, conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
A. No block may be more than 1,200 feet nor less than 600 feet in length
between the center lines of intersecting streets, except where, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, extraordinary conditions
unquestionably justify a departure from these limits.
B. In blocks over 700 feet in length, the Planning Commission may require
at or near the middle of the block a public way or easement of not less
than 10 feet in width for use by pedestrians and/or as an easement for
public utilities. Such easements shall be straight from street to street.
A. Minimum lot dimensions and sizes shall conform to the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance214 provided that:
(1) Residential lots, where not served by public sewers, shall not be
less than 60 feet wide nor less than 7,500 square feet in area.
(2) Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial
and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the offstreet
service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.
(3) Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
B. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated street or
a street that has received the legal status as such.
C. Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two parallel streets, should be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages
of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least
12 feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be
provided along the line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other
disadvantageous use.
D. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
214. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 294-18 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-20
294:766
§ 294-21. Parks, playgrounds and public open spaces.
E. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a
larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots rather than being allowed to
remain as unusable parcels.
A. The Council may accept the dedication of parks, playgrounds and other
public open spaces not shown on the Master Plan when it appears that
the city will benefit from such dedication.
B. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown
on the Master Plan is located in whole or in part in a proposed
subdivision, the Council may require the reservation of such area within
the subdivision when the Council deems such requirements to be
reasonable. A request for such land reservation shall be constructed as
the first step toward acquisition of said land by gift or purchase.
§ 294-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-21
294:767

ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 294-22. Bond.
The Council may require, before approving the final plat, the subdivider to
install or furnish adequate bond for the ultimate installation of any or all of
the improvements given in this Article VI.
§ 294-23. Street improvements.
§ 294-24. Street signs.
Street name signs may be required at all street intersections within or
abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a type approved by the
Council and shall be placed in accordance with standards of the city.
§ 294-25. Streetlighting. [Amended 5-13-1975 by Ord. No. 726215]
Streetlighting facilities shall be required. The pole and fixture and
candlepower shall be in accordance with general standards established by
the Council, and the installation shall be subject to approval by the City
Electrical Inspector.
§ 294-26. Public water supply.
Where a public water supply approved by the City Engineer is reasonably
acceptable, each lot within the subdivision area shall be provided with a
A. Monuments shall be placed at all intersections of the lines of streets,
alleys and streets and alleys and the lines of streets and alleys with the
boundaries of the plat, points of curvature in streets and at
intermediate points, as shall be required by the City Engineer. The
monuments shall be constructed and located in conformance with
Section 10, Act 172 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended.
B. All streets shown on the plat submitted shall be paved in accordance
with the standard cross sections for city streets of various widths and
purposes approved by the Council and the Planning Commission. Such
construction shall be in accordance with the current specifications of
the city and subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
C. Curbs, gutters, drainage and drainage structures in accordance with
standard specifications of the city may be required. Such construction
shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the City Engineer.
D. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications of the city. Such construction shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the City Engineer.
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 294-22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-26
294:769
connection thereto. All connections shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
§ 294-27. Sanitary sewers.217
§ 294-28. Street trees.218
On all plats submitted where suitable existing trees are not retained in good
condition, street trees may be required. Street trees shall be planted in
conformance with a planting plan approved by the Council on all streets.
A. In a proposed subdivision, pending accessibility of a public water
supply, the subdivider may be required to construct wells or a private
water supply system in such a manner that an adequate supply of
potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision at the time
improvements are erected thereon. The adequacy, healthfulness and
potableness of the water supply shall be subject to the approval of the
City Health Department and State Health Department. The water
supply system shall be constructed under the direction and control of
the City Health Department, and all construction shall be subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
B. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions within reach of a
water system. Fire hydrant standards shall be subject to the approval of
the City Fire Department and the City Engineer.216
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, each lot within
the subdivided area shall be provided with a connection thereto. All
connections shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
B. In the case of a subdivision that is not to be served by a public sewer
system, private restrictions shall be filed with the final plat and
incorporated in each deed calling for the installation on each lot of an
individual sewage disposal system meeting fully the requirements of
the City and County Health Departments, which system is to be used
until a public sewer system can be provided.
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 139, Fire Hydrants.
217. Editor's Note: See Ch. 256, Sewers.
218. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 324, Trees, Art. I, Street Trees.
§ 294-26 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-28
294:770
ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 294-29. Basis for granting of variance.
Where the Council finds that extraordinary hardship may result from strict
compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. In granting
any variance, the Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems
necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings,
as required below, the Council shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number
of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable
effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No
variance shall be granted unless the Council finds that:
§ 294-30. Record of modification.
Any modification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the
Council, setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the Council,
justified the modifications.
A. There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property
such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land.
B. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
C. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which said
property is situated.
§ 294-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-30
294:771

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 294-31. Sale of lands in violation of provisions.
Any sale of lands subdivided in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be voidable at the option of the purchaser thereof and shall subject
the seller thereof to the forfeiture of any or all consideration received or
pledged therefor, together with any damages sustained by said purchaser
or purchasers thereof, which may be recovered in action for debt by any
person who shall sue for the same before any court having jurisdiction.
§ 294-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall hereafter sell any lot, piece
or parcel of land subdivided as in this chapter provided, without having
first secured the approval of the Planning Commission and Council as
provided in this chapter and without having first recorded a plat thereof in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Plat Act of 1929, as
amended by the State of Michigan, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than 25% of the consideration involved or $500, whichever is the greater
amount, for each lot, piece or parcel of land so sold, in addition to all other
penalties or forfeitures herein provided.
§ 294-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-32
294:773

ARTICLE IX
Fees
§ 294-33. Filing fee.219
The subdivider shall pay a filing fee as provided in Chapter 133, Fees,
every subdivision preliminary plat submitted to the Planning Commission
for approval.
§ 294-34. Field inspections. [Amended 9-7-1965 by Ord. No. 54]
The subdivider shall pay a fixed charge of 4% of the total cost of sewer,
water, paving and sidewalks to the city to cover the cost incurred by the City
Engineer in checking and approving subject development plans and project
inspection.
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 294-33 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 294-34
294:775
Chapter 296
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS
§ 294-34 ROSEVILLE CODE § 294-34
294:776
ARTICLE I
Surveillance Cameras Required for Certain Businesses
[Adopted 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 1309]
§ 296-1. Short Title.
This chapter shall be known and be cited as the "Surveillance Cameras
Required for Certain Businesses Ordinance" of the City of Roseville Code of
Ordinances.
§ 296-2. Definitions.
The following definitions and provisions shall govern the construction,
meaning, and application of the following words and phrases:
BANK or FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment whose primary
function is related to the custody, loan, exchange, issuance of money,
extension of credit or transmission of funds such as, by example, banks,
credit unions, or savings and loan.
COIN DEALER — Any business who as a substantial portion of business
buys and sells coins, gold or other precious metals as the term is defined
elsewhere by ordinance.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS — A business commonly known as offering
payday loans, cash advance, or check advance loans which is regulated
under the State of Michigan Deferred Presentment Services Transaction
Act, 244 of 2005, as amended,220 or any similar state law.
FIREARM DEALER — An establishment required to obtain a federal
firearms license to sell firearms which engages in firearms transactions.
GAS STATIONS — A retail establishment at which motor vehicles are
refueled.
HOTEL or MOTEL — Any building or structure equipped, used, advertised
as, or held out to the public as a facility or place where sleeping quarters or
other similar accommodations are furnished for a fee to transient guests.
LICENSED MARIHUANA FACILITY — Any facility licensed by the State
of Michigan for the purpose of growing, dispensing, testing, storing or
otherwise having obtained a license to operate under appropriate State
statutes.
LIQUOR BUSINESS or ALCOHOL BUSINESS — Any retailer required to
obtain a permit by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission which
authorizes the sale of beer, wine, or distilled spirits to be consumed on or
off the premises where sold inclusive of brew pubs, distilleries, or other
similarly licensed facilities.
220. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 487.2121.
§ 296-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 296-2
294:777
MEDIA — Material conforming to the minimum technical standards of this
chapter upon which audio, video and electronic data can be recorded for
the purpose of making a permanent record.
MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS DEALER — Any retailer of a wireless twoway
communication device including a telephone used in cellular telephone
service which represents, along with accessories related thereto more than
50% of the displayed goods for retail purchase accessible to or observable
by patrons.
MONEY TRANSMISSION SERVICES — A retailer selling or issuing payment
instruments, or stored value devices, or receiving money or monetary value
for transmission. The term does not include the provision solely of delivery
online, or telecommunication services, or network access.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX — Any residential housing
complex consisting of greater than six units.
PAWNBROKER — A business required to obtain a license issued pursuant
to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Roseville regulating pawnbrokers
or used goods dealers.221
PHARMACY — A facility or part of a facility that is licensed under this part
to dispense prescription drugs, or prepare prescription drugs for delivery
or distribution, and does not include the office of a dispensing prescriber, or
an automated device.
SCRAP METAL DEALER — A person or entity that buys scrap metal and is
not a first purchaser, including but not limited to a person whether or not
licensed under state law or local ordinance that operates a business as a
scrap metal recycler, scrap processer, secondhand and junk dealer, or other
person that purchases any amount of scrap metal on a regular, sporadic, or
one time basis.
VIDEO SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM — A continual digital surveillance system,
including cameras, cabling, monitors, and digital video recorders (DVR) and
other related equipment used in conjunction which records in color with
camera and lens of a type with minimum resolution number and location,
meeting the terms of this article or otherwise as approved by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee. The system must be capable of producing
retrievable and identifiable images and video recordings which can be
enlarged through projection or other means and can make a permanent
record for use and identification of individuals and for use in a criminal
investigation.
§ 296-3. Video surveillance system required for business
establishments.
Every business establishment as defined in this chapter is required to install
and maintain, in working order, a video surveillance system compliant with
this chapter. Establishments which as of the effective date of this article
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 179, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and Junk Dealers.
§ 296-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 296-3
294:778
have a video surveillance system shall insure that such system is maintained
and, if necessary, upgraded to be in full compliance with this chapter. All
video surveillance systems shall:
§ 296-4. Minimum coverage standards.
The video system shall be capable of producing imagery allowing for facial
recognition of persons who are in areas accessible to patrons facing each
register or checkout stand, who would be entering each entrance/exit and
shall additionally have a wide angle camera or cameras, allowing for
imagery of the parking lot or an area designated for parking and the likely
pedestrian approach way toward the facility. At gas stations, all fueling
areas shall also have a video system so that facial recognition is allowed
in the fueling areas. Cameras positioned at the entrance/exit and registers
shall be positioned so as to view and record a full frame of the individual's
face as they are entering the business establishment and, to the extent
practicable, activity within 15 feet around the area of each entrance, exit,
register and checkout area.
§ 296-5. Notification of incidents and access to media.
If a crime occurs, or any employees of an establishment believe or suspect a
crime has occurred at the establishment premises, the establishment shall
contact the Police Department immediately and shall provide the Police
Department immediate access to media containing the recorded event. An
A. Be maintained in proper working order including prompt repair and/or
replacement.
B. The video camera shall be sufficiently light sensitive and provide
sufficient image resolution supported by additional lighting if
necessary, to produce easily discernable images recorded at all times,
including imagery sufficient to identify persons.
C. The video camera shall record at a minimum speed of eight frames per
second.
D. The video camera images shall be capable of being viewed through the
use of appropriate technology, including, but not limited to, a computer
screen, and a closed circuit television monitor.
E. The video camera shall be digital in nature and capable of transferring
the recorded images to a portable digital form of media.
F. The video camera shall be in operation and recording 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
G. The recordings made by video camera installed and maintained shall be
indexed by dates and times.
H. The video camera shall meet additional minimal technological
standards established pursuant to this chapter.
§ 296-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 296-5
294:779
establishment shall retain the continuous images recorded by the system for
no less than 30 days. The recording shall be stored in a locked receptacle,
preferably located in a controlled access area to which only authorized
persons have access and shall be secured to restrict access to such video
recordings. A log of all instances of requests for access to and the use of
recorded materials made by video cameras shall be maintained. Copies of
the access log shall be provided to the Police Department upon demand.
§ 296-6. Inspections.
The video surveillance system and the location for storage shall be subject
to regular inspection by the Chief of Police or his or her designee at
reasonable times to determine conformance to this article. If imagery is
sought for an incident which is unavailable for any reason, the video
surveillance system shall be subject to inspection, testing and review by the
Police Department to verify the functionality of the system at the time of the
incident. Any failure to produce an image which otherwise properly should
have been recorded shall be considered a violation of this chapter unless the
system has been under repair for a reasonable length of time. Any failure to
permit an inspection or to timely repair and maintain the video surveillance
system in working order shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 296-7. Minimum technology standards.
Minimum technology standards shall be promulgated by the Police Chief
after consultation with the Information Technology Department which shall
be issued and maintained at the Police Department and made available upon
request to business establishments subject to this article.
§ 296-8. Exemptions and appeals.
A business which is required to install a video surveillance system may
apply to the Chief of Police or his or her designee for an exemption or
an exception from all or a part of the provisions of this chapter. The
Chief of Police and his or her designee may exempt for a period of time
upon a finding that the business has or will undertake alternate security
procedures which are substantially equal to or more effective preventing
criminal activity and in assisting in the apprehension of perpetrators of
crime and for the protection of employees and patrons. Temporary
extensions of time for full compliance with the installation and maintenance
of the video surveillance system shall be permitted upon a showing of good
cause.
§ 296-9. Compliance with codes.
The video surveillance system must comply with all City codes and state
and federal codes with respect to the installation and maintenance of such
system.
§ 296-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 296-10
294:780
§ 296-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or business who shall violate any of the provisions of this article
or fails to comply with the court requirements shall be subject to a civil
infraction with a minimum fine of $150 per day for each day said violation
continues to exist. Each day said violation continues to exist shall constitute
a separate and distinctive offense.
§ 296-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 296-10
294:781
Chapter 300
SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 302
TATTOO PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 71. Fees — See Ch. 133.
§ 302-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Tattoo Parlor Ordinance of the
City of Roseville" and will be referred to herein as "this chapter."
§ 302-2. Definitions.
Unless particular provisions of the context otherwise require, the
definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the
construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this
chapter:
EMPLOYEE and/or INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR — Any person over 18
years of age, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a
tattoo parlor and receives compensation from the operator of the parlor or
patrons.[Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 1207]
OWNER or OPERATOR — A person who owns or controls or who has the
duty to control the operations of a tattoo parlor. This includes individuals,
licensees, managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships, corporations,
societies, organizations, associations or any combination of the individuals
of whatever form or character.
PATRON — Any person over 18 years of age who receives a tattoo under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay
money or give any other consideration therefor.
TATTOO ARTIST — Any person who performs tattooing.
TATTOOING — The creation of indelible mark or figure upon the human
body by insertion of pigment into or under the skin or by the production of
scars.
TATTOO PARLOR — Any place where establishment for a tattoo as defined
in this chapter is made available.
§ 296-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 302-3
300:782
§ 302-3. Business license required. [Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord.
No. 1207]
No owner/operator or employee and/or independent contractor shall
engage in or carry on the operation of a tattoo parlor unless he or she has a
valid tattoo business license issued by the City pursuant to provisions of this
chapter for each and every separate office or place of business conducted
by such owner/operator.
§ 302-4. Application for business license. [Amended 4-24-2007 by
Ord. No. 1207]
Any owner and/or operator or employee and/or independent contractor
desiring a tattoo business license shall file a written application with the
Police Chief on a form to be furnished by the Police Chief. The applicant
shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct license fee
as hereinafter provided, which fee shall not be refundable, and shall, in
addition, furnish the following information:
A. The type of ownership of the business, for example, whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is
to be conducted.
C. A complete list of the names and resident addresses of all employees in
the business and the name and resident address of the manager or
other person principally in charge of the operation of the business.
D. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; and concerning each stock holder holding more than 10% of
the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the
application of a corporation; and concerning the partners, including
limited partnership; and concerning the manager or other person
principally in charge of the business:
(1) Name, complete residence address and telephone numbers.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes and sex.
(5) Two front face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(6) The tattoo or similar business history and experience, including but
not limited to whether or not such person, in previously operating
in this or another City or state under license or permit, has had
such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, the reason
§ 302-3 TATTOO PARLORS § 302-4
302:783
§ 302-5. Investigation of applicant.
Upon receiving the application for a tattoo business license, the Police
Chief shall conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character and
personal and criminal history. The Police Chief may, in his or her discretion,
require a personal interview of the applicant and such further information,
identification and physical examination of the person that shall bear on the
investigation.
§ 302-6. Inspections by departments.
Any applicant for a tattoo business license shall submit to lawful inspections
by the Department of Buildings and Inspection, Police Department, Fire
Department and such other departments as may be necessary to ensure that
the proposed business and applicant comply with all applicable ordinances
and regulations of the City. The Roseville Police Chief may refuse to submit
any application for approval to the Roseville City Council until receipt of
inspection reports from the department requested.
§ 302-7. Submission of application to City Manager.
Before the Roseville Police Chief shall issue any license under this chapter,
he or she shall first submit, within 45 days of the receipt of an application,
said application with a report of investigations and inspections and his or
her recommendations to the Roseville City Manager.
therefor and the business activities or occupations subsequent to
such actions of denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the
circumstances thereof.
(8) A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by
the Chief of Police or authorized representative.
E. Such other information, identification and physical examination of the
person as shall be deemed necessary by the Police Chief to discover the
truth of the matters hereinafter required to be set forth in the
application.
F. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information
and conduct investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in
the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
G. The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will
serve as character references. These references must be persons other
than relatives and business associates.
H. A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
forgoing information contained in the application is true and correct,
said declaration being duly dated and signed in the City.
§ 302-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 302-8
302:784
§ 302-8. Placement of application on meeting agenda.
The Roseville City Manager, upon receipt of an application, reports and
recommendations of the Roseville Police Chief shall place said application
for license upon the agenda for the next regularly scheduled council
meeting; provided, however, that said meeting is not less than six days from
the date of receipt of said application by the City Manager, and in the event
that it is less than six days, an application shall be placed upon the agenda
for the following meeting of the City Council.
§ 302-9. Review of application and reports; issuance of license.
The Roseville City Council shall determine whether or not said license
shall be issued after reviewing the reports of investigations and inspections
and the recommendation of the Police Chief and other code enforcement
officers, and the Roseville City Council shall direct the Roseville Police Chief
to issue a tattoo business license within 14 days, unless it finds that:
§ 302-10. Revocation or denial of license.
A. The correct license fee has not been tendered to the City and, in the
case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation.
B. The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the City's
building, fire, zoning and health ordinances.
C. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more
than 10% of the stock of the corporation and any of the officers and
directors if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners
including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership; and the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, have been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud
or deceit, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the
date of the application.
D. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact on the permit application or any document required
by the City in conjunction therewith.
E. The applicant has had a tattoo business or other similar permit or
license denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above causes by the
City or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date
of the application.
F. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors, if the
applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other
persons principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not
over the age of 18 years.
§ 302-8 TATTOO PARLORS § 302-10
302:785
§ 302-11. Request for hearing to reconsider revocation or denial.
Within 20 days of the date of revocation or denial of any application for a
tattoo business license, said applicant may request, in the form of a written
application to the Roseville City Manager for a hearing before the Roseville
City Council, reconsideration of this application for license or for a variance
of any of the provisions or requirements of any ordinance, the violation
of which constitute a grounds for the original revocation or denial of the
application.
§ 302-12. Submission of evidence.
At said hearing, the applicant and his or her attorney may present and may
submit evidence on the applicant's behalf to show that the grounds for the
original revocation or denial no longer exist.
§ 302-13. Review of evidence and determination by Council.
After reviewing an applicant's evidence, the City Council shall determine
whether to sustain the revocation, sustain the denial or grant the
application for license.
§ 302-14. Evidence of exceptional circumstances.
At said hearing, the applicant and his or her attorney may present a
statement and adequate evidence showing that:
A. Revocation. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by
the City Council upon written notice from the Police Chief or other code
enforcement officials for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application.
(2) Violation of any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of
the City of Roseville.
(3) Conviction by the applicant, owner, manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business of any crime
involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit.
B. Denial. In the event that the Roseville City Council shall deny an
application, it shall specify the particular grounds for such denial and
shall direct the City Attorney to notify the applicant by regular mail,
addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application.
Said notice shall specify the grounds for which said application is
denied.
A. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the proposed tattoo parlor referred to in the appeal
application submitted to the Roseville City Manager, which
§ 302-10 ROSEVILLE CODE § 302-14
302:786
§ 302-15. Granting of variance.
In all cases where the Roseville City Council shall grant a variance of any
provision or requirement of this chapter, the Roseville City Council shall
find that the granting of the variance under such conditions as the Roseville
City Council may deem necessary or desirable to apply thereto will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and that it will
not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public
welfare.
§ 302-16. Inspections; operation during license suspension
prohibited.
Every licensee/applicant under this chapter shall permit all reasonable
inspections of the business premises and shall at all times comply with the
laws and regulations applicable to such business premises and shall refrain
from operating the licensed business on the premises after the expiration of
said license and during the period the license may be revoked or suspended.
§ 302-17. Sterilizing equipment.
The Department of Buildings and Inspection shall promulgate regulations
to be followed for the sterilization of instruments and needles used in the
tattoo process. The sterilizing equipment must be maintained in the proper
sanitary manner and be at all times in proper working order. No tattooing
shall be performed unless the tattooing equipment and materials have been
sterilized before attempting to tattoo each customer.
§ 302-18. Display of license. [Amended 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 1207]
The tattoo licensee/applicant shall display the license in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises of the tattoo business.
§ 302-19. Notification of change in information.
If, while any application for a tattoo business license is pending or during
the term of any license granted hereunder, there is any change in fact,
policy or method which would alter the information provided in such
application, the applicant/licensee shall notify the Roseville Police Chief
thereof, in writing, within 72 hours after such change.
circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to any proposed
tattoo parlor.
B. The granting of such tattoo business license will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the
health, safety or welfare of the persons residing or working in the
neighborhood or attending any tattoo parlor and will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to the immediate neighborhood or the City at
large.
§ 302-14 TATTOO PARLORS § 302-20
302:787
§ 302-20. License fees. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
The annual fee for a tattoo business shall be as provided in Chapter 133,
Fees.
§ 302-21. License expiration date.
All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
February 1 on each and every year.
§ 302-22. Appointment book.
Every person who operates a tattoo business or provides a tattoo shall at
all times keep an appointment book in which the name, age and address
of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date
and place of service and the service provided. Such appointment book shall
be available at all times for inspection by the Police Chief or authorized
representatives, and said appointment book shall be kept on file for one year
from the date of the last entry therein.
§ 302-23. Licenses not transferable.
No tattoo business license is transferable, separate or divisible, and such
authority as a license confers shall be conferred only on the licensee named
therein.
§ 302-24. Periodic inspections; minimum standards.
All premises used by the licensee hereunder shall be periodically inspected
by the Police Chief, Director of Buildings and Inspection or Fire Chief
or their authorized representatives for the safety of the structure and
adequacy of the plumbing, ventilation, heating and illumination. The
following minimum standards shall be maintained:
A. Walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in
all rooms.
B. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse.
C. All equipment used in the tattoo operation shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
D. Towels, linen and items for personal use of tattoo operators and patrons
shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not
be used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be
substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is changed for every
patron.
§ 302-20 ROSEVILLE CODE § 302-25
302:788
§ 302-25. Toilet facilities. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations and shall comply
with the Plumbing Code of the City or Roseville as provided in Chapter 221,
Plumbing Standards.
§ 302-26. Lavatories or wash basins.
Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water
shall be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or wash
basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and sanitary towels.
§ 302-27. Hands of attendants to be clean.
The skin of the hands of those attending patrons shall be clean and in
healthy condition and the nails shall be kept short. The hands shall be
washed thoroughly before giving the patron any attention.
§ 302-28. Persons under 18 not permitted on premises.
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come
or remain on the premises of any tattoo business establishment, as tattoo
operator, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on
lawful business.
§ 302-29. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage on the premises
of any tattoo business.
§ 302-30. Administrative procedures.
The Roseville Police Chief or Roseville City Manager shall establish
reasonable administrative procedures necessary to the operation and
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 302-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125; 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 1207]
Every person except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
chapter whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner,
independent contractor, operator or employee of the operator or whether
acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator or acting as
a participant or worker in any way, who gives a tattoo or conducts a tattoo
establishment without first obtaining a permit, and paying a license fee to
do so, from the City of Roseville, or who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 304
§ 302-25 TATTOO PARLORS § 302-31
302:789
TAXATION
CHARTER REFERENCES
City Assessor — See Ch. 7, Sec. 7.7. Taxation — See Ch. 9.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special assessments — See Ch. 5.
§ 302-31 ROSEVILLE CODE § 302-31
302:790
ARTICLE I
Relief Procedure for Paupers
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 304 of the 1984
Code]
§ 304-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to create an orderly procedure by which
persons deemed to be paupers under the General Property Tax Law of the
State of Michigan may be granted relief.
§ 304-2. Adoption of statute by reference. [Amended 4-17-1995 by
Ord. No. 1067]
The City hereby adopts by reference MSA § 7.7, the same being MCL
§ 211.7, including all subsections thereof and any and all amendments
thereto that have been made or that may be made from time to time, as if
the same were fully set forth herein.
§ 304-3. Determination of poverty level for granting full or partial
hardship exemptions and/or for arrangements for payment of
obligations. [Amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 1067; 8-13-2002 by
Ord. No. 1169; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 1196; 9-23-2008 by Ord. No.
1215]
A. It is the purpose of this article to empower the Assessor and the Board
of Review to make the determination in the event of the allegation of
poverty and proof thereof by any person to make a reasonable
arrangement with the City for the payment of his or her tax obligations
and/or for an exemption thereof.
B. The City hereby establishes the following procedures and minimum
standards as a guideline for the determination of poverty hardship
exemptions as intended pursuant to MCL § 211.7(u) and Public Acts of
1994, No. 390:
(1) The applicant must be the owner of and occupy as a homestead the
property for which the exemption is requested.
(2) The applicant must timely file a claim with the Board of Review on a
form provided by the City Assessor’s office. Federal and state
returns for the immediately preceding year shall be submitted for
all owners and all persons residing in the household
(3) The applicant must produce a valid driver's license or other form of
identification if requested by the Board of Review.
(4) The applicant must produce a deed, land contract or other evidence
of ownership of the property for which an exemption is requested if
required by the Board of Review.
§ 304-1 TATTOO PARLORS § 304-3
302:791
§ 304-4. Acceptance of mortgage and note.
The City Assessor and the Board of Review may accept a regular real estate
mortgage and note to secure the amounts advanced by the City for the
payment of the pauper's tax billing.
(5) The income of all property owners, including that of each
householder as defined by P.A. 390 of 1994, must not be more than
that amount set by the Federal Government in its poverty level
standards.
(6) The valuation of assets owned by all property owners and any
householder must not be greater than $75,000. In determining the
value of assets, any equity in the residence under appeal shall not
be included.
(7) Consideration for the granting of a poverty hardship exemption
shall be made after calculating all property tax rebates, including
but not limited to the Michigan homestead property tax credit.
C. Based on the information provided, the Board of Review will make a
determination whether a full or partial exemption will be granted.
§ 304-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 304-4
302:792
ARTICLE II
Statutory Exemption for City Housing Projects
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 304 of the 1984
Code]
§ 304-5. Exemption not applicable to certain projects.
The tax exemption established in Subsection (1) of Section 15a of Act No.
346 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1966, as amended, shall not apply to any
and all housing projects situated within the boundaries of the City which
are financed with any mortgage aided by, or any financial advance or grant
from, the United States Government or the State Housing Development
Authority of the State of Michigan.
§ 304-6. Legislative intent.
It is the legislative intent of this article that the City implement the
provisions contained in Subsection (2) of Section 15a of Act No. 346 of the
Michigan Public Acts of 1966, as amended, to the end that nonprofit housing
projects within the corporate boundaries of the City shall not be exempt
from ad valorem property taxation as provided in Subsection (1) of Section
15a of said Act.
§ 304-7. Applicability.
This article shall be effective with respect to any housing project for which
an exemption has already been granted in the year 1968.
§ 304-5 TATTOO PARLORS § 304-7
302:793
Chapter 308
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 308, Taxicabs, adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Ch.
308 of the 1984 Code, as amended, was repealed 4-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 1295.]
Chapter 310
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
§ 310-1. Purpose.
This chapter regulates access to and the ongoing use of public utility
easements and rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for the
purpose of protecting public health, safety and welfare through reasonable
control of public utility easements and rights-of-way as authorized under
the Michigan Telecommunications Act (Act No. 216 of the Public Acts of
1995, as amended, MCL 484.2101 et seq.) and as authorized pursuant
to the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight
Act, No. 48, P.A. 2002, as amended other state statutes and Article VII,
Section 29, of the 1963 Michigan Constitution by:
§ 310-2. Reservation of rights.
The issuance of a permit and access to and use of public utility easements
and rights-of-way shall not constitute a waiver or otherwise adversely affect
the following reserved rights:
A. Minimizing disruption to public utility easements and rights-of-way by
regulating access to and ongoing use of the same and the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance and use of facilities in such
easements and rights-of-way;
B. Establishing that the City and public are protected from liability for use
of public utility easements and rights-of-way by telecommunications
providers;
C. Providing for the payment of nondiscriminatory permit, application and
fees as provided in the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Right-of-Way Oversight Act; and
D. Assisting telecommunications providers in understanding requirements
of the City for use of public utility easements and rights-of-way and
providing a fair and nondiscriminatory policy for such use as prescribed
by and consistent with state law, including the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight Act.
A. Right to require a franchise. Article VII, Section 29, of the 1963
Michigan Constitution requires that all public utilities obtain a
franchise to conduct local business within a City. To avoid the expense
§ 304-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 310-2
310:794
§ 310-3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the terms and phrases used in this chapter have
the following meanings:
CITY — The City of Roseville.
COMMISSION — The Public Service Commission and the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services of the State of Michigan.
PERMIT — A nonexclusive limited authorization for the construction,
maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system on, under or
over or across the public right-of-way of the City and to transact local
business thereon as further defined pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the permit. Permits shall be in the form of a written agreement granted
and delay of litigation that may be unnecessary, the City determines
that telecommunications providers shall not be required at this time
to obtain franchises for the transaction of business within the City.
Telecommunications providers shall be required to obtain and maintain
a permit for access to and ongoing use of the public utility easements
and rights-of-way and to otherwise comply with the terms of this
chapter. Such permit shall not constitute a franchise. The City reserves
the right to require telecommunications providers to obtain a franchise
in the future to transact local business within the City. The City reserves
the right to require cable operators to obtain a franchise currently to
transact local business within the City.
B. Rights regarding taking claims. Certain cable telecommunications
providers have initiated or supported legal proceedings in which they
contend that federal law grants them the right to physically occupy the
rights-of-way and other property of a municipality for the purpose of
providing telecommunications service without compensation to the
municipality for the use or value of the property so occupied or the cost
of acquiring and maintaining such property. Municipalities dispute that
claim. The City believes that if such a claim were sustained it would,
among other things, constitute an unlawful taking by the United States
in violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
The legal issues involved in such disputes have not been finally decided.
The City desires to act upon applications for permits granting access to
its public utilities easements and rights-of-way at this time rather than
wait for a determination of these issues, provided this can be done
without waiver or loss of any rights of the City or a permittee.
Notwithstanding any other provision, a permittee is not precluded by
this chapter from seeking relief from the fee provisions of § 310-5C
from any court or agency of competent jurisdiction. If a permittee seeks
such relief, the City reserves the right to assert a takings claim to take
all action it deems necessary in support thereof. Neither this chapter
nor the issuance of any permit shall be deemed in any way to modify or
abridge or reduce the scope or extent of any right which would have
existed on behalf of the City and permittee if this chapter had not been
adopted and such permit issued.
§ 310-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 310-3
310:795
and approved by resolution of the City Council of the City to use the public
utilities and rights-of-way of the City for fiber optics, wires, poles, pipes,
conduits or other telecommunications equipment.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area on, below or above a public roadway,
street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a
federal, state or private right-of-way.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who contracts with the permittee for or is in
any manner provided with telecommunications services by permittee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The equipment or
personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches,
conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to generate, receive, transmit,
carry amplify or provide the telecommunications services or signals.
Telecommunications facilities or facilities do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide the
federally licensed commercial mobile services as defined in Section 332(d)
of Part 1 of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48
Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332, and further defined as commercial mobile radio
service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER or PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in Section
102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act of 1991, P.A. 179, M.C.L.
484.2102. Telecommunications provider does not include a person or an
affiliate of the person when providing a federally licensed commercial
mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part 1 of the Communications
Act of 1934, Chapters 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332, and further defined
as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by
any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of this Act
only, provider also includes all of the following:
§ 310-4. Permit required.
A. Cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service.
Except as otherwise provided by this Act, a person who owns
telecommunications facilities located within the public right-of-way.
B.
C. A person providing broadband Internet access service.
A. No person shall install, construct, maintain or otherwise a operate
telecommunications facilities or a telecommunications provider in the
City without a permit granted by resolution of the City Council.
B. No person shall transact business on telecommunications facilities or
act as a telecommunications provider unless the owner or operator of
§ 310-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 310-4
310:796
§ 310-5. Permit application.
§ 310-6. Permits; nonexclusive.
The City may grant one or more permits for telecommunications systems,
services or equipment in the City subject to this chapter. The City
such system has been granted a permit pursuant to this chapter,
subject, however, to any limitation provided by constitution or law.
C. A person shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits,
authorizations or licenses necessary to provide telecommunications
services from all other governmental authorities furnishing evidence of
such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses prior to the issuance
of any permit pursuant to this chapter.
D. Within 180 days from November 1, 2002, a provider with facilities
located in a public right-of-way as of November 1, 2002, that has not
previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 P.A. 179, MCL 484.2251, shall
submit a application for a permit to the City of Roseville if it has
facilities located in a public right-of-way in the City of Roseville.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any codes,
ordinances or regulations of the City or the City's right to require
providers or persons utilizing telecommunications service to secure
appropriate permits or authorizations for such use.
A. For applications and permits issued after November 1, 2002,
application shall be submitted upon a prescribed form by the
Commission. The initial application form, unless otherwise agreed to by
the City and provider, shall be those approved by the Commission as of
August 16, 2001.
B. If the City and provider cannot agree on the requirement of additional
information requested by the City or the use of additional permit terms,
either the City or the provider shall notify the Commission, which shall
appoint a mediator within seven days from the date if no one is to make
recommendations within 30 days from the date of the appointment for
resolution of the dispute. The terms and provisions of the Metropolitan
Extension Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight Act, as
amended, shall control resolution of any such dispute.
C. Except as otherwise provided in the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight Act, provider shall file an
application or permit and pay a one-time five-hundred-dollar
application fee for access to or use of public rights-of-way if sought by
the provider within the City.
D. The City shall approve or deny permits for access to public rights-ofway
pursuant to this chapter within 45 days from the date provider files
a complete application for permit.
§ 310-4 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 310-6
310:797
specifically reserves the right to grant at any time such additional permits
as it deems appropriate. Additional permits shall not be deemed to modify,
revoke, terminate or damage any right previously granted to any other
permittee.
§ 310-7. Effective date of permit validity.
No permit shall be valid unless authorized by resolution adopted by the City
Council, approving a written agreement containing terms and conditions
pursuant to which the permit is granted which shall be executed by the
Mayor and Clerk and filed with the City Clerk and all fees have been paid,
bond, insurance or letter of credit or other requirements of the permit
satisfied.
§ 310-8. Telecommunications facilities and route maps.
The provider shall cause to be filed with the City with the application
route maps showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed
facilities in the format as required by the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight Authority. Within 90 days after
the substantial completion of construction of the new facilities, a provider
shall submit route maps showing the location of telecommunications
facilities to the City and Commission in the manner and format as approved
by the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight
Authority.
§ 310-9. Construction and maintenance.
All facilities and equipment of any telecommunications system operating
with a permit within the City shall be constructed and maintained at a
state of the art level in accordance with the applicable requirements and
specifications of the National Electric Code, National Building Code, shall
participate in MISS DIG and shall comply with all applicable rules and
regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission, Federal
Communications Commission and all other pertinent ordinances and codes
of the City. No construction shall occur which involves cutting or patching
or tunneling beneath any paved surface, whether concrete, asphalt or other
pavement, unless plans have been approved by the Building Department of
the City and any other applicable governmental entity having jurisdiction
of such paved surfaces. Before commencement of any construction activity,
including but not limited to any digging, boring, or the placement of any
facilities, the provider shall have a preconstruction meeting with
representatives of the City, including the City Engineer, the Director of
Building and Inspection and the Director of the Department of Public Works.
If the City representatives and provider representatives are unable to agree
on arrangements for coordinating and minimizing the disruption of public
rights-of-way and with the application of applicable standards, they shall
follow the provision for mediation, pursuant to the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight Act, Section 7, as amended.
§ 310-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 310-10
310:798
§ 310-10. Permit nontransferable.
Permits shall not be sold, transferred, assumed, assigned or sublet in any
manner, either directly or indirectly. A substantial change in ownership,
either through stock purchase, merger or consolidation, shall require
reapplication for a permit.
§ 310-11. Indemnification.
Provider shall indemnify and hold the City, its officers, employees, agents
or contractors harmless from any injury claim, demand, suit, judgment,
execution, liability, debt, damages or penalty arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise or result from any act or omission of the provider
in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of the
telecommunications system and equipment or of the issuance of a permit.
§ 310-12. Insurance.
Provider shall at all times during the life of the permit carry and require its
contractors and subcontractors to carry public liability, property damage,
workers compensation and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as
determined by the City and set forth in the agreement. All insurance shall
provide for a thirty-day notice to the City in the event of material alteration
or cancellation of coverage prior to the effective date of such alteration
or cancellation. Failure to provide or maintain insurance for any period in
excess of 60 days shall render the permit null and void.
§ 310-13. Performance bond.
City may require as a condition of the permit that a bond be posted by
the provider which shall not exceed the reasonable cost to insure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
provider's access and use. The bond may be in the form of a construction
bond issued by a Best A-rated company as approved on the recommendation
of the City Controller and/or as approved on the recommendation of the City
Controller and/or cash or letter of credit in a form as approved by the City
Controller.
§ 310-14. Relocation or removal.
No telecommunications system or equipment may be relocated or removed
unless plans showing the proposed relocated site are submitted and filed
with the City and approved by the Building Department, which shall not
unreasonably refuse to approve any such relocation or removal. Any and
all rights-of-way shall be restored in a reasonable manner forthwith to
substantially the same condition which was existing prior to such relocation
or removal.
§ 310-10 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 310-15
310:799
§ 310-15. Penalties.
Any person violating the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be
subject to penalties as provided in this Code for violation of a
misdemeanor.222
§ 310-16. Severability.
In the event any section, paragraph, sentence, or word of this chapter shall
be declared for any reason invalid, all other provisions shall remain in full
force and effect.
§ 310-17. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part thereof in conflict is expressly repealed.
§ 310-18. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon adoption and
publication.
Chapter 313
TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages by
minors — See Ch. 71, Art. III.
Controlled substances — See Ch. 109.
Minors — See Ch. 197.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 217.
§ 313-0. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Roseville Tobacco
Products and Vapor Products Ordinance."
§ 313-1. Purpose and findings.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the property and persons in the City by prohibiting persons
under 18 years of age from possessing tobacco products and vapor
products and prohibiting the sale of tobacco products and vapor
products to persons under 18 years of age.
B. Persons under age 18 are prohibited by law from purchasing or
possessing cigarettes and other tobacco products, and retailers are
prohibited from selling them to minors. However, tobaccoless products,
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 310-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 313-1
310:800
commonly referred to as "electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "ecigars,"
"e-cigarillos," "e-pipes," "e-hookahs," or "electronic nicotine
delivery systems," allow the user to simulate cigarette smoking and
ingest nicotine. These products may be purchased by minors and are
being marketed without age restrictions or health warnings and come
in different flavors that appeal to young people.
C. Studies by the FDA have determined that e-cigarettes can increase
nicotine addiction among young people and contain chemical
ingredients known to be harmful, which may expose users and the
public to potential health risks. The use of e-cigarettes and similar
devices has increased significantly in recent years, as evidenced by the
fact that:
(1) Between 2011 and 2012, the percentage of all youth in grades 6 to
12 who had tried electronic smoking devices doubled.
(2) 6.8% of all youth between sixth and 12th grade report trying
electronic smoking devices.
(3) 10% of high school students have tried electronic smoking devices.
(4) 9.3% of youth who have used electronic smoking devices have
never smoked conventional cigarettes.
(5) Between 2010 and 2011, rates of both awareness and use of
unregulated electronic smoking devices by adults also increased
significantly.
(6) The 2014 survey conducted by Monitoring the Future, released on
December 16, 2014, by the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
revealed recent use by 8.7% of eighth graders, 16.2% of 10th
graders, and 17.1% of 12th graders.
D. Existing studies on electronic smoking devices' vapor emissions and
cartridge contents have found a number of dangerous substances,
including:
(1) Chemicals known to cause cancer, such as formaldehyde,
acetaldehyde, lead, nickel, and chromium.
(2) PM2.5, acrolein, tin, toluene, and aluminum, which are associated
with a range of negative health effects such as skin, eye, and
respiratory irritation, neurological effects, damage to reproductive
systems, and even premature death from heart attacks and stroke.
(3) Inconsistent labeling of nicotine levels in electronic smoking device
products.
(4) In one instance, diethylene glycol, an ingredient used in antifreeze
and toxic to humans.
§ 313-1 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 313-1
310:801
E. Some cartridges used by electronic smoking devices can be refilled
with liquid nicotine solution, creating the potential for exposure to
dangerous concentrations of nicotine, and as a result:
(1) In one instance, diethylene glycol, an ingredient used in antifreeze
and toxic to humans.
(2) Poisonings from electronic smoking devices have increased
dramatically in the last 3 1/2 years from "one [a month] in
September 2010 to 215 a month in February 2014."
(3) Analysis of reports of poisonings from electronic smoking devices
finds that calls reporting exposure to electronic smoking devices
are much more likely to involve adverse health effects when
compared to calls reporting exposure to conventional cigarettes.
F. Clinical studies about the safety and efficacy of these products have not
been submitted to the Food and Drug Administration for the over 400
brands of electronic smoking devices that are on the market, and for
this reason, consumers currently have no way of knowing:
(1) Whether electronic smoking devices are safe.
(2) What types or concentrations of potentially harmful chemicals the
products contain.
(3) What dose of nicotine the products deliver.
G. The World Health Organization has strongly advised consumers against
the use of electronic smoking devices until they are "deemed safe and
effective and of acceptable quality by a competent national regulatory
body."
H. The World Medical Association has determined that electronic smoking
devices "are not comparable to scientifically-proven methods of
smoking cessation" and that "neither their value as therapeutic aids for
smoking cessation nor their safety as cigarette replacements is
established."
I. In September of 2013, 40 state attorneys general (including
Michigan's) signed a letter to the Commissioner of the United States
Food and Drug Administration outlining their concerns with ecigarettes
and requesting the implementation of regulations that would
address the advertising, ingredients, and sale to minors of e-cigarettes
at the federal level.
J. It is the intent of the City Council, in enacting this chapter, to provide
for the public health, safety, and welfare by facilitating uniform and
consistent enforcement of smoke-free air laws; by reducing the
potential for renormalizing smoking in public places and places of
employment; by reducing the potential for children to associate the use
of electronic smoking devices with a normative or healthy lifestyle; and
§ 313-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 313-1
310:802
§ 313-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of construction and application of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply:
MINOR — An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
PERSON WHO SELLS VAPOR PRODUCTS AT RETAIL — A person whose
ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of
vapor products.
PERSON WHO SELLS TOBACCO PRODUCTS AT RETAIL — A person whose
ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of
tobacco products subject to state sales tax.
POSSESS A TOBACCO PRODUCT OR VAPOR PRODUCT — Shall mean
either actual physical control of the tobacco product or vapor product
without necessarily owning that product, or the right to control the product
even though it is in a different room or place than where the person is
physically located.
PUBLIC PLACE — A public street, sidewalk, or park or any area open to the
general public, a publicly owned or operated building or premises, or in a
public place of business.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — A product that contains tobacco and is intended for
human consumption, including but not limited to cigarettes, noncigarette
smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are defined in
Section 2 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act,224 cigars, chewing tobacco,
and flavored tobacco (shisha). "Tobacco product" does not include a vapor
product or a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States
Food and Drug Administration.
USE OF A TOBACCO PRODUCT OR VAPOR PRODUCT — To smoke, chew,
suck, inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco product or vapor product.
VAPOR PRODUCT — A noncombustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other
by prohibiting the sale or distribution of electronic smoking devices to
minors.
K. Therefore, the City Council determines that prohibiting the sale, giving,
or furnishing of e-cigarettes to minors and prohibiting the purchase,
possession, or use of e-cigarettes by minors is in the City's best
interests and will promote the public health, safety, and welfare. For
purposes of this chapter, the City is adopting the term "vapor product"
to address e-cigarettes and all similar devices because this term has
been defined by the Michigan House and Senate in Senate Bills 667 and
668, enrolled in June of 2014, as part of proposed amendments to the
Youth Tobacco Act, being Public Act 31 of 1915.223
223. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.641 et seq.
224. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 205.421 et seq.
§ 313-1 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 313-2
310:803
electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that
can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form.
"Vapor product" includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and a vapor cartridge
or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. "Vapor product" does
not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States
Food and Drug Administration.
§ 313-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. Subject to Subsection C of this section, a minor shall not do any of the
following:
(1) Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco product or vapor
product.
(2) Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco product or vapor product.
(3) Use a tobacco product or vapor product in a public place.
(4) Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of age that is
false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age for the
purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or
attempting to possess a tobacco product or vapor product.
B. An individual who violates Subsection A of this section is subject to the
following:
(1) The first violation is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a
fine of $500 for each violation, except that the fine will be $50 for
each violation cited on a single municipal civil infraction citation if
the individual completes a health promotion and risk reduction
program approved by the Police Department or 39th District Court,
either within 30 days of receiving the citation or prior to entering a
plea of responsibility at the district court.
(2) A second violation or subsequent violation shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine up to $500. The court may order the individual
to complete a health promotion and risk reduction program and
perform not more than 40 hours of community service.
C. Subsection A of this section does not apply to a minor participating in
any of the following:
(1) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
a tobacco product or vapor product under the direction of the
minor's employer and with the prior approval of the local
prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal
enforcement action.
§ 313-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 313-3
310:804
§ 313-4. Parental responsibility.
A primary caretaker having custody or control of a minor who violates
§ 313-3 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and a fine of
$500 for knowingly allowing or, through lack of supervision, allowing the
minor to violate § 313-3. The fine will be $50 if the primary caretaker
completes a health promotion and risk reduction program approved by the
Police Department or 39th District Court, either within 30 days of receiving
the citation or prior to entering a plea of responsibility at the district court.
§ 313-5. Sales of individual cigarettes.
(2) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
a tobacco product or vapor product under the direction of the state
police or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action,
unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of the
tobacco product or vapor product by the minor was not under the
direction of the state police or the local police agency and was not
part of the undercover operation.
(3) Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to purchase
tobacco products for the purpose of satisfying federal substance
abuse block grant youth tobacco access requirements, if the
compliance checks are conducted under the direction of a
substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in the Public
Health Code, 1978 P.A. 368, MCLA 333.6103,225 and with the prior
approval of the state police or a local police agency.
D. Subsection A of this section does not apply to the handling or
transportation of a tobacco product or vapor product by a minor under
the terms of that minor's employment.
E. This section does not prohibit an individual from being charged with,
convicted of, or sentenced for any other violation of law that arises out
of the violation of Subsection A of this section.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (B) of this section, a person
who sells tobacco products at retail shall not sell a cigarette separately
from its package.
B. Subsection A of this section does not apply to a person who sells
tobacco products at retail in a tobacco specialty retail store or other
retail store that deals exclusively in the sale of tobacco products and
smoking paraphernalia.
C. A person who violates Subsection A of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense.
225. Editor's Note: MCLA § 333.6103 was repealed by P.A. 2012, No. 500, § 1(a), immediately
effective 12-28-2012.
§ 313-3 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 313-6
310:805
§ 313-6. Furnishing to minors.
A. A person shall not sell, give, or furnish a tobacco product or vapor
product to a minor, including, but not limited to, through a vending
machine. A person who violates this subsection or Subsection H of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than
$50 for each violation.
B. A person who sells tobacco products or vapor products at retail shall
post, in a place close to the point of sale and conspicuous to both
employees and customers, a sign that includes the following statement:
The purchase of a tobacco product or vapor product by a minor under
18 years of age and the provision of a tobacco product or vapor product
to a minor are prohibited by law. A minor who unlawfully purchases or
uses a tobacco product or vapor product is subject to criminal penalties.
C. If the sign required under Subsection B of this section is more than six
feet from the point of sale, it shall be 5 1/2 inches by 8 1/2 inches and
the statement required under Subsection B shall be printed in thirty-sixpoint
boldfaced type. If the sign required under Subsection B is six feet
or less from the point of sale, it shall be two inches by four inches and
the statement required under Subsection B shall be printed in twentypoint
boldfaced type.
D. The signs required by Subsection C of this section may be procured
from the Department of Community Health pursuant to state law. The
seller may add the "vapor product" language to the sign if the
Department of Community Health does not or will not include it.
E. It is an affirmative defense to a charge under Subsection A of this
section that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and
continues to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of tobacco
products and vapor products to persons under 18 years of age and that
the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy. A defendant
who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense described in
this subsection shall file and serve notice of the defense, in writing, with
the court and serve a copy of the notice on the City Attorney. The
defendant shall serve the notice not less than 14 days before the date
set for trial.
F. If the City Attorney proposes to offer testimony to rebut the affirmative
defense described in Subsection E of this section, the City Attorney
shall file a notice of rebuttal, in writing, with the court and serve a copy
of the notice on the defendant. The City Attorney shall serve the notice
not less than seven days before the date set for trial and shall include in
the notice the name and address of each rebuttal witness.
G. Subsection A of this section does not apply to the handling or
transportation of a tobacco product or vapor product by a minor under
the terms of the minor's employment.
§ 313-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § 313-6
310:806
Chapter 316
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND STREET SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 264.
Street name signs — See Ch. 294, § 294-24.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 340.
§ 316-1. Tampering and removal prohibited.
No person shall tamper with, damage, deface, destroy or remove any traffic
control device, traffic control sign or street sign located on public property
or public rights-of-way within the City of Roseville.
§ 316-2. Illegal possession prohibited.
No person shall possess any traffic control device, traffic control sign or
street sign unless it can be proven that any such traffic control device or
sign has been obtained legally.
§ 316-3. Violations and penalties.226
A person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
H. Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a vapor product to
an individual, a person shall verify that the individual is at least 18
years of age by doing one of the following:
(1) If the individual appears to be under 27 years of age, examining a
government-issued photographic identification that establishes
that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(2) For sales made by the internet or other remote sales method,
performing an age verification through an independent, third-party
age verification service that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that is
regularly used by government agencies and businesses for the
purpose of age and identity verification to the personal information
entered by the individual during the ordering process that
establishes that the individual is 18 years of age or older.
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 313-6 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND STREET § 316-3
316:807
Chapter 324
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 103.
Posting notices on trees — See Ch. 165.
Pavement damage caused by trees — See Ch.
290, § 290-27.
Uncontrolled growth and trimming of
trees — See Ch. 364.
§ 324-1. Authority of City Manager; appeal.
§ 324-2. Interference with city forestry operations.
§ 324-3. List of official street tree species.
The species set forth in this section shall constitute the official street tree
species for the City of Roseville. Species other than those included in this
section may not be planted as street trees without written permission of the
Director of Public Works. The minimum diameter for each tree planted shall
be two inches in diameter at one foot above ground with a minimum height
of eight feet.
A. The City Manager or designee shall have authority over all trees
growing on public lands under city jurisdiction. The City Manager shall
assign the responsibility to the Director of Public Works and Public
Works Department to implement and carry out a plan and program for
the care, preservation, trimming, pruning, planting, removing, or
similar practice for these public trees.
B. Persons aggrieved by a ruling, regulation, charge or other public-treerelated
practice by the Director of Public Works or Public Works
Department employees shall have direct access and appeal rights to the
City Manager or designee. The City Manager or designee may confirm,
reinforce, modify or repeal any such ruling, directive or charge.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with, or
to cause, authorize or procure any interference with, the Director of
Public Works or in any forestry operations or in removing any device
attached to any tree, plant or shrub. It shall also be unlawful for any
person to procure any interference with the Director of Public Works or
any employees or agents while they are engaged in the execution of
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit a public
hearing or the permitting of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the
owner of any property within the city.
§ 316-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 324-3
324:808
§ 324-4. Location of trees.
A. Large trees (50 or more feet):
(1) English oak (Quercus robur).
(2) White ash (Fraxinus americana).
(3) Littleleaf Linden (Tilia cordata).
(4) Emerald Queen Norway maple (Acer platanoides/Emerald Queen).
(5) Autumn Blaze Freeman maple (Acer x freemani/Jeffersed).
B. Medium trees (30 to 50 feet):
(1) Redspire pear (Pyrus calleryana Redspire).
(2) Bradford pear (Pyrus calleryana Bradford).
(3) Sunburst locust (Gleditsia triacanthos Sunburst).
(4) Crimson King maple (Acer platanoides/Crimson King).
(5) Norwegian Sunset maple (Acer truncatum/Norwegian Sunset
maple).
C. Small trees (15 to 30 feet):
(1) Redbud (Cercis canadensis).
(2) Snowdrift crab (Malus snowdrift).
(3) Thornless cockspur hawthorn (Crataegus crus-galli inermis).
(4) Hedge maple (Acer campestre).
(5) Amur Maple (Acer ginnala/Tree form).
A. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in § 324-3, and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following, except as approved in writing by the
Director of Public Works:
(1) Small trees: 20 feet.
(2) Medium trees: 30 feet.
(3) Large trees: 40 feet.
B. The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes
listed in § 324-3, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following:
(1) Small trees: two feet.
§ 324-3 TREES § 324-4
324:809
§ 324-5. Tree care.
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove street
trees, park trees, plants and other vegetation within the lines of all streets,
alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, rights-of-way and public grounds as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve and enhance the symmetry
and beauty of such public grounds. The Public Works Department may
remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is
in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to public
utilities or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pest. This section shall not prohibit the planting of
street trees by adjacent property owners, provided that the selection and
location of said trees is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 324-6. Permit required.
No person shall plant, remove, prune, cut, molest, break, deface, destroy,
spray, repair or do surgery work upon any tree or part thereof or in any
manner interfere with, disturb or injure any tree that is now or may
hereafter be growing upon any public property within the city, nor shall any
chemical, either solid or fluid, seep, drain or be emptied on or about any
tree that is now or may be planted upon any public highway with the city,
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
§ 324-7. Attaching articles to trees.
No person shall be permitted to hitch any animal to any tree nor fasten
to, for the purpose of anchorage, any wire, rope, chain or cable, nor shall
any person nail, tie or in any other manner fasten any cards, signs, posters,
boards or any other article to any tree that is now or may hereafter be
growing upon any public property within the city.
§ 324-8. Pruning of branches by tree owners; pruning by city.
(2) Medium trees: three feet.
(3) Large trees: four feet.
C. No street tree shall be planted closer than 25 feet from any street
corner as measured from the point of intersecting curblines. No street
tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet from any fire hydrant.
A. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct
the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above
the surface of the street and eight feet above the surface of the
sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety
of the public.
§ 324-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 324-8
324:810
§ 324-9. Removal of dead or diseased trees on private property.
§ 324-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any lawful
order issued in pursuance of the provisions hereof shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. Imposition of any
penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not be construed as a waiver of
the right of the city to collect the costs of removal of such trees or plants
or parts thereof, repair damages and/or replace such trees or plants in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 332
USED CAR LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. 133
Licensing — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
B. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the
street from a streetlight or interferes with the visibility of any traffic
control device or sign or presents an obstruction to a public
thoroughfare, including but not limited to sidewalks, streets or alleys.
A. The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased tree or parts thereof on private property within the city when
such trees or parts thereof constitute a hazard to life and property or
harbor insects or disease that constitute a potential threat to other
trees and/or private property within the city.
B. The Director of Public Works shall send notice by first-class mail to the
owner of the private property with a copy of such notice sent by firstclass
mail to the occupant. Removal shall be done by said owners or
occupants at their expense within 30 days after the date of mailing of
notice, or sooner if conditions warrant earlier removal.
C. In the event of failure of owners or occupants to comply with such
provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and
charge the cost of removal on property owner's ad valorem real
property tax bill. In addition, the city may elect to recover such amount
through court action.
§ 324-8 USED CAR LOTS § 332-1
332:811
§ 332-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of keeping a secondhand gasoline or
motor-driven vehicle or used car lot within the city without first procuring a
license from the Roseville Police Department as herein provided.
§ 332-2. Granting of license by Police Department; fees.
The Police Department is hereby authorized, on the application of any
person of good character, to grant an annual license to engage in the
business of keeping a secondhand automobile or used car lot upon payment
to the Police Department of a sum as provided for in Chapter 133, Fees,
said license to expire upon the first day of May of the succeeding year;
provided, however, that if the Police Department refuses to issue a license,
the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Council, and upon its
approval and payment of the proper fee, the Police Department shall issue
a license.
§ 332-3. Application information.
Application for such license shall be made in writing to the Roseville Police
Department and shall set forth:
§ 332-4. Number of lots limited; conformance with zoning and
building regulations.
No person so licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license,
keep within said city more than one used car lot. Used car lots must be on
locations approved by the city and in conformity with the Zoning Ordinance
of the city.227 Each used car lot shall have upon the premises at which it is
operated a suitable building with sanitary facilities which shall conform to
the Building Code of the city.228
A. The full name, age and residence of the applicant.
B. The site upon which the business is to be conducted.
C. The date of license from the Secretary of State of the State of Michigan
authorizing the conduct of a business in used automobiles.
D. The type of building to be erected or used.
E. Whether or not the applicant was ever convicted of a felony or has a
police record.
F. Any other information deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of
this chapter.
227. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
228. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Building Construction.
§ 332-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 332-5
332:812
§ 332-5. Book of purchases and sales to be kept.
Every person so licensed shall, at the place of business named in said
license, keep a book in which shall be written in ink at the time of purchase
or at the time of selling of any secondhand or used automobile a description
thereof the name, age, address and personal description of the person or
persons from whom such purchase was made or to whom such sale is
made and the day and hour of such purchase or sale. Such book at all
times shall be open to the inspection of any city official. Such book shall
be substantially bound and in a size not less than six inches in length and
breadth and in which shall be legibly written in the English language the
amount paid for each and every automobile purchased and for each and
every automobile sold. No entry in such book shall be erased, obliterated,
altered or defaced.
§ 332-6. Minimum length of possession.
No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall display for
sale or remove from his or her place of business any such secondhand
automobile or used car until the same shall have been in his or her
possession at least 48 hours.
§ 332-7. Operation on Sundays.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to carry on or
engage in the business of operating a used car lot or in any work pertaining
thereto on the first day of the week, commonly called "Sunday."
§ 332-8. Location of vehicles for sale; repairs on premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to display or
offer for sale any motor-driven vehicle within five feet of the lot line facing
on any highway or street, and it is further provided that no licensee shall
dismantle any car or operate a repair shop on the used car lot or premises.
However, repairs necessary to recondition those vehicles to be sold on the
premises may be made upon the premises subject to proof of ownership at
the time of repair by the licensee, in accordance with § 332-5 of this chapter.
§ 332-9. Violations and penalties.229
Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I.
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-5 USED CAR LOTS § 332-9
332:813
Chapter 336
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 203. Property maintenance — See Ch. 225.
§ 336-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK AUTOMOBILES OR MOTOR VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle not
licensed for use upon the highways of the State of Michigan for a period in
excess of 30 days or which has been inoperative for any reason for a period
in excess of 30 days.
§ 336-2. Declaration of nuisance.
All junk automobiles or motor vehicles, or parts thereof, or any other
materials, refuse or debris lying upon any property, either public or private,
relating to such automobiles, are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
§ 336-3. Duty to remove; notice.
It shall be the duty of every owner, possessor or occupier of land, or of
every person or persons, firm or corporation in charge of lands in the City
of Roseville, upon which any of the said junk automobiles or motor vehicles
or parts thereof are permitted to remain, to cause the same to be removed
within 10 days after notice to the owner, possessor or occupier of the land.
Said notice shall be mailed by the City Manager or designee to the last
known address of the parties, providing 10 days' notice for removal, and
shall be mailed by ordinary United States Mail.
§ 336-4. Removal by city; costs.
Should the owner or occupant of any premises fail to remove said nuisance
after proper notification, then the city shall cause to have the said nuisance
removed, and any costs incurred in connection therewith shall be a lien
upon the premises, and if not paid by October 1 of each year shall be added
to the next city tax statement.
§ 336-5. Violations and penalties.230
The owner, possessor or occupier of land within the City of Roseville, or
any person or persons, firm or corporation having charge of such land, who
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-9 ROSEVILLE CODE § 336-5
336:814
shall fall to conform to this chapter, shall, upon conviction before any court
of competent jurisdiction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 340
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Violations Bureau — See Ch. 61.
Bicycles — See Ch. 82.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Operation of emergency vehicles — See Ch.
144, § 144-10.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 158.
Ice cream vending vehicles — See Ch. 176.
Motor carrier safety — See Ch. 199.
Parking lots and garages — See Ch. 211.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 213.
Parking of recreational equipment — See Ch.
230.
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 280.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 308.
Traffic control devices and street signs — See
Ch. 316.
Used car lots — See Ch. 332.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 336.
§ 336-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 336-5
336:815

ARTICLE I
License Plates
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 340 of the 1984
Code]
§ 340-1. Vehicles to be equipped with license plates.
No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle on the streets of this
governmental unit without having his or her motor vehicle equipped with
license plates as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300, Public
Acts of 1949, as amended.231
§ 340-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person convicted of violating this article shall be punished as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
231. Editor's Note: See MSA § 9.1801 et seq.; MCL § 257.1 et seq.
§ 340-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-2
336:817

ARTICLE II
Soliciting Rides
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 340 of the 1984
Code]
§ 340-3. Soliciting rides or business prohibited.
No person shall stand on or in close proximity to a street or highway for the
purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of
any vehicle.
§ 340-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person convicted of violating this article shall be punished as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 340-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-4
336:819

ARTICLE III
Commercial Vehicles
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. III of Ch. 340 of the
1984 Code]
§ 340-5. Effectiveness of regulations contingent upon erection of
signs; exceptions. [Amended 8-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1040; 5-28-1996
by Ord. No. 1080]
Whenever, by this article or any other ordinance of this City, any parking
time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, no
such regulations shall be effective unless appropriate signs giving notice
thereof are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense, except
that no such signs need be erected to make effective ordinances regulating
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles when these ordinances do not
differ from the provisions of Act No. 300, Public Acts of 1949, as amended.
Further, there shall be no requirement for the posting of signs prohibiting
commercial vehicles from being parked or stored on residentially zoned
property.
§ 340-6. Restrictions on parking of commercial vehicles; special
parking permits. [Amended 8-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1040; 5-28-1996
by Ord. No. 1080; 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1089]
A. It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle on any street in the
City between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for a period longer
than 30 minutes. A “commercial vehicle” is defined as a vehicle with
any of the following characteristics:
(1) Vehicles with capacity in excess of 3/4 of a ton used in commercial
activities, such as a business or trade, by the owner, operator or
some other person, except for one-ton pickups used by an owner or
occupant of residential property within the City, if said pickup is for
noncommercial use only.
(2) Any vehicle or trailer, regardless of size, whether attached or
unattached, that is used for the storage of tools, boats, vehicles,
equipment, machinery, merchandise, inventory, supplies or waste
by-products, including but not limited to leaves, clippings, paper
and/or building materials.
(3) Any stake truck (with or without stakes in place), step van,
semitrailer/tractor or semitrailer, ice cream truck, dump truck,
vendor's truck, catering truck, tow truck, cube van or car hauler or
utility truck 5,000 pounds or over.
B. The Chief of Police or his/her designee, for good cause, may grant
special parking permits permitting additional parking of commercial
vehicles during the above hours, provided that each permit is granted
for a definite period of time.
§ 340-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-7
336:821
§ 340-7. (Reserved)232
§ 340-8. Prima facie presumptions. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 1080]
In any proceeding for violation of this article where a motor vehicle displays
a commercial license registration plate, such registration shall constitute a
prima facie presumption that it is a commercial vehicle at the time of any
alleged violation. In any proceeding for violation of the weight-limitation
provisions of this article, the indicated weight on the vehicle's registration
shall constitute a prima facie presumption of the weight of the vehicle at
the time of any alleged violation, and any gross vehicle weight classification
indicated on the vehicle's registration or plate shall constitute a prima facie
presumption that the weight of the vehicle was within such classification at
the time of any alleged violation.
§ 340-9. Posting of signs.
This article shall not become effective until such signs as are required by
the Michigan State Motor Vehicle Code are posted at the appropriate places
on highways at the corporate limits of the City, indicating that the parking
of commercial vehicles is limited to 30 minutes between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m.
§ 340-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1080; amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
Violation of this article shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
232. Editor's Note: At the request of the City, former § 340-7, Parking on residentially zoned
property, added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1080, was deleted as being covered in the Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 340-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 340-10
336:822
ARTICLE IV
Private Parking Spaces; Parking for the Handicapped
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. IV of Ch. 340 of the
1984 Code]
§ 340-11. Parking and use of a parking lot other than intended
prohibited. [Amended 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 1163]
§ 340-12. Sign considered evidence of notice. [Amended 5-11-1993
by Ord. No. 1036]
Display on the premises of a sign of reasonable size of not less than six
square feet clearly readable stating that the premises and/or the parking
spaces are restricted for certain specific purposes as stated therein shall
be deemed as prima facie evidence of notice to any person parking on the
premises. Signs for parking lot spaces designated for the handicapped are
excepted from the minimum size requirements of this article.
§ 340-13. Parking in handicapped spaces.
Every vehicle parked in parking lot spaces designated for the physically
handicapped shall be equipped with special plates or serial-numbered
registration displayed on the handicapped person's vehicle. Any owner or
operator of a motor vehicle who fails to produce at the City of Roseville
Police Department evidence of his or her physical handicap by way of
special license plates, registration or insurance or other competent
evidence, when requested to do so or within 72 hours thereafter, shall be
deemed to be in violation of this article.
§ 340-14. (Reserved)233
§ 340-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-4-1993 by Ord. No.
1033; 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 1036; 6-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1037;
5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 1163]
Any person violating provisions of this article shall be deemed to have
committed a civil infraction.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any
private property or in any private parking space without the express or
implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder,
occupant, signee, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property or parking
space.
B. It shall be unlawful for any persons to use a parking lot other than
intended without the express or implied consent, authorization or
ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, signee, lessee, agent, or
trustee of such property or parking space.
233. Editor's Note: Former § 340-14, Complaints, was repealed 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 1163.
§ 340-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-15
336:823

ARTICLE V
Parking in Commercial Areas
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. V of Ch. 340 of the 1984
Code; amended in its entirety 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 1163]
§ 340-16. Parking and use of lot other than intended prohibited
when businesses are closed; exception.
No person shall park a vehicle, stop, stand, or use a parking lot other than
intended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or a traffic control
device, in any of the following places: in any area designated for the parking
of motor vehicles in commercial areas where the business establishment
being served by such parking area is closed and not rendering service. The
prohibition in this article shall not apply to vehicles which are parked or
using the lot and such areas with the permission of the owners or which are
parked while servicing the buildings or premises.
§ 340-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating provisions of this article shall be deemed to have
committed a civil infraction.
§ 340-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-17
336:825

ARTICLE VI
Violations of Parking Regulations
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as § 142-11 of Ch. 142 of the
1984 Code]
§ 340-18. Presumption of ownership.
In any proceedings for violation of the parking provisions of this chapter
or any parking rule, the registration plate displayed on such motor vehicle
shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of
such motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed such motor vehicle
at a point where such violation occurred.
§ 340-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-18
336:827

ARTICLE VII
Winter Parking
[Adopted 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 1216234]
§ 340-19. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as the “City of Roseville Winter Parking
Ordinance.”
§ 340-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents and property owners in the City from hazards
caused by the leaving of unattended vehicles parked on a public street or
private road during the winter, including snow emergencies; such vehicles
impede the safe travel upon the streets of the City, as a result of the
accumulation of ice and snow which occurs during the winter. This article
is in accordance with Act No. 246 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945, as
amended, and pursuant to the general powers of the Home Rule City Act, as
amended, and the Michigan Constitution.
§ 340-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A vehicle of the Fire Department;
a police vehicle; an ambulance; a privately owned motor vehicle of a
volunteer or paid firefighter; or a privately owned motor vehicle of a
volunteer ambulance driver or a licensed ambulance driver or attendant as
is authorized by the Department of State Police.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A bus; a school bus; a school
transportation vehicle; a motor vehicle, except a motor home having a
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more; a motor vehicle
towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000
pounds; or a motor vehicle carrying hazardous material and on which is
required to be posted a placard as defined and required under 49 CFR
Parts 100 to 199. A commercial motor vehicle does not include a vehicle
used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for
nonbusiness purposes.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every motor vehicle which is used for the
transportation of passengers for hire or which is constructed or used for
transportation of goods, wares or merchandise; and/or all motor vehicles
designed and used for drawing other vehicles and which are not so
constructed to carry any load thereof either independently or as any part of
the weight of the vehicle or load so drawn.
234. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. VII, Winter
Parking, adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. VII of Ch. 340 of the 1984 Code, as
amended.
§ 340-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-21
336:829
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires
but which is not operated upon rails.
POLICE OFFICER — Every Sheriff or Sheriff’s Deputy; officer of the Police
Department of any city, village or township; any officer of the State Police;
or any peace officer who is trained and certified pursuant to Act No. 203 of
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965 [MCL 28.601 et seq., MSA 4.450(1) et
seq.], as amended.
PRIVATE ROAD — A privately owned and maintained road which allows
access to more than one residence or place of business, which is normally
open to the public, and on which persons other than the owners may travel.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn on a highway, except devices which are moved
exclusively by human power or which are used exclusively on stationary
rails or tracks, and except for a mobile home as defined in Section 2 of
Act No. 419 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 [MCL 125.1102, MSA
19.855(2)], as amended.
§ 340-22. Winter parking.
No person shall park any motor vehicle on any residential street within the
City of Roseville between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. between
Monday and Friday if there is snow or ice on the ground. This parking
prohibition on residential streets for motor vehicles shall not apply to the
Christmas holiday season from 12:01 a.m. December 24 through 12:01 a.m.
January 2.
§ 340-23. Declaration of snow emergency.
The City Manager, or his/her designated agent, may declare a snow
emergency when, in his/her judgment, the snow or ice has accumulated or is
significantly likely to accumulate to such an extent as to impede safe travel
upon the streets of the City. A declaration of snow emergency shall be made
in writing and filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall time-stamp the
declaration of snow emergency. During the regular business hours of the
City offices, the snow emergency shall take effect one hour after such timestamping
and filing with the City Clerk. At all other times, the declaration
shall be filed at the beginning of the next business day at the City offices,
but the snow emergency shall take effect one hour after its publication to
City residents. Upon declaration of a snow emergency, the City Manager or
his/her designated agent shall immediately publicize the snow emergency
and the parking prohibition in a manner reasonably calculated to inform
City residents of their responsibilities.
§ 340-24. Duration of parking prohibition in snow emergency.
§ 340-21 ROSEVILLE CODE § 340-24
336:830
§ 340-24.1. Abandoned and disabled vehicles.
Whenever a vehicle becomes disabled for any reason on any street during
a parking prohibition or snow emergency, the owner or person operating
the vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed
off the street. No person shall abandon or leave the vehicle on the street,
except for the purpose of securing immediate assistance; in such cases,
the person securing assistance shall leave the vehicle only for the time
absolutely necessary to make contact for assistance and shall return to the
vehicle immediately thereafter without delay.
§ 340-24.2. Impounding vehicles.
A police officer is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle if parked on any
street during a declared snow emergency and to transport the vehicle to
an impound facility utilized by the Police Department, Macomb County
Sheriff’s Department and/or State Police. Towing and impound fees shall be
charged to the owner of the vehicle impounded.
§ 340-24.3. Presumption of ownership.
Proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint in violation of
this article, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint
was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall
constitute a presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle in violation of this article. The
failure of a defendant to receive notice of a snow emergency shall not be a
defense.
§ 340-24.4. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to park a commercial vehicle,
commercial motor vehicle, motor vehicle, or vehicle upon a public street
or private roadway in the City during a declared snow emergency, except
A. The snow emergency parking prohibition shall begin when the snow
emergency takes effect, one hour after the City Manager or his/her
designated agent has declared a snow emergency. The prohibition shall
end when both the following conditions have been satisfied:
(1) The snow, sleet, or ice has stopped; and
(2) An individual street has been completely snowplowed by the City
from curb to curb.
B. The parking prohibition shall expire 36 hours after the weather
conditions creating the emergency have stopped, unless the snow
emergency is extended by action of the City Manager or his/her
designated agent. Such an extension shall require that the procedures
outlined in § 340-23 of this article be repeated.
§ 340-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-24.4
336:831
as otherwise provided in this article. Such prohibition is not applicable to
authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 340-24.5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 1217]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of § 340-24.4 shall be
responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a penalty not to exceed $50.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of § 340-22 shall be responsible
for a civil infraction and subject to a penalty not to exceed $20. Any person
accused of a violation of this article may settle and compromise the claim
against him or her for such illegal parking by paying to the 39 District
Court 1/2 of the fine stated herein by the close of the second business day
of issuance of the parking violation ticket or by appearing in person at
the 39 District Court to make said payment; or, in lieu of settlement and
compromise as provided herein, the person should appear at the date and
time specified on the parking ticket in the 39 District Court.
§ 340-24.4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 340-24.5
336:832
ARTICLE VIII
Tow-Away Zones
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. VIII of Ch. 340 of the
1984 Code]
§ 340-25. Parking in posted areas prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or
direction of a police officer or a traffic control device, at any place on any
public street in the City of Roseville posted for "no parking, tow-away zone."
§ 340-26. Removal and impoundment of illegally parked vehicles.
Any unattended motor vehicle found parked at any time in violation of this
article may, by or under the direction of any officer of the Roseville Police
Department, either by towing or otherwise, be removed or conveyed to and
impounded in any place designated by the Roseville City Council.
§ 340-27. Recovery of impounded vehicles.
A. When a motor vehicle is removed and impounded pursuant to this
article, such vehicle shall be surrendered to the duly registered owner
thereof when:
(1) Such person deposits at the Roseville Police Department with one
of the authorized personnel there the title to the impounded vehicle
issued to such person under the laws of the state where issued;
(2) Such person deposits at the Roseville Police Department with one
of the authorized personnel there a cash bond in the sum of $50;
provided, however, that if the face amount of the fine or fines, plus
any towing fees and storage fees, exceeds the sum of $50, then the
cash bond shall be equal to the amount of the fine or fines, plus the
accrued storage fees and towing fees;
(3) Such person (but only if the same person charged with the parking
violation) signs and executes a form prepared by the City Attorney
for the purpose of waiving trial, admitting responsibility to the
parking offense charged and agreeing to and paying the parking
fine, towing fee and storage fees incurred for the period of
impoundment prior to the release of the vehicle from
impoundment. The personnel of the Roseville Police Department
are hereby authorized to accept such waivers of trial and pleas of
responsibility to the parking offense charged and for entering of
same in the proper court of competent jurisdiction, and the
personnel of the Roseville Police Department shall be authorized to
collect all such fines and fees and issue receipts therefor to the
person making payment of same; or
§ 340-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-27
336:833
§ 340-28. Notice to be posted.
The following notice, printed in eighteen-point news Gothic bold type, shall
be posted in all places to which members of the public come to recover
removed vehicles:
"ATTENTION: When a motor vehicle is removed and impounded pursuant
to this ordinance, such vehicle shall be surrendered to the duly registered
owner thereof when:
"a) Such person deposits at the Roseville Police Department with one
of the authorized personnel there the title to the impounded vehicle
issued to such person under the laws of the state where issued; or
"b) Such person deposits at the Roseville Police Department with one
of the authorized personnel there a cash bond in the sum of $50;
provided, however, that if the face amount of the fine or fines, plus any
towing fees and storage fees, exceeds the sum of $50, then the cash
bond shall be equal to the amount of the fine or fines plus accrued
storage fees and towing fees; or
(4) Such person demands a hearing in the 39th Judicial District Court
on the parking violation citation, which hearing must be held after
the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of the
vehicle notifies the Clerk of the 39th Judicial District Court of the
intent to challenge the citation and as soon as the police officer
issuing the parking violation citation and a District Judge or
Magistrate is available for a hearing. In the event that the 39th
Judicial District Court dismisses the citation and holds the owner
not responsible and said owner's car is in storage on the date of the
aforementioned hearing, upon receipt of an order of dismissal from
the 39th Judicial District Court, the persons authorized to hold the
removed vehicle shall immediately release it to the owner or other
person lawfully entitled to possession. In those cases where,
pursuant to the authority of this subsection, a removed vehicle is
released to the owner or other person lawfully entitled to
possession, then the City of Roseville shall bear the expense for
towing and storage not to exceed 72 hours' storage fees. It shall be
the duty of the 39th Judicial District Court Clerk to furnish to the
Chief of Police an account of the final disposition of any case heard
under the hearing procedures set forth in this subsection within 24
hours after disposition thereof.
B. In the event that the person whose vehicle has been impounded
deposits the title to the impounded vehicle, or deposits a bond,
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection A(1) and (2) hereof, then and
in that event, such person shall be issued a summons to appear for trial
in accordance with the Traffic Code of the City of Roseville in the same
manner and under the same procedures employed for any other traffic
violation.
§ 340-27 ROSEVILLE CODE § 340-28
336:834
"c) Such person (but only if the same person charged with the parking
violation) signs and executes a form prepared by the City Attorney for
the purpose of waiving trial, admitting responsibility to the parking
offense charged and agreeing to and paying the parking fine, towing
fee and storage fees incurred for the period of impoundment prior to
the release of the vehicle from impoundment. The personnel of the
Roseville Police Department are authorized to accept such waivers of
trial and pleas of responsibility to the parking offense charged, for
entering of same in the proper court of competent jurisdiction; and the
personnel of the Roseville Police Department are authorized to collect
all such fines and fees and issue receipts therefor to the person making
payment of same.
"d) You may demand a hearing on the parking violation citation giving rise
to the removal of your vehicle. A hearing must be held when the owner
or other person lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle notifies
the Clerk of the 39th Judicial District Court of the intent to challenge
the citation and as soon as the police officer issuing the parking
violation citation and a District Judge or magistrate is available to
appear at the hearing. In the event the 39th Judicial District Court
dismisses the citation, you may recover your vehicle, and the City
of Roseville will pay the tow fees and up to 72 hours' storage fees.
You should appear to request a hearing at the 39th Judicial District
Court between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday."
§ 340-29. Notification of owner.
If the motor vehicle impounded has not been reclaimed within 24 hours of
the time of its impoundment, the City of Roseville Police Department shall
notify the vehicle's last owner of record (as determined by the license tags
thereof) of the place of impoundment of the vehicle.
§ 340-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person found responsible for violation of this article shall be guilty
of a civil infraction and shall be assessed actual towing fee charges and
actual civil storage fee charges for each day that the vehicle involved was
impounded, together with such court costs as may be imposed by the court
in accordance with law.
§ 340-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-30
336:835

ARTICLE IX
Vehicles and Traffic Code
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. IX of Ch. 340 of the
1984 Code; amended in its entirety 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 1181235]
§ 340-31. Adoption of state regulations by reference.
A. The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL §§ 257.1 through
257.923, and the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and
Villages as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of
State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969,
1969 PA 306, MCL §§ 24.201 through 24.328, and made effective
October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the
Motor Vehicle Code or the Uniform Traffic Code when they are
promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by
reference. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 1276]
B. References in Code. References in the Michigan Vehicle Code and
Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages to "local
authorities" or "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Roseville.
[Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 1276]
C. The City of Roseville Clerk shall publish this article in the manner
required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the
purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the Uniform Traffic Code for
Cities, Townships, and Villages, and the fact that a complete copy of the
Codes are available to the public at the office of the Clerk for
inspection. [Amended 11-11-2014 by Ord. No. 1276]
D. Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL
§ 257.625, is hereby adopted by reference, including the provisions that
provide a violation of this ordinance and this specific section is
punishable by one or more of the following: [Added 3-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 1250]
(1) Community service for not more than 360 hours;
(2) Imprisonment for not more than 180 days;
(3) A fine of not less than $200 or more than $700;
(4) Any and all penalties and provisions as provided by the Michigan
Vehicle Code and/ or the ordinances of the City of Roseville,
including cost recovery.
235. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided that penalties provided by the
Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference; provided, however, that the City of
Roseville may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the
maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
§ 340-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-31
336:837

ARTICLE X
Emergency Response to Drunk Driving Accident Scenes
[Adopted 10-11-1988 as Ord. No. 980; amended 3-23-1993 by Ord.
No. 1032 (Art. XI of Ch. 340 of the 1984 Code)]
§ 340-32. Civil liability for expenses of emergency response and
prosecution for persons convicted of operating a motor vehicle
while intoxicated or visibly impaired. [Amended 7-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 1189]
A. Person liable. Any person who, while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a controlled substance, or combination thereof, or while
visibly impaired, due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor or
controlled substance, or combination thereof, operates a motor vehicle
and causes any incident resulting in an emergency response or a
prosecution pursuant to the City of Roseville Code of Ordinances is
liable to the City for the expenses of such emergency response and
prosecution.
B. Emergency response expenses. Emergency response expenses shall
include all of the following:
(1) Salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law enforcement
personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which
charges arose, including arresting a person, processing the person,
preparing reports on the incident, investigating the incident,
collecting and analyzing evidence, determining bodily alcohol
content and determining the presence of and identifying controlled
substances in the blood, breath or urine.
(2) Salary, wages or other compensation, including overtime pay of the
Fire Department and Emergency Medical Service personnel,
including volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical
service personnel for time spent in responding to and providing
fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services in relation to
the incident.
(3) The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by Fire Department
and Emergency Medical Service personnel, including volunteer
firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel.
C. Expenses of prosecution. Expenses of prosecution shall include all the
following:
(1) Costs billed or to be billed to the City for legal services associated
with the issuance of a complaint and warrant, investigation,
response to discovery, subpoenaing of witnesses, preparation for
trial, preparation of pleadings, response to motions and pleadings,
court appearances and court time, telephone calls and conferences
relating to prosecutions and any other services performed in
connection with prosecuting the person.
§ 340-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-32
336:839
§ 340-33. Definitions.
The following terms as used in this article are defined as follows:
(2) The salary and wages, including overtime pay of law enforcement
personnel, Fire Department and Emergency Medical Services
personnel, including volunteers, for preparation for and attendance
at court proceedings relating to the prosecution of the person.
D. Presumption. For purposes of this section, any presumption set forth
and contained within the Code of Ordinances for the City of Roseville
relating to the prosecution of persons for operating while intoxicated or
operating while visibly impaired, including any amendments or
revisions to the Code of Ordinances, shall be applicable for determining
liability pursuant to this section.
E. Nature of liability. Liability pursuant to this division shall be of a civil
nature. Such liability shall not be construed to limit or restrict the
liability the Court may otherwise impose upon such a person pursuant
to any and all applicable law, including MCL § 769.1f. Such liability
shall not reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines
and/or costs, imposed by a Judge or Magistrate on any person who may
be convicted for the offense of operating while intoxicated or operating
while visibly impaired or any similar offense.
F. Schedule of cost. The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule
of costs, which schedule of costs shall be set forth and the nature and
amount of costs included within the expense of an emergency response
or prosecution. The schedule of cost shall be available to the public
from the City Clerk and from the Police Department upon request. The
schedule of cost shall be subject to periodic review and revision.
G. Billing for expense. The Police Department shall issue a statement to
any person arrested and charged with operating while intoxicated or
operating while visibly impaired as existing pursuant to ordinances at
the time of adoption of this section or any substantially similar offense
pursuant to any revised amendment or subsequently adopted
ordinance. The bill shall be sent by first class mail or by personal
service upon the person arrested, sent to the last known address as
furnished at the time of arrest. Expense set forth in the bill is payable
within 30 days from the date of emergency response or expense of
prosecution.
H. Failure to pay. The City may commence a civil law suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover the unpaid expense of emergency
response as well as any and all costs of such litigation, including actual
attorney fees. Such remedy shall be a cumulative remedy to any and all
other available legal remedies.
§ 340-32 ROSEVILLE CODE § 340-33
336:840
EMERGENCY RESPONSE —
EXPENSE OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The costs associated with the
occurrence of an emergency response, which shall include costs associated
with the deployment and utilization of City employees, transportation,
processing and lodging of arrested subjects, a completion of arrest
procedures and bookings, the writing, filing and review of police reports,
the administration of field sobriety tests, the administration of breathalyzer
tests and the identification, recording and preservation of evidence. These
costs shall be periodically reviewed and shall be established on a peroccurrence
basis by Council resolution. Costs set forth in such resolution
shall become effective following publication in a newspaper of general
circulation.
EXPENSES OF COURT PREPARATION AND APPEARANCE — The costs
associated with the review, preparation and assembling of evidence by City
employees in preparation for a scheduled trial date and the costs of any
appearance in court for a scheduled trial date. Such expenses shall be
imposed notwithstanding that the matter is disposed of other than by trial
or adjourned on the scheduled trial date. Such costs shall be set by Council
resolution and shall become effective upon publication of such resolution in
a newspaper of general circulation.
§ 340-34. Liability for costs and expenses.
The furnishing, development or utilization of public service, police,
fire-fighting and rescue services or other services from the City to an
accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers
involved was operating the motor vehicle while vision impaired from
alcohol and/or a controlled substance.
A.
The development, furnishing or utilization of police, public service, firefighting
and rescue services involved in or incidental to a traffic stop
and arrest when the driver involved was operating a motor vehicle
while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled
substance or operating a motor vehicle while vision impaired from use
of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance.
B.
A. Any person who operates a motor vehicle while under the influence of
an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance or who operates a
motor vehicle with vision impaired from an alcoholic beverage and/or a
controlled substance which results in an emergency response shall be
responsible and/or liable for the expenses of the emergency response
and the expenses of court preparation and court appearance expense.
B. For purposes of this article, it shall be presumed that a person was
operating a motor vehicle under the influence of an alcoholic beverage
and driving with vision impaired from an alcoholic beverage if chemical
analysis of the driver's blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount
in the driver's blood exceeded .07% by weight of alcohol.
§ 340-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-35
336:841
§ 340-35. Civil liability.
Provisions of this article are construed as a civil liability only. This article
shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge or reduce criminal
liability or responsibility, including but not limited to any costs or fines
which may be imposed upon the operator of a motor vehicle while under
the influence of alcoholic beverages or a controlled substance or while
operating a motor vehicle with vision impaired from alcoholic beverages
and/or controlled substances.
§ 340-35 ROSEVILLE CODE § 340-35
336:842
ARTICLE XI
Insurance Security
[Adopted 1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 1025 (Art. I of Ch. 178A of the 1984
Code)]
§ 340-36. Nonresident owners or registrants to maintain security.
A nonresident owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle not
registered in the State of Michigan shall not operate or permit the motor
vehicle or motorcycle to be operated in the City of Roseville for an
aggregate of more than 30 days in any calendar year unless he or she
continuously maintains security for the payment of benefits pursuant to
Chapter 31 of the Michigan Insurance Code of 1956.236
§ 340-37. Violations and penalties.
An owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle with respect to
which security is required, who operates a motor vehicle or motorcycle or
permits it to be operated upon a public highway in the City of Roseville,
without having in full force and effect security complying with MCLA
§ 500.3101, 500.3102 or 500.3103, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person
who operates a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon a public highway in the
City of Roseville with the knowledge that the owner or registrant does not
have security in full force and effect is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person
convicted of a misdemeanor under this section shall be fined not less than
$200 nor more than $500, imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 340-38. Failure to produce evidence of security.
The failure of a person to produce evidence that a motor vehicle or
motorcycle has in full force and effect security complying with this article or
MCLA § 500.3101 or 500.3103, on the date of the issuance of the citation,
creates a rebuttable presumption in a prosecution under § 340-37 of this
article that the motor vehicle or motorcycle did not have in full force and
effect security complying with this article or MCLA § 500.3101 or 500.3103
on the date of the issuance of this citation.
236. Editor's Note: See MSA § 24-1100 et seq.; MCL § 500.100 et seq.
§ 340-36 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-38
336:843

ARTICLE XII
Inspection of Vehicles by Police
[Adopted 12-13-1994 as Ord. No. 1063 (Art. XII of Ch. 340 of the
1984 Code)]
§ 340-39. Vehicle equipment inspection; fee.
The Police Department for the City of Roseville may, but is not required, to
inspect vehicles at the request of owners or occupants in order to determine
whether defective equipment has been remedied. Such inspections shall
be conducted only upon the payment in advance of an inspection fee to
defray actual costs of inspection in an amount as determined periodically by
resolution of the City Council, payable to the Police Department. The Police
Department and City do not warrant or represent by any such inspection
that vehicles are free from defects or are able to be operated safely by the
performance of any such inspection.
§ 340-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 340-39
336:845
Chapter 350
WASTEWATER SYSTEM
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Water and Sewers — See Ch. 7,
Sec. 7.12.
Water system — See Ch. 14, Sec. 14.2.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 256. Disposal of wastewater from swimming
pools — See Ch. 300.
§ 350-1. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following rules of construction shall
apply:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) Words used in the singular include the plural, unless the context
clearly indicates the contrary.
(3) The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
(4) The word "may" is permissive.
(5) A word or term not interpreted or defined by this chapter shall be
used with a meaning of common or standard utilization.
B. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BUILDING — Any structure, including a mobile home, that requires a
supply of potable water and/or a means of disposal of wastewater.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURES — Expenditures, including principal and
interest on bonds, which are made for additions to or improvements of
the systems.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS — The payments required to be made
by the City of Roseville to the County of Macomb pursuant to the
provisions of existing sewer contracts between said parties for the
financing of improvements to the systems under the provisions of Act
342 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1939, as amended.237
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Water and Sewers charged with
operating and maintaining the wastewater system.
237. Editor's Note: See MSA § 5.276(1) through (16); MCL § 46.171 et seq.
§ 340-39 ROSEVILLE CODE § 350-1
336:846
DIRECTOR — The person appointed by the city to manage the
Department of Water and Sewers.[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or a unit thereof, including an
apartment, house trailer or mobile home, occupied by one or more
persons as a residence, with a single set of culinary facilities, intended
for a single family.
INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE or INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid
containing waterborne process wastes from industrial sources.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Roseville, County of Macomb, State of
Michigan.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — All direct and/or indirect
costs, other than debt service, necessary to ensure adequate
wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis in
conformance with related federal, state and local requirements. These
costs include replacement costs and payments made to other agencies
for wastewater disposal.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or other legal entity.
PREMISES — A parcel of real estate owned by a person served as
a single user by a wastewater disposal outlet. Each mobile home is
considered separately as a premises.
RECURRING RATES AND CHARGES — Sewer use rates and any other
rates and charges hereinafter established or established by resolution
of the City Council, which are payable in installments or on a recurring
basis.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
replacement equipment, accessories or appurtenances that are
necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the existing
systems.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Usual domestic sewage or equivalent sewage,
not including industrial sewage as herein defined, from all sources.
SANITARY SEWER OR SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries sanitary
sewage.
SYSTEM — The wastewater system.
USER — The owner or occupant of any premises connected to and/or
using any of the facilities operated by the Department of Water and
Sewers.
WASTEWATER OR SEWAGE — Spent water which may be a
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions or other uses,
including drainage water inadvertently present in said waste.
§ 350-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-1
336:847
§ 350-2. Operation; financial management.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM or SEWER SYSTEM — Any part or all of the
property, structures, equipment, sewers, materials and/or
appurtenances used in conjunction with the collection and disposal of
wastewater.
A. Operation. The operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and
management of the system shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Council or such agency or department of the city as it may
designate. The city may employ a Director of the Department of Water
and Sewers to manage the Department and such other person or
persons as it deems advisable to carry on the maintenance and
operation of the Department.
B. Allocation of revenues. All revenues of the system shall be deposited in
a qualified depository designated by the city and in an account
designated "Sewage Disposal System Receiving Fund," hereinafter
referred to as the "Receiving Fund."
(1) Operation and Maintenance Fund.
(a) There shall be first allocated from the Receiving Fund and
deposited in a separate account designated the "Operation and
Maintenance Fund" sufficient sums to pay the anticipated
expenses of operation, maintenance and administration of the
sewer system. Charges imposed by the South Macomb
Sanitary District for wastewater disposal to the city shall be
considered operational expenses, and an amount sufficient to
pay said charges and rates during said period shall likewise be
set aside into said fund.
(b) For budgeting and rate-setting purposes, accounting records
that separate sewer system expenses from water supply
expenses shall be kept. The city shall set rates and charges so
that wastewater system rates and charges are sufficient to
cover the operation and maintenance costs of the wastewater
system.
(c) The Director, based upon the costs of the prior year and
anticipated costs for the ensuing year, shall annually
recommend a separate budget for each system to the City
Council. If the costs of the prior year or the recommended
budget for the ensuing year indicates a deficiency of revenues
to meet the costs in either system, the City Council shall adjust
the rates and charges for the system or systems to eliminate
said deficiency. The rates and charges shall be in relation to the
costs incurred to provide services to each user.
(2) Reserve Fund. Out of revenues remaining in the Receiving Fund
after provision has been made for the Operation and Maintenance
§ 350-1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 350-2
336:848
§ 350-3. Use rates; permit fee.
Fund, there shall be established and maintained a separate account
designated the "Reserve Fund." Funds deposited in the Reserve
Fund may be transferred to the Operation and Maintenance Fund
of the Department of Water and Sewers in ensuing years to offset
increased costs for the operation and administration of the
Department of Water and Sewers. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord.
No. 1016]
C. Investments. Moneys in funds of the systems may be invested in
accordance with applicable state statutes and the limitations imposed
therein. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the
Receiving Fund.
D. Annual statements and audits.
(1) All accounting for revenues generated by the systems shall be
based on a fiscal year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30.
(2) The city shall maintain and keep books of record and account, in
which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions
relating to the wastewater and water supply systems. Not later
than three months after the end of each fiscal year, the city shall
cause to be prepared a statement showing the cash income and
disbursements of the systems at the beginning and end of the fiscal
year and such other information as may be necessary to enable any
person to be fully informed as to all matters pertaining to the fiscal
operation of the systems during such year. Such annual statement
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and shall be open to public
inspection. Such books of record and account shall be audited
annually by a certified public accountant to be designated by the
City Council. A certified copy of such audit shall be filed with the
Clerk.
A. Sewer use rate (sewage disposal charge). [Amended 5-24-1983 by
Ord. No. 885; 9-25-1984 by Ord.No. 907]
(1) Except as herein otherwise provided, sewage disposal service
provided by the wastewater system shall be paid by the owner or
occupant of each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having
a connection with the wastewater system on the basis of the water
meter readings for water used. The sewage disposal charge per
quarter shall be composed of the following:
(a) A minimum charge per quarter as provided in Chapter 133,
Fees, shall be charged to offset the fixed expenses for
operations, maintenance and replacement of the system and
shall be called the “readiness to serve charge.” [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 1223]
§ 350-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-3
336:849
(b) The second charge shall be based on an amount established
from time to time by Council per 100 cubic feet of water
consumed per quarter to offset the operation and maintenance
expenses of the Department of Water and Sewers. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(c) The third charge shall be based on an amount established from
time to time by Council per 100 cubic feet of water consumed
and shall be called the "regional treatment charge" to offset
the wholesale cost of wastewater disposal to the South
Macomb Sanitary District. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
(2) When more than one dwelling unit on a premises is served by a
single water connection, the minimum sewage disposal charges for
such a premises shall be the minimum quarterly sewage disposal
charges per dwelling unit times the number of dwelling units
served by such single water connection.
B. Special sewer use rates (industrial).
(1) Any user discharging industrial wastes to the wastewater system
shall pay an industrial use fee as provided in Chapter 133, Fees.
The applicant shall pay this fee annually at the time of application
for the industrial sewage permit or renewal thereof. [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(2) If the industrial wastes discharged to the wastewater system
exceed the limits for industrial wastes established by the city or
impose an additional burden upon the wastewater system as
measured by volume or strength of sewage flow, the city may
assess and collect surcharges to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the overlimit discharge of compatible waste and
assess monitoring and surveillance fees when the limits of
incompatible wastes, as defined in this chapter, are found to be
exceeded. Such surcharges shall be uniform throughout the system
and in accordance with a schedule to be published whenever
conditions require updating. Such surcharges shall be applicable
on the basis of samples taken at the control manhole (or its
equivalent) of each industrial and commercial user. The surcharge
fee assessed to users which exceed the allowable discharge limits
shall be equal to the surcharge assessed by the City of Detroit, plus
an additional 15% to cover the city's administration costs.
C. Sewer permit fee. In addition to all other charges herein provided, each
premises connecting to the sewers of the wastewater system shall pay a
permit fee as provided in Chapter 133, Fees, for inspection of a tapping
of each sewer service pipe to a public sanitary sewer. Said charge shall
be paid in full at the time that application for a permit for the
connection is made. The applicant shall pay all costs of construction of
said sewer connection. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
§ 350-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § 350-4
336:850
§ 350-4. Industrial cost recovery.
A nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment
works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per
day of sanitary sewage, in strength or volume, may be subject to industrial
cost recovery as defined in federal regulation 40 CFR 35.928. An industrial
cost recovery system requires each industrial user to pay back to the
city a portion of the capital expenditures allocable to the construction of
facilities for the treatments of its wastes. Should any industrial user (as
defined in federal regulation 40 CFR 35.905) commence discharge to the
treatment works during the thirty-year industrial cost recovery period, then
an industrial cost recovery system shall be developed and implemented for
the user pursuant to this chapter and federal regulation 40 CFR 35.928.
§ 350-5. Drain connection fee. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
In addition to all other charges herein provided, each premises connecting
to the drainage water system shall pay a drain connection fee as provided in
Chapter 133, Fees, for inspection of each building service drain connection
to the drainage system. Such charge shall be paid in full at the time that
application for a permit for the connection is made. The applicant shall pay
for the entire cost of construction of said connection.
§ 350-6. Billing.
All meters shall be read at least quarterly. Bills for water service and sewage
disposal service shall be due and payable when rendered. There shall be
added to all bills not paid on or before the due date of the bill a penalty of
10% of the amount of the bill. The Director shall have charge of the reading
of all meters. He or she shall keep a record of all meter readings and shall
keep accounts of the charges for water and sewer service furnished to all
premises and shall render bills for the same. All water and sewer service
charges shall be collected by the City Treasurer, who shall credit the same
to the proper account.
§ 350-7. Enforcement; deposits.
A. The Department of Water and Sewers is hereby authorized to enforce
payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises by
discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to
such premises, or both, and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by
the city against the customer.
B. The charges for water service and sewage disposal service, which,
under the provisions of Act 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1933, as
amended,238 are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are
hereby recognized to constitute such lien; and the city shall, annually,
on May 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any
238. Editor's Note: See MSA § 5.2731 et seq; MCL § 141.101 et seq.
§ 350-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-7
336:851
Chapter 354
WATER
CHARTER REFERENCES
Department of Water and Sewers — See Ch. 7,
Sec. 7.12.
Water system — See Ch. 14, Sec. 14.2.
premises which, on the 30th day of April preceding, have remained
unpaid for a period of six months, to the City Assessor, who shall place
the same on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall
be collected in the same manner as general city taxes.
C. Deposits.
(1) In cases where the city is properly notified, in accordance with said
Act 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1933, that a tenant is
responsible for sewage disposal service charges, no such service
shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has
been deposited with the Department a sum sufficient to cover two
times the average quarterly bill for such premises as estimated by
the city, such deposit to be in no case less than provided in Chapter
133, Fees. Where the water service to any premises is turned off to
enforce the payment of sewage disposal service charges, the water
service shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges have
been paid and a deposit, as in the case of tenants, is made, and
there shall be a water turn-on charge as provided in Chapter 133,
Fees. In any other case where, in the discretion of the city, the
collection of charges for water or sewage disposal service may be
difficult or uncertain, the city may require a similar deposit.
[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125]
(2) Such deposits may be applied against any delinquent water or
sewage disposal service charges of the depositor, and the
application thereof shall not affect the right of the Department to
turn off the water service and/or sewer service to any premises of
any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear
interest, and such deposit or any remaining balance thereof shall
be returned to the customer making the same when he or she shall
discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service or, except
as to tenants as to whom notice of responsibility for such charges
has been filed with the city, when any eight successive quarterly
bills shall have been paid by said customer with no delinquency.
§ 350-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 350-7
336:852
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special assessments — See Ch. 5.
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Accumulation of water at car washes — See
Ch. 98, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 133.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 139.
Groundwater wells — See Ch. 163.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 221.
Sewers — See Ch. 256.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 300.
Wastewater system — See Ch. 350.
§ 350-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-7
336:853

ARTICLE I
Water Meters
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. I of Ch. 354 of the 1984
Code]
§ 354-1. Remote system required.
It shall be mandatory, from and after the eighth day of August 1966, for all
newly constructed buildings within the confines of the City of Roseville to
be equipped with a remote water meter system at the expense of the permit
taker. The cost shall be payable at the time of the making of the application
for the water permit.
§ 354-2. Installation of outside device; cost.
Where the Department of Water and Sewers has been unable to make a
meter reading for a period of not less than two successive billing periods,
the property owner shall be charged $20 for the installation of an outside
meter reading device approved by the Department of Water and Sewers;
provided, however, that where an outside meter reading device shall be
installed for a nonresidential building, the cost shall be $40, the cost to be
paid in four equal payments. Payments will be added to the quarterly water
bills after installation.
§ 354-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 354-2
336:855

ARTICLE II
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 895 as Art. II of Ch. 354 of the 1984
Code]
§ 354-3. Adoption of standards by reference.
The City of Roseville adopts by reference the water supply cross-connection
rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health, being R-325-431 to
R-325-440 in the Michigan Administrative Code.
§ 354-4. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Department of Water and Sewers or the
Department of Buildings and Inspection to cause inspections to be made of
all properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections
with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of
inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved
shall be as established by the Department of Water and Sewers or
Department of Buildings and Inspection and approved by the Michigan
Department of Public Health.
§ 354-5. Right of access.
The representative of the Department of Water and Sewers or Department
of Buildings and Inspection shall have the right to enter at any reasonable
time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system
of the City of Roseville for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or
systems thereof for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency
any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such
property. The refusal of such information or refusal of such access when
requested shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections.
§ 354-6. Discontinuance of service. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 1125]
The Department of Water and Sewers or Department of Buildings and
Inspection is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service
after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this article exists and to take other such precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions
of this article. All costs for reconnection shall be borne by the property
owner and shall become a lien on the property.
§ 354-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 354-7
336:857
§ 354-7. Protection of potable water supply: commercial and
industrial; labeling of other outlets. [Amended 4-29-2003 by Ord.
No. 1175]
A backflow preventer approved by the City of Roseville shall be installed
for each service connection to a commercial or industrial building. The
owner shall be responsible for proper installation, operation, maintenance,
testing, and repair of the backflow preventer. The potable water supply
made available on the property served by the public water supply shall be
protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the
State and Local Plumbing Code.239 Any water outlet which could be used
for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable
system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR
DRINKING."
§ 354-8. Supersession; repealer. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code and the current
City of Roseville Plumbing Code but is supplementary to them, and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed
only to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect.
§ 354-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this article, or any written order of the Department of Water and Sewer
or Department of Buildings and Inspection in pursuance thereof, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provision, Article I.
239. Editor's Note: See Ch. 221, Plumbing Standards.
§ 354-7 ROSEVILLE CODE § 354-9
336:858
ARTICLE III
Water Lateral Benefit Connection Charge
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 1038 (Art. III of Ch. 354 of the
1984 Code)]
§ 354-10. Charge established.
There shall be paid on behalf of any premises other than premises owned
by the City making a connection to any public waterline of the combined
system in the City of Roseville which has not been either privately
constructed and fully paid for on behalf of said premises, or publicly
financed by means of special assessments levied against the property on
which said premises is located for the privilege of making use of said
waterline, a lateral benefit charge based upon a per front footage of the
property abutting said waterline, which per front footage amount shall be
established for each project based upon actual construction costs and which
shall include construction costs, engineering, legal and administration. Said
charge shall be due and payable in full at the time of application for
a building permit for new construction and prior to connection for any
existing construction.
§ 354-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 354-10
336:859

ARTICLE IV
Water Restrictions
[Adopted 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 1214240]
§ 354-11. Determination of water emergency.
The City Manager, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to declare a
water supply emergency whenever he/she determines any of the following
conditions exists:
§ 354-12. Emergency water use restrictions.
Whenever a water supply emergency exists, it shall be unlawful for any
person to utilize water from the City water supply system for any type of
outdoor use which is in violation of the terms of the declaration.
§ 354-13. Notification of regulations; when effective.
A. An existing or anticipated drought condition.
B. Loss or reduction in volume and/or pressure in water supply from the
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD).
C. Failure of one or more parts of the supply system.
D. Any condition that may result in a threat to the public health due to
potential or documented contamination associated with low water
pressure.
E. Any condition that may reduce the Fire Department’s available water
supply to fight fires.
F. Requests by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department or Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality to place use restrictions on the
system.
G. Any use by system customers that adversely impacts peak water use
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time,
which could adversely affect future water supply charges and fees.
H. Any use by system customers that adversely impacts the City’s
compliance with terms of its DWSD water contract.
A. A water supply emergency shall exist when the City Manager has
caused a declaration of such emergency to be publicly announced by
broadcast from one or more radio or television stations with normal
operating range covering the City. When practical, such declaration
shall also be made over the appropriate cable television channel, on the
City Hall telephone message machine, and in the local newspaper, if the
anticipated duration of the emergency warrants it. The City Manager
240. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. IV, Water
Restrictions, adopted 5-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1079 (Art. IV of Ch. 354 of the 1984 Code).
§ 354-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 354-13
336:861
§ 354-14. Nonemergency water use restrictions.
§ 354-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be deemed responsible for a civil
infraction and will be assessed a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
shall make a record of each time and date and methods of such
declaration. Irrespective of such methods of declaration, a water supply
emergency shall be deemed to exist for any person who has received a
direct written notice of such declaration.
B. A declaration of water supply emergency shall include the effective date
and time of such emergency, which may be immediate; the period of
time during which such emergency shall be in effect, which may be for
24 hours per day, and until further notice; and the types of outside
water usage which are prohibited, which may include all outside uses
except fire protection; and may permit certain uses on alternating days
or during restricted hours.
A. A property which is connected to the municipal water system is hereby
restricted to irrigating during the following days and times between
May 15 and October 1:
(1) A property with an even-numbered address shall only be allowed to
irrigate on even-numbered dates within a month.
(2) A property with an odd-numbered address shall only be allowed to
irrigate on odd-numbered dates within a month.
(3) If a property has mixed odd- and even-numbered addresses or an
undetermined address, the City Manager, or his/her designee, may
assign an odd/even designation for compliance with this section.
(4) A property with a newly seeded or sodded lawn and any trees,
shrubs and bushes may, for the first 21 days after planting, irrigate
said new lawn or landscaping as often as required for growth.
§ 354-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § 354-15
336:862
ARTICLE V
Utility Tampering and Unauthorized Water Usage
[Adopted during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III]
§ 354-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATER UTILITY — Includes any pipeline, system or component thereof,
including but not limited to water pipeline, valves, hydrants or other
appliances or equipment or appertaining to or used in connection with such
system by whomsoever owned or operated for the benefit of the City of
Roseville.
§ 354-17. Interruption and disruption of water service.
No person or firm shall cause or permit to continue any cut, break,
obstruction, injury, destruction, manipulation or tampering with any water
utility belonging to or used by the City of Roseville, with the intention and
without authority to interrupt or disrupt the water service or avoid payment
for water service. No person or firm shall conspire, aid or abet in or cause
to be done any such unlawful acts.
§ 354-18. Taking of water without permission.
No person or firm shall take or cause to be taken or permit the continued
taking of water from any fire hydrant, valve, faucet, pipe or other opening
connected with the City of Roseville water supply system, nor shall any
such person or firm open any fire hydrant, valve or faucet for the purpose
of taking water or for any other purpose, unless such person or firm shall
have first made application for use of the water for an allowable purpose
and received permission from the Director of the Department of Water
and Sewers for the City of Roseville, unless such person is an employee
within the City of Roseville acting in the course of employment, discharging
authorized duties.241
§ 354-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person or firm who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions
hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
241. Editor's Note: See Ch. 139, Fire Hydrants.
§ 354-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 354-19
336:863
Chapter 364
WEEDS
CHARTER REFERENCES
General powers — See Ch. 3, Sec. 3.1. Department of Public Works — See Ch. 7, Sec.
7.11.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 49.
Burning of weeds — See Ch. 94.
Nuisances — See Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 225.
Residential refuse collection — See Ch. 285,
Art. I.
§ 364-1. Destruction of noxious weeds.
§ 364-2. Failure to comply; removal by City. [Amended 2-26-1991 by
Ord. No. 1007; 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 1258]
Should the owner or occupant of any premises situated in the City of
Roseville fail to comply with § 364-1 of this chapter after notice as
hereinafter provided, the Department of Public Works or a designated
contractor may enter upon such premises and destroy any and all noxious
weeds, cut any grass or nonnoxious weeds higher than six inches in height,
trim the uncontrolled growth of any shrub, hedge, bush, plant or tree
and remove such waste along with any other accumulated debris on such
property. Any costs incurred therewith shall be a lien upon the premises
A. "Noxious weeds" means any weed or plant which is detrimental to other
desirable plants, crops or land or other property or which is injurious to
the public health or the economy.
B. It shall be the duty of both the owner and occupant of any land situated
in the City of Roseville to keep the same free of all noxious weeds and to
destroy the same before they reach seed-bearing stages and to prevent
such weeds from perpetuating themselves. It shall also be the duty of
both the owner and occupant of any land situated in the City of
Roseville to cut all grass and nonnoxious weeds higher than six inches
in height and to control the growth of all shrubs, hedges, bushes, plants
and trees by proper trimming, shearing or cutting of all uncontrolled
growth of the same on the property the person owns or controls. Vacant
property shall be kept free of dense, wild growth of trees, shrubs,
bushes, plants and debris. Trees on vacant property shall be kept
trimmed, where reasonable, to maintain a clearance of at least eight
feet from the ground to the lowest limbs thereof. [Amended
2-26-1991 by Ord. No. 1007; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125;
3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 1258]
§ 354-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 364-2
336:864
and, if not paid within 45 days of the billing date, shall be added on the next
tax statement for said premises.
§ 364-3. Publication of notice. [Amended 2-26-1991 by Ord. No.
1007]
§ 364-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1125]
In addition to any others which may be provided, any person who violates
any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
A. On or before the first day of April of each year, the City Clerk shall
cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City a notice to all owners and occupants of land that: [Amended
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1125; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1212;
3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 1258]
(1) All noxious weeds on any property located within the City must be
destroyed on or before the 15th day of April and for the remainder
of any such year.
(2) At all times all grass and nonnoxious weeds higher than six inches
in height must be cut.
(3) The uncontrolled growth of all shrubs, hedges, bushes, plants and
trees must be trimmed, sheared or cut.
(4) At all times vacant property shall be kept free of dense, wild growth
of trees, shrubs, bushes, plants and debris.
(5) At all times trees on vacant property shall be kept trimmed, where
reasonable, to maintain a clearance of at least eight feet from the
ground to the lowest limbs thereof.
B. Such notice shall further provide that upon failure to comply with any of
the aforesaid provisions the Department of Public Works or a
designated contractor may enter upon such premises as many times as
is necessary and destroy any and all noxious weeds, cut any grass or
nonnoxious weeds higher than six inches in height, trim the
uncontrolled growth of any shrub, hedge, bush, plant or tree and
remove such waste along with any other accumulated debris on such
property. [Amended 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 1258]
C. Such notice shall further provide that any costs incurred by said
Department of Public Works or a designated contractor shall be a lien
upon the premises and shall be assessed against the premises and, if
not paid within 45 days of billing, shall be added on the next tax
statement for said premises; provided, however, that such notice gives
the owners or occupants of premises situated within the City 30 days
from such publication to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 364-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 364-4
336:865
Chapter 370
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 45.
Building construction — See Ch. 88.
Fences — See Ch. 134.
Lawns — See Ch. 183.
Massage businesses — See Ch. 193.
Parking lots and garages — See Ch. 211.
Off-street parking — See Ch. 213.
Parks — See Ch. 215.
Property — See Ch. 224.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 225.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 284.
Solid waste — See Ch. 285.
Signs — Ch. 264.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 294.
Used car lots — See Ch. 332.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 336.
Wastewater system — See Ch. 350.
Water — See Ch. 354.
Weeds — See Ch. 364.
§ 364-4 ROSEVILLE CODE § 364-4
336:866
ARTICLE I
Authority; Purpose; Preamble; Title
§ 370-1. Legislative authority; purpose.
This chapter enacted under Act 110, of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended,
governing the incorporated portions of the City of Roseville, Macomb
County, Michigan, to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence and for public and
semipublic or other specified uses; and to regulate and limit the height and
bulk of buildings, and other structures; to regulate and to determine the
size of yards, courts and open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of
population; and for said purposes to divide the Municipality of Roseville
into districts and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes
in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of such districts; defining
certain terms used herein; providing for enforcement; establishing a Board
of Zoning Appeals; and imposing penalties for the violation of the standards
of this chapter.
§ 370-2. Preamble.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the State of
Michigan in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting
and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort,
convenience and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of
Roseville by protecting and conserving the character and social and
economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use
areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing
overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; providing
adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and
economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation
and other public requirements, and by other means, now therefore, the City
of Roseville ordains the following.
§ 370-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Roseville
Zoning Code."
§ 370-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-3
336:867

ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 370-4. Construction of language.
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter.
§ 370-5. Terms defined.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them.
ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY — A use that is clearly incidental to,
customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory
off-street parking or loading spaces) located on the same zoning lot with the
principal use to which it is related. When "accessory" is used in this text, it
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive.
D. The words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
E. A "building" or "structure" includes the whole or any part thereof.
F. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for," or "occupied for."
G. The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership,
an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
H. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected
by the conjunction "and," "or," "either. . .or," the conjunction shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply singly or in any combination.
(3) "Either. . .or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.
I. Terms not herein defined shall have the meanings assigned to them in
the Webster's Standard Dictionary.
§ 370-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:869
shall have the same meaning as "accessory use." An accessory use includes,
but is not limited to, the following:
ADOLESCENT — A male or female human being less than 18 years of age
and shall have the same meaning as a "minor child" as defined in MCLA
§ 722.111, Sec. 1(1)(o), of the Child Care Organizations Act, Act 116 of the
Michigan Public Acts of 1973, as amended.
ADULT — For the purposes of this chapter, shall mean a male or female
human being 18 years of age or older, as defined in MCLA § 400.703, Sec.
3(1)(a) of the Adult Foster Care Licensing Act 218 of the Michigan Public
Acts of 1979, as amended.
ADULT FOSTER CARE — A facility for the care of adults, over 18 years
of age, as licensed and regulated under the Adult Foster Care Facility
Licensing Act,242 as amended, and the associated rules promulgated by the
State of Michigan. Such organization shall be defined as follows:
Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers and private
vehicle garages;
A.
Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence and their
guests;
B.
Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar
accessory building or other structure;
C.
D. Home occupations;
A newsstand primarily for the use of the occupants of a building, when
the newsstand is located on the same premises with the building;
E.
Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock and which is directly
used in connection with a business or industrial use on the premises,
unless such accessory storage is specifically prohibited as set forth in
the regulations of the zoning lot on which the principal use is located;
F.
Storage of goods and materials used in the manufacture of a product
made on the same premises, unless such storage is specifically
prohibited as set forth in the regulations of the zoning lot on which the
principal use is located;
G.
Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, on the same
premises as the use they are intended to serve, except as otherwise
permitted in the P-1 Vehicle Parking District as set forth in this chapter;
H.
Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located;
I.
J. Accessory signs located on the same premises as the principal use.
242. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 400.701 et seq.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:870
ADULT HOUSING, DEPENDENT — A multiple-family housing form with
individual sleeping rooms or dwelling quarters served by a central dining
facility which provides a basic daily service to each occupant, either in the
central dining facility or in their individual dwelling units, as well as nursing
care and limited medical care. Each dwelling unit may or may not contain a
central dining facility.[Added 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 1210]
ADULT-ORIENTED USE — Includes the following uses as herein defined:
ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME — A private residence with
capacity to receive not more than six adults who shall be provided
foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more
consecutive weeks.
A.
ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME — An adult foster care
facility with capacity for not more than 12 adults who are provided
foster care.
B.
ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME — An adult foster care
facility with capacity for at least 13 but not more than 20 adults who
are provided foster care.
C.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion-picture, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other audio-visual representations
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, and
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities. A
commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult
bookstore or adult video store.
(b)
(1)
Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult
bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal
(2)
B.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:871
business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; and
(2)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(3)
C.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions;
(1)
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
10 hours; and
(2)
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sublet the room
for period of time that is less than 10 hours.
(3)
D.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly
shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
E.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
F.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
G.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:872
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
H.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business
as a new business.
(1)
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
(2)
The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business.
(3)
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
I.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in
a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
J.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or full female breast.
K.
PAWNBROKER USE — Pawnbroker business as defined in the Roseville
Code of Ordinances, State Public Acts or substantially similar business.
L.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit
and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued
as well as the individual listed as the applicant on the application for a
permit and/or license.
M.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
N.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
O.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; and
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminude.
(2)
P.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore
or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture
Q.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:873
AGENCY GROUP HOME — A small child-caring institution owned, leased,
or rented by a licensed agency providing care for more than three but less
than 13 minor children.
ALLEY — Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access
to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion-picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios;
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of
sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals.
R.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
(2)
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsection S(1) through (3) above.
(4)
S.
TATTOO PARLOR — An establishment where persons are tattooed for
consideration, other than by a licensed medical practitioner or
cosmetologist; or any place where tattooing is regularly conducted,
whether or not if in exchange for compensation.
T.
TATTOO, TATTOOED, TATTOOING — Any method of placing permanent
designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or
under the skin with ink or any other substance, by the aide of needles or
any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin, resulting
in either the coloration of the skin, or the production of scars or
scarring, other than by branding.
U.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:874
ALTERATIONS — A change, addition, or modification in construction or type
of occupancy, any change in the structure of a building, such as walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may
be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed."
ANTIQUE SHOP — An establishment engaged in the selling of used
merchandise that is at least 100 years old, excluding motor vehicle parts,
tires, recreational vehicles (RVs) and mobile homes. The objects sold have
a special value because of their age, especially a domestic item or piece of
furniture or handicraft esteemed for its artistry, beauty, or period or origin.
It can be any piece of furniture or decorative object or the like produced
in a former period and valuable because of its beauty or rarity.[Added
3-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1259]
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family building
arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or a group
of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
APARTMENT HOTEL — A building designed for or containing both dwelling
units and individual guest rooms or suites of rooms, which building may
include accessory uses such as a cigar store, coffee shop, etc., when such
uses are accessible only from the lobby.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multiple-family."
ARCADE, ADULT — See "adult-oriented use."
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — See "motor vehicle repair."
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE CENTER — A building or premises used primarily
for the sale and installation of major automobile accessories, such as tires,
batteries, radios, air conditioners and mufflers, plus such services as brake
adjustment and wheel alignment and balancing; but excluding any major
mechanical repairs, collision work, undercoating or painting. Sale of
gasoline (stored in underground tanks) shall be incidental to the aboveenumerated
activities.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade.
BASEMENT AND STORY
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:875
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A use which is subordinate to the principal use of
a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in which transient
guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for payment.
BLOCK — The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest such streets (crossing or terminating) or railroad right-of-way,
unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing
and any other barrier to the continuity of development or corporate
boundary lines of the City.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE — A building other than a hotel where,
for compensation, meals or lodging and meals are provided for not more
than 10 persons in addition to the members of the family occupying the
premises.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS — The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City
of Roseville.
BRICK — See "face brick."
BUILDING —
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See "accessory."
BUILDING AREA — The space remaining on a property for building
purposes after compliance with minimum building setback requirements
and any applicable lot area coverage limitations.
BUILDING HEIGHT — For a principal use, the vertical distance measured
from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for
flat roofs; to the deckline of mansard roofs; and to the average height
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. For an accessory
building, the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the
highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs and to the ridgeline for
mansard, gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
Any structure which:
(1) Is permanently affixed to the land;
(2) Has one or more floors and a roof;
(3) Is bounded by either open area or the lot line or a platted lot.
A.
A building shall not include such structures as fences, or structures
such as gasholders, tanks, grain elevators, coalbunkers, or similar
structures.
B.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:876
BUILDING HEIGHT
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the exterior surface of the building
opposite the front lot line; and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum
building line is the same as a front setback line.
BUILDING LINE
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the
principal purpose of the land on which it is situated.
BUILDING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — See "apartment building."
BUILDING, ONE-FAMILY — See "dwelling (one-family)."
BUILDING, TWO-FAMILY — See "dwelling (two-family)."
CELLAR — See "basement."
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used solely for burial of the
human dead and dedicated for such purpose.
CEMETERY, PET — Land used or intended to be used solely for burial of
nonhuman dead and dedicated to such purpose.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:877
CENTER COMMERCIAL — A large, commercial-oriented land use that
draws City-wide or regionally and which is characterized by large buildings
or complexes of buildings with substantial building setbacks, large parking
lots, a uniform architecture, etc.
CHILD — See "adolescent."
CHILD-CARE INSTITUTION — A child-care facility that is organized for the
propose of receiving minor children for care, maintenance, and supervision,
usually on a twenty-four-hour basis, in buildings maintained by the childcaring
institution for that purpose, and operates throughout the
year.[Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
CHILD-CARE ORGANIZATION — A governmental or nongovernmental
organization having as its principal function receiving minor children for
care, maintenance, training, and supervision. Such organization shall be
defined as follows:[Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
CHILD-CARE CENTER or DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, other than
a private residence, receiving one or more preschool- or school-age
children for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day and where
the parents, guardians, family member, or court-appointed fiduciary
or caregiver is not immediately available to the child or adult. Childcare
center or day-care center includes a facility that provides care
for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of
hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child-care
center, day-care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative
preschool, play group, before- or after-school program, or drop-in
center. Child-care center or day-care center does not include any of the
following:
Sunday school, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional
class that is conducted by a religious organization where children
are attending for not more than three hours per day for an
indefinite period or for not more than eight hours per day for a
period not to exceed four weeks during a twelve-month period.
(1)
A facility operated by a religious organization where children are
in the religious organization's care for not more than three hours
while persons responsible for the children are attending religious
service.
(2)
A program that is primarily supervised, school-age-child-focused
training in a specific subject, including, but not limited to, dancing,
drama, music, or religion. This exclusion applies only to the time a
child is involved in supervised, school-age-child-focused training.
(3)
A program that is primarily an incident of group athletic or social
activities for school-age children sponsored by or under the
supervision of an organized club or hobby group, including, but
not limited to, youth clubs, scouting, and school-age recreational
or supplementary education programs. This exclusion applies only
(4)
A.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:878
CITY — The City of Roseville, Macomb County, Michigan.
CLINIC — An establishment where human patients, who are not lodged
overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of
physicians, dentists or similar professions.
CLUB — An organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, public service, patriotism,
or the like.
COLLECTIBLE STORE — An establishment engaged in the selling of used
merchandise that is at least 25 years old or older, excluding motor vehicle
parts, tires, recreational vehicles (RVs) and mobile homes. They are things
to the time the school-age child is engaged in the group athletic or
social activities and if the school-age child can come and go at will.
PRIVATE HOME — A private residence in which the licensee or
registrant permanently resides as a member of the household, which
residency is not contingent upon caring for children or employment
by a licensed or approved child-placing agency. Private home includes
a full-time foster family home, a full-time foster family group home, a
group child-care home, or a family child-care home, as follows:
FOSTER FAMILY HOME — A private home in which one but not
more than four minor children who are not related to an adult
member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption are given
care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a
week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent
or legal guardian.
(1)
FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME — A private home in which more
than four but less than seven minor children who are not related to
an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption
are provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week,
for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian.
(2)
FAMILY CHILD-CARE HOME — A private home in which one but
fewer than seven minor children are received for care and
supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended
by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family childcare
home includes a home that gives care to all unrelated minor
children for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
(3)
GROUP CHILD-CARE HOME — A private home in which more
than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and
supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended
by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption, but
including a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for
more than four weeks during a calendar year.
(4)
B.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:879
considered to be worth collecting but not necessarily valuable or
antique.[Added 3-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1259]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — See "motor vehicle, commercial."
COMPLETE STREETS — Roadways planned, designed, and constructed to
provide appropriate access in a manner that promotes safe and efficient
movement of people and goods, whether by car, truck, transit, assistive
device, foot, or bicycle for all ages and abilities.[Added 1-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 1265]
CONDITIONAL LAND USE — A use of land which requires compliance with
certain development or location conditions as set forth for the use in the
various zoning districts of this chapter.
COMMISSION — See "Planning Commission."
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership, which, for the purposes of this
chapter, is applied to the following terms as defined herein:
CONDOMINIUM ACT — Act 59 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1978, as
amended.243
A.
COMMON ELEMENTS — The portions of the condominium project
other than the condominium.
B.
CONDOMINIUM BYLAWS — The required set of bylaws for the
condominium project attached to the master deed.
C.
CONDOMINIUM SITE PLAN — A scale drawing of a site, including
a survey, utility layouts, floor plans and elevation sections, as
appropriate, showing existing and proposed structures, improvements,
parking, etc., as it is to be erected on the site.
D.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — That portion of the project designed and
intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master
deed.
E.
CONSOLIDATING MASTER DEED — The final amended master deed
for a contractible condominium project and expandable condominium
project, or a condominium project containing convertible land, or
convertible space which final amended master deed fully describes the
condominium project as completed.
F.
CONTRACTIBLE CONDOMINIUM — A condominium project from
which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn
pursuant to express provisions in the condominium documents and in
accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act.
G.
CONVERSION CONDOMINIUM — A condominium project containing
condominium units, some or all of which were occupied before the
establishment of the condominium project.
H.
243. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:880
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME — See "elderly housing, dependent"
and "elderly housing, independent."
COURT — An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, and bounded on
at least two sides by a building. A court extending to a front yard or a front
lot line, or to the rear lot line, or to an exterior street side yard or exterior
street side lot line is an outer court. Any other court is an inner court.
DENSITY — The number of families residing on, or dwelling units developed
on, an acre of land. As used in this chapter, all densities are stated in
CONVERTIBLE AREA — A unit or a portion of the common elements
of the condominium project referred to in the condominium documents
within which additional condominium units, or general or limited
common elements, may be created pursuant to express provision in the
condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and the
Condominium Act.
I.
CO-OWNER — A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
trust, or other legal entity, or combination thereof, who owns a
condominium unit within the condominium project. Co-owner may
include a land contract lender if the condominium documents or the
land contract so provides.
J.
EXPANDABLE CONDOMINIUM — A condominium project to which
additional land may be added pursuant to express provision in the
condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and the
Condominium Act.
K.
LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS — A portion of the common elements
reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the
co-owners.
L.
MASTER DEED — The condominium document recording the
condominium project as approved by the City, to which is attached as
exhibits, and incorporated by reference, the approved bylaws for the
project and the approved condominium subdivision plan for the project.
CONDOMINIUM
M.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:881
families per net acre, that is, per acre of land devoted to residential use,
exclusive of land in streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, schoolyards, or other
public lands and open spaces.
DERRICK — Any portable framework, tower mast, and/or structure which
is required or used in connection with drilling or reworking a well for the
production of oil or gas.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
DEVELOPMENT — The construction of a new building or other structure on
a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or
the use of open land for a new use.
DISTRICT — The various portions of the City of Roseville within which
certain regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof,
apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DRILLING PAD — The area of surface operations surrounding the surface
location of a well or wells. Such area shall not include an access road to the
drilling pad.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
DRIVE-IN — See "restaurant, drive-in."
DRIVE-THROUGH — A business establishment designed and intended to
provide a driveway approach and temporary motor vehicle standing space
or stacking space where customers receive service while in their motor
vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway, passage, or way upon and along which
vehicles may be driven and which is intended to provide access to a parking
space, garage, dwelling building or other structure. For the purpose of this
Zoning Code, a driveway may also be a vehicle maneuvering lane.
DWELLING — A place or unit of residence, an abode, a place of continued
living. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for
one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY — See "apartments."
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED — A dwelling unit which is substantially or
completely built, constructed, assembled, and finished in strict compliance
with the applicable laws of the State of Michigan, off the premises upon
which it is intended to be located.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — See "apartment."
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building designed exclusively for and
occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, SITE-BUILT — A dwelling unit which is substantially built,
constructed, assembled, and finished on the premises and which is intended
to serve as its final location. Site-built dwelling units shall include dwelling
units constructed of pre-cut materials, and panel walls, roof and floor
sections when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on
the premises which are intended to serve as its final location.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:882
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed exclusively for occupancy
by two families living independently of each other.
EARTH BERM — See "landscaping."
EARTH BERM, OBSCURING — See "landscaping."
EASEMENT or CORRIDOR — A quantity of land set aside, over which a
liberty, privilege or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a
corporation or a particular person or persons or part of the public for
specific use and purpose. An easement may be designated as a public or a
private easement depending on the nature of the user.
ELDERLY HOUSING, DEPENDENT — A multiple-family housing form with
individual sleeping rooms or dwelling quarters served by a central dining
facility which provides a basic daily service to each occupant, either in the
central dining facility or in their individual dwelling units, as well as nursing
care and limited medical care. Each dwelling unit may or may not contain a
central dining facility.
ELDERLY HOUSING, INDEPENDENT — A multiple-family housing form
with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual dwelling unit. The
facility may or may not contain a central dining facility.
ENTRANCE RAMP — A roadway designed to permit traffic from an
unlimited access surface street to gain access to a limited access highway
or expressway.
ERECTED — Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon or any
physical operations on the premises which are required for construction.
Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground,
surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission
or distribution systems, collections, communication, supply or disposal
systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and similar equipment in connection therewith, but not including buildings
which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service such utilities or
municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. Essential
services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and the
applicable standards of this chapter and other ordinances of the City of
Roseville.
EXCAVATION — Any breaking of ground, except common household
gardening and ground care.
EXCEPTION — A use permitted only after review of an application by
the Board of Zoning Appeals or legislative body or a modification in the
standards of this chapter specifically permitted after review by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, Planning Commission or legislative body, such review
being necessary because the provisions of this chapter covering conditions
precedent or subsequent are not precise enough to cover all applications
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:883
without interpretation and such review and exception is provided for by this
chapter. An exception is not a variance.
EXIT RAMP — A roadway designed to permit traffic from a limited access
highway or expressway to gain access to an unlimited access surface street.
FACE BRICK, NONRESIDENTIAL — Wherever face brick is called for as an
exterior building wall material for a nonresidential building, the material
shall consist of kiln-baked clay or shale masonry units, the exterior
dimensions of which shall not be less than four inches deep by four inches
high by 12 inches long, the individual shape of which shall be rectangular
in appearance.
FACE BRICK, RESIDENTIAL — Whenever face brick is called for as an
exterior building wall material for a residential dwelling building, the
material shall consist of kiln-baked clay or shale masonry units, the exterior
dimensions of which shall not exceed accepted industry standards for
residential brick units, except no such unit shall be less than 3 5/8 inches
deep, measured from the front face of the unit to the rear face of the unit.
FAMILY — A single individual or a number of individuals domiciled together
whose relationship is of a continuing, nontransient, domestic character and
who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit. This shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association,
lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose
relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for anticipated limited
duration of school terms or other similar determinable period.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — See "restaurant (fast-food)."
FEEDER ROAD or PUBLIC ACCESS SERVICE DRIVE — A public street
or road intersecting with a limited access highway and having traffic
interchange facilities with the limited access highway and with intersecting
local streets and major thoroughfares.
FENCE — A vertical hedge, structure, or partition erected for the purpose
of enclosing a piece of land or to separate two contiguous pieces of land as
stipulated in Chapter 134, Fences, in the Roseville Code of Ordinances, as
amended. For the purpose of this Zoning Code, a fence is not a wall.
FENCE, OBSCURING — An opaque structure of definite height and location
designed to serve as a screen or obscuring device.
FILLING — The depositing or dumping of any matter on, or into, the ground,
except deposits resulting from common household gardening and general
farm care.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The area of a building measured to the exterior
face of all exterior walls.
FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL — The minimum allowable floor area in a
residential dwelling unit shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of each
story of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the center line of walls separating two dwelling units. The floor area
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:884
measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached
garages, breezeways and enclosed or unenclosed porches.
FLOOR AREA, NONRESIDENTIAL (for the purpose of computing parking)
— For commercial business and office uses, that area used for or intended
to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve
patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area that is used or intended to
be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways,
or for utilities or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from this computation
of usable floor area. For all industrial and research uses, usable floor area
shall include the floor area that is used for, or intended to be used for, the
storage or processing of merchandise. Measurements of usable floor area
shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building,
measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls.
USABLE FLOOR AREA
FLOOR, GROUND — That portion of a building which is partly below grade,
but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the
ceiling is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the
floor. A ground floor shall be counted as a story.
GARAGE, REPAIR — See "motor vehicle repair."
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL PARKING — A building or structure which is used
by the public for the parking of motor vehicles and for the purposes of this
chapter may be the principal use of the property or may be accessory to a
principal use.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or integral portion of a main
building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles,
boats, and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building.
GARAGE, SERVICE — Any premises used for the storage or care of motordriven
vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation,
repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — See "motor vehicle service station."
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:885
GRADE — The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating
the number of stories and the height of the building. The building grade
shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the
finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be
determined by computing the average elevation of the ground for each face
of the building, and averaging the totals.
GREENBELT, AESTHETIC — See "landscaping."
GREENBELT, OBSCURING — See "landscaping."
HOME OCCUPATION — A gainful occupation, activity, hobby or profession
that is traditionally or customarily carried on entirely within the walls of
a residential dwelling and which is carried on by the inhabitants thereof,
which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character thereof.
HORIZONTAL DRILLING — The drilling of an oil or natural gas well at an
angle so that the well runs parallel to the formation containing the oil or
gas.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
HOSPITAL — A building, structure or institution in which sick or injured
persons are given medical or surgical treatment and operating under
license by the Health Department and the State of Michigan, and is used
for primarily inpatient services, and including such related facilities as
laboratories, outpatient departments, central service facilities, and staff
offices.
HOTEL — A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or
entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily
for transient occupancy and within which one or more of the following
services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial
or desk service and bell boy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or
cocktail lounge, banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:886
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING OR FRACKING — The process of injecting
water, customized fluids, sand, steam, or gas into a gas well under pressure
to improve gas recovery.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that is impenetrable and prevents
filtration of water or sediments down into the ground.[Added 4-12-2011
by Ord. No. 1241]
JUNK — Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, product, merchandise
with parts missing or scrap metals or other scrap materials that are
damaged, deteriorated, or are in a condition which cannot be used for the
purpose for which the product was manufactured.
JUNKYARD — Includes automobile wrecking yards, any area where junk
vehicles are stored, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metal
or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment
of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof except for
the normal household refuse which is stored only between regular pickup
and disposal of household refuse, provided the same is not left for a period
of over 30 days in which case it shall be considered as junk. This definition
does not pertain to uses conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — Any lot or premises on which three or more
dogs, and/or cats, or other domestic household pets, over six months of age
are either permanently or temporarily boarded. A kennel shall also include
any lot or premises where household pets are bred or sold.
LANDSCAPING — The art or science of placing live planting materials in
specific or in specified areas with the intent of improving the appearance of
an area, or for the purpose of creating a screen to obscure vision beyond
the screen. For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, landscaping shall also
include the following terms.
BUFFERS FOR CONFLICTING LAND USE — A device or an area that
is used for the purpose of shielding the view of one use of land from
another, and for the protection of an adjoining property. A buffering
device could include a wall, fence earth berm or landscape planting
screen, or an area containing sufficient natural tree cover to serve
as a buffer, or an area of sufficient distance to effectuate a buffer, or
land containing sufficiently abrupt changes in topography to serve as a
buffer.
A.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree measured six inches above the root
ball up to trees four inches and larger in caliper, and measured 12
inches above the root ball for larger-caliper trees.
B.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:887
EARTH BERM, ARTISTIC — An aesthetically designed landscaping
feature, which may also serve to create a landscaped swale for the
purpose of temporarily detaining stormwater runoff.
C.
EARTH BERM, OBSCURING — An earthen mound of definite height,
length, location and appearance, which is designed and intended to
serve as an obscuring device.
D.
GREENBELT, AESTHETIC — A landscaped area or lawn panel in which
live landscape planting materials are placed for aesthetic purposes and
not for the purpose of screening.
E.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:888
LOADING SPACE — See "off-street loading space."
LOCAL STREET — A street of limited continuity, which is to be used to gain
immediate access to abutting residential properties.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied, by a main
building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for
the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and
open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may
or may not be specifically designated as such on public records.
GREENBELT, OBSCURING — A landscaped area of definite width,
height and location containing live planting materials of definite
spacing or grouping which is designed to serve as an obscuring device.
F.
INTERIOR LANDSCAPED AREAS — Includes all landscaped areas
between the walls of a building and any off-street parking spaces,
service drives or vehicle maneuvering lanes, or loading and unloading
areas that comply with the minimum applicable size (planting area)
requirements of this section and which are contained within an
imaginary line that squares off the outer limits of an off-street parking
lot.
G.
OBSCURE — To make not readily visible, to hide or screen from view.
For the purpose of this chapter, "obscure" shall mean to obscure the
view of one use of land from another. (See definition of "buffers for
conflicting land use.")
H.
PARKING LOT TREE — A large deciduous tree placed within an offstreet
parking area.
I.
PERIPHERAL LANDSCAPED AREAS — Includes all landscaping that
lies between any off-street parking spaces, service drives and vehicle
maneuvering lanes, or loading and unloading area, and any peripheral
property line, or where no parking, service drives and vehicle
maneuvering lanes, or loading and unloading areas exist, any
landscaped areas lying between any minimum required building
setback line and a peripheral property line.
J.
SHRUBS, LARGE — Shrubs which will be four feet six inches in height
or greater at maturity.
K.
SHRUBS, SMALL — Shrubs that will be less than four feet six inches in
height at maturity.
L.
TREE, LARGE DECIDUOUS — Shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in
caliper measured six inches up to the tree from the ground.
M.
TREE, SMALL DECIDUOUS — Shall be a minimum of 1.5 inches in
caliper measured six inches up the tree from the ground.
N.
VEHICLE USE AREA — Includes all off-street parking lots, drive aisles,
loading and unloading areas, service drives and landscaped islands.
O.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:889
INTERIOR, THROUGH AND CORNER LOTS
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the
intersection of two streets is less than 135°. A lot abutting upon a curved
street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this
chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the
curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight
street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings,
including accessory buildings in excess of 144 square feet of floor area.
LOT, DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured along the median between the side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH (DOUBLE FRONTAGE) — Is an interior lot having frontage
on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In
case of a row of double frontage lots, all sides of said lots adjacent to streets
shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
FRONT LOT LINE — In the case of an interior lot abutting upon one
public or private street, the front lot line shall mean the line separating
such lot from such street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, the
front lot line shall be the narrower of the two frontage lines, except
in the case where both street frontages are at equal dimension, the
front shall be the one assigned a street address. In the case of a double
frontage lot, the front lot line shall be that line separating said lot from
that street which is designated as the front street by the owner, with
City approval, or the City's Board of Zoning Appeals shall designate the
front lot line.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular,
triangular, or cone-shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length entirely within
the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line
of the lot shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose
B.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:890
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on
a document or map on file with the City or county and which actually exists
as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in record ownership separate
from that of the remainder thereof.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal straight-line distance between the side lot
lines.
LOT WIDTH, REQUIRED — The minimum required horizontal straight-line
distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where
the minimum required front setback line intersects the side lot lines.
LOT, ZONING — A single tract of land, which at the time of filing for a
building permit is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control.
A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions
and frontage as required in the zoning district in which the zoning lot is
located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed
in the Macomb County Register of Deeds but may include one or more lots
of record. A zoning district line of the zoning lot shall serve as though it is a
lot line for the purposes of establishing building setbacks and percent of lot
coverage.
of determining depth of the rear yard. In cases where none of these
definitions are applicable, the property owner, with City approval, may
designate the rear lot line, or the City Board of Zoning Appeals shall
designate the rear lot line.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side
lot line.
C.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:891
ZONING LOT
MAIN BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot upon which it is situated.
MAIN USE — The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — An arterial street which is intended to serve
as a large-volume trafficway for both the immediate area and the region
beyond, and may be designated as a "major thoroughfare," "parkway
freeway," "expressway," or equivalent terms to identify those streets
comprising the basic structure of the street plan. Any street with a width,
existing or proposed, of 120 feet or greater shall be considered a major
thoroughfare.
MASSAGE PARLOR — See Chapter 193, Massage Businesses, in the
Roseville Code of Ordinances.
MANEUVERING LANES OR AISLES — For the purpose of this chapter, a
maneuvering lane or aisle shall mean an open, unobstructed area located off
street directly behind an off-street parking space or loading, unloading area.
A maneuvering lane or aisle may serve a single row of off-street parking
spaces or may be used jointly when located between two opposing rows of
parking spaces.
MANUFACTURED HOME — See "dwelling, manufactured."
MARGINAL ACCESS ROAD — A service roadway parallel to a feeder road or
to a street, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
MARQUEE — A roof-like structure of a permanent nature projecting out
horizontally from the wall of a building.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan, including graphic and written
proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public
building and all physical development of the City, and includes any unit or
part of such plan and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:892
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine or device, whether
video, electronic, mechanical or a combination thereof, which, upon the
insertion of a coin, trade, token, ticket, slug, plate, disc or key, or payment of
a price, operates or may be operated as a game, entertainment or contest of
skill or amusement of any kind or description which contains no automatic
payoff device for the return of money, price or goods to the player and
further includes any machine, apparatus, or contrivance which is used or
may be used as a game of skill and amusement wherein or whereby the
player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by the machine.
This definition does not apply to or include:
MEZZANINE — An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and
ceiling of a full story and occupying not more than 1/3 of the floor area of
the full story.
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling without
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in the structure. A mobile home does not include a recreational
vehicle.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which three or more
mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
MOTEL — A series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units
containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for
overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall
cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle.
MOTOR HOME — A manufactured motorized home, motorbus, or motorized
camper vehicle, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation and vacation use.
MOTOR VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL — As defined in the 1995 Michigan
Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Villages and Townships, every vehicle which
is used for the transportation of passengers for hire or which is constructed
or used for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise. The term
also means a motor vehicle which is designated and used for drawing other
vehicles and which is not constructed to carry any load thereon, either
independently or as any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR (GENERAL) — The general mechanical repair,
including overhaul and reconditioning of motor vehicle engines,
transmissions and other mechanical repairs, but not including collision
services such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair, painting or
undercoating.
A vending machine which does not incorporate gaming or amusement
features;
A.
B. Musical devices or coin-operated radios; or
C. Television sets in private quarters.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:893
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR (MAJOR) — The general repair, engine
rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision services
such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair, painting or
undercoating.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE CENTER — A use which is accessory to a
designated retail commercial outlet located within a shopping center or
which is within a building composed of the same construction material and
of the same design as the shopping center, wherein automobile products
such as motor oils, lubricants and various automobile mechanical parts
that are retailed directly to the public by said retail commercial outlet are
installed.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION (GASOLINE STATION) — A place
where gasoline or other motor fuel and lubricants for operating motor
vehicles are offered for sale at retail to the public, including sale of
accessories, lubricating and light motor service on the premises, but not
including collision services such as body, frame or fender straightening
or repair, painting or undercoating, but which may include a retail food
adjunct.
MUNICIPALITY — See "City."
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and
constructed to compress natural gas originating from a gas well, or
collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for delivery of
gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural gas processing
plant, or underground storage field, including one or more natural gas
compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and other
equipment.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord.No. 1289]
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility designed and constructed
to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane, methane and other
constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural
gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission
or distribution to commercial markets, but not including facilities or
equipment that are designed and constructed primarily to remove water,
water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from the natural gas.[Added
5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
NONCENTER COMMERCIAL — See "commercial, non-center."
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building or structure, or portion
thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or
amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter in the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which lawfully occupied a building or
land at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and that
does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:894
NONCONFORMING USE AND BUILDING — A use and a building lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or subsequent amendment
thereto, which does not conform to the use and height, bulk, placement and/
or provisions for the zoning district in which it is located.
NUISANCE FACTORS — An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious
thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or
repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across
a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the
generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things,
such as but not limited to: noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes,
vibration, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable
effluent, noise of congregation of people, particularly at night, passenger
traffic, invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic.
NURSERY — An area for the growing of plant materials not offered for sale
on the premises.
NURSERY, COMMERCIAL — A space, building or structure, or combination
thereof, for the growing and storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered
for sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or
landscaping.
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "child-care center or day-care center."
NURSING HOME — See "convalescent or nursing home."
OCCUPANCY LOAD — The number of individuals normally occupying a
building, or part thereof, or for which the existing facilities have been
designed.
OCCUPIED — Used in any way at the time in question.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE — A facility or space specifically intended
to permit the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other vehicles
outside of a public right-of-way.
OFF-STREET PARKING LOT — A facility, providing vehicular parking spaces
along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide
access for entrance and exit, for the parking of more than three vehicles.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:895
OIL AND GAS — Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane
gas, propane, butane and/or any other products or similar substances that
are produced by drilling an oil or gas well.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No.
1289]
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT — The well site preparation, construction,
drilling, redrilling, hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration associated
with an oil or gas well of any depth; water and other fluid storage,
impoundment and transportation used for such activities; and the
installation and use of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters,
and other equipment and structures, whether permanent or temporary;
and the site preparation, construction, installation, maintenance and repair
of oil and gas pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment
and activities associated with the exploration for, production of and
transportation of oil and gas. The definition does not include natural gas
compressor stations and natural gas processing plants or facilities
performing the equivalent functions.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No.
1289]
OIL OR GAS WELL — A pierced or bored hole drilled or being drilled in
the ground for the purpose of, or to be used for, producing, extracting
or injecting gas, oil, petroleum or another liquid related to oil or gas
production or storage, including brine disposal or being drilled for an
exploration for such purposes.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
OIL OR GAS WELL SITE — The location of facilities, structures, materials
and equipment, whether temporary or permanent, that are used for or
incidental to the preparation, construction, drilling, production or operation
of an oil or gas well, or exploration for a potential oil or gas well.[Added
5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
OPEN-AIR BUSINESS USES — Open-air business uses not conducted from
a wholly enclosed building, if operated for profit, shall include the following
uses.
OPEN-FRONT STORE — A business establishment so developed that
service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure,
not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open-front store"
shall not include automobile repair stations or automobile service stations.
Bicycle, trailer, mobile home, motor vehicle, farm implements, boats or
home equipment sale or rental services.
A.
B. Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, and similar uses.
C. Retail sale of fruit, vegetables, and perishable foods.
Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, humus,
fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment, and other
home garden supplies and equipment.
D.
Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts,
miniature golf, golf driving range, children's amusement park or similar
recreation uses.
E.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:896
OPEN SPACE — An area of land that remains primarily undeveloped and in
its natural state. For the purpose of this chapter, open space may include
parklands and park facilities so long as they are provided as a part of an
open space area.
OPEN STORAGE (MOTOR VEHICLE) — The outdoor standing or placement
of motor vehicles, including truck trailers, for more than 18 hours, including
new or used motor vehicles on display for lease or sale.
OPEN STORAGE (NONRESIDENTIAL) — The outdoor standing or
placement of any material which is man-made, assembled, fabricated or
treated in any manner and which may or may not be used directly in the
processing or fabrication of a product manufactured on the premises.
OPEN STORAGE (RESIDENTIAL) — The outdoor placement or keeping
of material which is owned and possessed by the resident occupying the
dwelling unit on the premises or by the owner of the premises where open
storage is to take place.
OUTDOOR CAFE — A temporary area with removable seats and tables; an
extension of the restaurant where food and beverages are served. (Rooftops
are not considered outdoor cafes.)[Added 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1265]
OUT LOT — A lot in a subdivision which is restricted from use for building
purposes, whether or not deeded to the City, but which is not dedicated as
a street or public reservation or public park.
PARKING — The parking of a motor vehicle for short duration and
possessing the element of a vehicle in use, being temporarily parked until it
is shortly to be again put into service. The terms "temporarily" or "shortly,"
for the purpose of this definition, shall mean and be measured by hours, or
at most, up to a maximum of 18 hours.
PARKING LOT — See "off-street parking lot."
PARKING SPACE — An area of definite length and width, said area shall be
exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be
fully accessible for the parking of vehicles.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that is penetrable and allows for the
inflow of rainwater into the underlying construction or soil.[Added
4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1241]
PLANNED COMMERCIAL CENTER — See "commercial, center
commercial."
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Roseville Planning Commission.
PRINCIPAL USE — See "main use."
PROPERTY LINE — The boundary lines that define and identify the extent
of a lot, parcel or property by ownership.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A person, firm or corporation, municipal department,
board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under
governmental regulations to the public gas, steam, electricity, sewage
disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:897
RECREATION LAND — Any public- or private-owned property that is
utilized for recreation activities, including such active recreation as
camping, swimming, picnicking, hiking, walking, nature study and various
organized or unorganized sports, and inactive recreation such as reading,
sitting and table games.
RECREATION VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT — Includes the following.
RECYCLING — The process by which waste products are reduced to raw
materials and transformed into new and often different products.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility where previously used products or
materials are transformed into new and often different products. For the
purposes of this chapter, a "recycling center" shall be other than a junkyard
as defined herein.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and whose
method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through,
fast-food, or standard restaurant or bar/lounge/tavern, or a combination
thereof, as defined below:[Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1308]
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the
manufacturer.
A.
PICKUP CAMPER — A structure designed primarily to be mounted on
a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it
suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and
vacation uses.
B.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
C.
FOLDING TENT TRAILER — A folding structure, mounted on wheels
and designed for travel and vacation use.
D.
BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS — Includes boats, floats, ski jets and
rafts, plus the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway.
E.
SNOWMOBILE AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Plus the normal
equipment to transport the same on the highway.
F.
UTILITY TRAILER — Any wheeled vehicle designed and intended to be
towed behind another vehicle.
G.
BAR/LOUNGE/TAVERN — A type of restaurant which is operated
primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages but in which the sale
of prepared food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar, lounge or
tavern is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part
of the structure so designated or operated.
A.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:898
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way line shall be the line established by the
Macomb County Road Commission and the City of Roseville in their rightof-
way requirements established for Roseville in the City's adopted Master
Plan.
ROADSIDE STANDS — A roadside stand is a temporary or existing
permanent building operated for the purpose of selling only produce raised
or produced by the proprietor of the stand or his family on the premises, and
its use shall not make into a commercial district land which would otherwise
BREWERY/DISTILLERY (ON SITE) — A restaurant/lounge/bar where a
process used to create beer (brewery), or the process that produces
spirits, such as but not limited to whiskey, gin and vodka (distillation) is
undertaken.
B.
CARRY-OUT — A business establishment whose method of operation
involves the sale of food, beverages and/or frozen desserts in disposable
or edible containers or wrappers, in a ready-to-consume state and for
consumption primarily off the premises, but in which seating for up to
30 persons may be provided.
C.
DRIVE-IN — A business establishment whose method of operation
involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a
motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed
building. A drive-in restaurant may also have interior seating.
D.
DRIVE-THROUGH — A business establishment whose method of
operation involves the delivery of prepared food to a customer in a
motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for
consumption off the premises.
E.
FAST FOOD SIT-DOWN (QSRs) — A business establishment where
food is ordered not from the table, but from a front counter (or in
some cases, using an electronic terminal). Diners typically then carry
their own food from the counter to a table of their choosing, and
afterward dispose of any waste from their trays. Drive-through and
take-out service may also be available.
F.
OUTDOOR CAFE — An area adjacent to and directly in front of a streetlevel
eating or drinking establishment located within the sidewalk area
of the public right-of-way exclusively for dining, drinking, and
pedestrian circulation. The encroachment area of a sidewalk cafe may
be separated from the remainder of the sidewalk by railings, fencing,
or landscaping planter boxes or a combination thereof.
G.
STANDARD) RESTAURANT — A business establishment whose method
of operation involves either the delivery of prepared food by waiters
and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely
enclosed building or the acquisition of prepared food by customers at
a cafeteria line which food is subsequently consumed by the customers
at tables within a completely enclosed building.
H.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:899
be an agricultural or residential district, nor shall its use be deemed an
approved commercial activity.
ROOM — For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and
dwelling density in a multiple-family district, a room shall be a living room
containing at least 150 square feet of floor area, a dining room or a
bedroom, with each containing at least 80 square feet of floor area. A room
shall not include the area in kitchens, sanitary facilities, utility provisions,
corridors, hallways and storage. Plans presented showing one-, two- or
three-bedroom units and including a den, library or other extra room shall
count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing dwelling
density.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boarding or rooming house."
ROOMING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used for living and sleeping but not containing kitchen or eating
facilities.
SALVAGE YARDS — See "junkyard."
SCREEN — See "landscaping."
SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE — A street of limited continuity designed
and intended to collect and distribute traffic to and from local streets and to
and from major thoroughfares.
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distance between any side of the main
building and any adjoining property boundaries, such as the front of the
building, excluding only the steps, and the front lot line or street right-ofway
line.
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration as set
forth and regulated in the City of Roseville Sign Control Code of
Ordinances.244
SINGLE-FAMILY SITE CONDOMINIUM — See "condominium."
SITE PLAN — A plan showing all salient features of a proposed development
so that it may be evaluated in order to determine compliance with the
applicable requirements of the Roseville Code of Ordinances, including this
chapter.
SPECIAL LAND USE — See "conditional land use."
STORAGE — See "open storage."
STORAGE WELL — A well used for and in connection with the underground
storage of natural gas, including injection into or withdrawal from an
underground storage reservoir for monitoring or observation of reservoir
pressure.[Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITY — A facility designed for detaining
stormwater runoff for a short period of time, thereafter to be released at a
controlled rate into a storm sewer or county drain.
244. Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Signs.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:900
STORMWATER RETENTION FACILITY — A facility which does not possess
the ability of de-watering, whereby water is held for a considerable length
of time for aesthetic value, agricultural consumption, holding of stormwater
runoff or other uses. The water may never be discharged to a natural
watercourse, but may be dissipated by plants, evaporation or percolation
into the ground.
STORY — That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein,
having its finished floor surface entirely above grade except that a basement
shall be considered as a story above grade where the finished surface of the
floor above the basement is:
STORY, HALF — An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an
area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet six inches.
For the purpose of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having
at least four feet of clear height between floor and ceiling.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street that provides the principal means of access to
an abutting land use, portions of which may be owned and controlled by the
abutting property owners and which may or may not be open to public use.
STREET, PUBLIC — A dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley,
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams
or girders, stairways, or any change in the width or number of exits, or any
substantial change in the roof.
A. More than six feet (1,829 millimeters) above the grade plane;
More than six feet (1,829 millimeters) above the finished ground level
for more than 50% of the total building perimeter; or
B.
More than 12 feet (3,658 millimeters) above the finished ground level
at any point.
BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS
C.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:901
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure located above or below grade, designed
to hold water to a depth greater than 24 inches, to be used for swimming.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — See "wireless communications facilities."
TEMPORARY USE (BUILDING or STRUCTURE) — A building, structure or
use permitted by the Building Official or designee, to exist only during a
specific period of time.
TRAILER COACH — See "mobile home."
TRAILER COURT OR PARK — See "mobile home park."
TRANSITION — The word or term "transition," or "transitional," shall mean
a zoning district, a landscaped area, arrangement of lots, wall or other
means which may serve as a district or area of transition, i.e., a buffer zone
between various land use districts and/or land use and thoroughfares.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:902
TRANSITION (THROUGH ZONING)
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK (OVERNIGHT CAMPING FACILITY) — A place
utilized for the temporary storage of travel trailers, for camping purposes,
where there is no permanent storage of mobile homes for year-round
occupancy, and where commercial activity is limited to service the needs of
the temporary occupants of the travel trailer park.
USE — The principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged,
designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied.
USED GOODS/SECONDHAND STORE — A store that sells secondhand
goods (previously used by another; not new) at reduced prices. It is engaged
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:903
in dealing in previously used merchandise or secondhand goods, excluding
motor vehicles, such as automobiles, recreational vehicles (RVs),
motorcycles, and boats; motor vehicle parts; tires; and mobile
homes.[Added 3-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1259]
VARIANCE — See "zoning variance."
VEHICLE DEALER — A person, firm, corporation, etc., licensed by the state
to sell cars, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, boats and related
parts, supplies and services.
VETERINARY CLINIC — A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of
sick or injured animals, and those in need of medical or minor surgical
attention. A veterinary clinic may include customary pens or cages. A
veterinary clinic may also be known as a "veterinary hospital."
VIDEO STORE — A commercial establishment whose principal function
is the renting or sale of video materials such as tapes, electronic video
disks and any other format capable of transmitting a picture, except those
materials that would categorize the use as an adult video store as defined
in this Zoning Ordinance.
WALL, OBSCURING — A structure of definite height and location to serve
as an opaque screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. For
the purposes of this chapter, a wall is not a fence.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA CO-LOCATION — The
location by two or more antennas or antenna arrays by wireless
communications providers on a common support structure, tower, or
building with the intent to reduce the overall number of support structures
or towers that may be otherwise required to support wireless
communications antennas or antenna arrays in the City.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Includes all structures
and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum
for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include,
but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone
devices and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission
equipment buildings and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not
included within this definition are citizen band radio facilities, short-wave
facilities, ham amateur radio facilities, satellite dishes and governmental
facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which
preempt municipal regulatory authority.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (ATTACHED) — Wireless
communications facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as
existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles and the like. A wireless
communications support structure (tower) proposed to be newly
established is not included in this definition.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURE —
Structures erected or modified to support wireless communications
antennas or arrays of antennas. Support structures within this definition
include, but are not limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:904
poles, and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something
other than a mere support structure.
YARDS — The open spaces on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, and as defined herein:
ZONING — (See Article III, Zoning Districts and Map.)
ZONING CODE — This chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT — See "district."
ZONING LOT — See "lot, zoning."
ZONING MAP — The Official Map of the City of Roseville that visually
depicts by area and identifies by name various zoning districts throughout
the City.
ZONING VARIANCE — A modification of the literal provisions of this
chapter granted when strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue
hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which
the variance is granted. The crucial points of variance are undue hardship
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the nearest point of the main building.
A.
REAR YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner
lot, the rear yard shall be opposite the assigned street frontage.
B.
SIDE YARD, EXTERIOR — An open space between a main building and
the street right-of-way line extending from the front yard to the rear
yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between
the street right-of-way line and the nearest point of the main building.
C.
SIDE YARD, INTERIOR — An open space between a main building and
the interior side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard,
the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on
the interior side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.
YARDS
D.
§ 370-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-5
336:905
and unique circumstances applying to the property. A variance is not
justified unless both elements are present in the case. The exception differs
from the variance in several respects. An exception does not require undue
hardship in order to be allowable. The exceptions that are found in this
chapter appears as special approval or review by the Planning Commission,
legislative body, or Board of Appeals. These land uses could not be
conveniently allocated to one zone or another, or the effects of such uses
could not be definitely foreseen as of a given time. The general
characteristics of these uses include one or more of the following:
A. They require large areas.
B. They are infrequent.
C. They sometimes create an unusual amount of traffic.
D. They are sometimes obnoxious or hazardous.
E. They are required for public safety and convenience.
§ 370-5 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-5
336:906
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts and Map
§ 370-6. Districts established.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Roseville is hereby divided into
the following districts:
R-1 One-Family Residential District
R-1A One-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District (Low Rise)
RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District (High Rise)
OS Office Service District
B-1 Local Business District
B-2 Community Business District
B-3 General Business District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 General Industrial District
P-1 Vehicular Parking District
§ 370-7. District boundaries.
A. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on
the City of Roseville Zoning Map, which accompanies this chapter, and
which map, with all notations, references, and other information shown
thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter is if fully described
herein.
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under
the following words: This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning
Map referred to in § 370-7 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Roseville, adopted on July 11, 2006, and amended to the most recent
date shown on the Zoning Map. If, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map within two weeks after the
amendment has been approved by the City Council, together with an
entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: On (date), by official action
of the City Council, the following change(s) were made: (brief
description with reference number to Council proceedings). Three
copies of the Official Map are to be maintained and kept up-to-date: one
in the Building Department offices, one in the Planning Commission
files, and one in the City Clerk's office, accessible to the public and shall
be final authority as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings and
other structures in the City.
§ 370-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-8
336:907
§ 370-8. District boundaries interpreted.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 370-9. Zoning upon annexation.
Wherever any area is annexed to the City of Roseville:
§ 370-10. Zoning of vacated areas.
Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the City of Roseville
shall have been vacated by action of the City Council and when the lands
within the boundaries thereof attach to and become a part of lands
adjoining such street, alley or public way, such lands formerly within such
vacated street, alley, or public way shall automatically, and without further
action of the City Council, thenceforth acquire and be subject to the same
zoning regulation as are applicable to lands to which same shall attach, and
the same shall be used for the same use as is permitted under this chapter
for such adjoining lands.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center
lines;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits;
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
the midway between the main tracks;
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to the extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through D above shall be so construed. The scale of
the map shall determine distances not specifically indicated on the
Official Zoning Map.
F. Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsections A through E above, the
Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
A. Land that is so annexed shall be classified as being in whichever district
of this chapter most closely conforms with the zoning that existed most
prior to annexation, such classification to be recommended by the
Planning Commission to the City Council, and the Council shall approve
it by resolution.
§ 370-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-11
336:908
§ 370-11. District requirements.
All buildings and uses, in addition to meeting all conditions that may be
assigned to them in their respective zoning district, shall also be subject to
the applicable standards of Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District
Options, Article XXIII, General Provisions, and Article XXV, General
Exceptions, in this chapter.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
336:909

ARTICLE IV
R-1A and R-1 One-Family Residential Districts
§ 370-12. Intent.
The R1-A and the R-1 One-Family Residential Districts are designed to be
the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent is to provide
for an environment of predominantly low- to medium-density single-unit
dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the
residents in the district.
§ 370-13. Principal permitted uses.
In the R1-A and R-1 Districts, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 370-14. Permitted uses subject to special conditions.
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject to the approval of the Building Director,
except for cemeteries and mausoleums which must be approved by the City
Council and except for those uses requiring review and approval by the
Planning Commission.
A. One-family detached dwellings.
B. Family child-care home, provided that any and all licensing
requirements by the State of Michigan shall be met, for one but not
more than six minor children. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No.
1213]
C. Foster family home, provided that any and all licensing requirements by
the State of Michigan shall be met for one but not more than four minor
children. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
D. Foster family group home, provided that any and all licensing
requirements by the State of Michigan shall be met for more than four
but fewer than seven minor children. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 1213]
E. Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and
recreational facilities.
F. Accessory buildings, provided they are located as set forth in § 370-100
of this chapter.
A. One-family attached dwellings, subject to the requirements of § 370-62
of this chapter.
B. Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, subject to the
following conditions:
§ 370-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-14
336:911
(1) Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in Article
XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, may be allowed,
provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the
minimum required yards by at least one foot for each foot of
building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed, except
church spires, flag poles, public monuments, etc., may be excused
from this limitation as set forth in Article XXV, General Exceptions,
§ 370-126, in this chapter.
(2) Wherever an off-street parking area is adjacent to land zoned for
residential purposes, a continuous and obscuring wall, four feet six
inches in height, or an obscuring landscaped greenbelt planting
screen shall be provided along the sides of the parking area
adjacent to the residentially zoned land. The wall and/or greenbelt
shall be further subject to the provisions of Article XXII, in this
chapter.
(3) The site shall be so located as to have at least one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare or collector street as designated on
the Major Thoroughfare Plan. All ingress and egress to the site
shall be directly onto said major thoroughfare or collector street or
a marginal access service drive.
C. Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate schools
and/or high schools offering courses in general education, or operated
for profit, are subject to review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
D. Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards),
when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building
within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity, subject to
review and approval by the Planning Commission.
E. Adult foster care family homes, provided that any and all licensing
requirements by the State of Michigan shall be met for one but not
more than six adults. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
F. Elderly day care homes, provided that any and all licensing
requirements by the State of Michigan shall be met for the daytime care
of up to six adults, provided the following conditions are met.
[Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
(1) A use permit shall be required, said permit to be issued by the
Roseville Building Department.
(2) Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in Article XX of this
chapter.
(3) The use permit issued for an elderly day-care home shall terminate
upon change of ownership or noncompliance with applicable local
or state regulatory standards.
§ 370-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-14
336:912
G. Group child-care homes, provided that any and all licensing
requirements by the State of Michigan shall be met, for the daytime
care of up to 12 children, provided the following conditions are met.
[Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
(1) The outdoor play area shall be fenced with at least a five-foot-high
fence.
(2) The facility shall not provide care services for more than 16 hours
in any twenty-four-hour period.
(3) The facility shall be located on a major thoroughfare.
(4) Operations of the facility conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be limited to indoor activities only.
(5) The applicable requirements of the Roseville Sign Ordinance245 for
signs in residential districts shall apply.
(6) Off-street parking and off-street pickup and dropoff areas shall be
provided as set forth in Article XX of this chapter.
(7) The property shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
(8) It shall be the obligation of an applicant to provide all necessary
information relative to the above requirements.
H. Child-care center or day-care center, for children or adults, provided
that any and all licensing requirements by the State of Michigan shall
be met, and provided the following conditions are met: [Amended
7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
(1) The facility shall not provide care services for more than 16 hours
in any twenty-four-hour period.
(2) An outdoor play area for children, if so cared for in the facility, shall
be provided and shall be fenced with at least a five-foot-high fence.
(3) The facility shall be located on a major thoroughfare and shall
provide not less than 5,000 square feet of outdoor on-site play area
when more than 12 children are to be cared for. All such play areas
shall be screened from view from any adjoining single-family
dwelling in a residential district.
(4) The applicable requirements of the Roseville Sign Ordinance246 for
signs in residential districts shall apply.
(5) Off-street parking and off-street pickup and dropoff areas shall be
provided as set forth in Article XX in this chapter.
(6) The property shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
245. Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Signs.
246. Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Signs.
§ 370-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-14
336:913
(7) It shall be the obligation of an applicant to provide all necessary
information relative to the above requirements.
I. Child-caring institution, provided that any and all licensing
requirements by the State of Michigan shall be met, subject to the
following conditions. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
(1) The facility may care for more than four but less than 13 minor
children at one time.
(2) The facility shall be located on a major thoroughfare as designated
on the City's adopted master plan map.
(3) Off-street parking and off-street pickup and dropoff areas shall be
provided as set forth in Article XX in this chapter.
(4) Outdoor play areas shall be provided in accordance with applicable
state requirements.
(5) When located on the same premises with the use, the play area will
be fenced along property lines in residential districts.
J. Swimming pool clubs when incorporated as a nonprofit club or
organization maintaining and operating a swimming pool with a
specified limitation of members, either by subdivision, or other
specified limitation of members, for the exclusive use of members and
their guests, all subject to the following conditions:
(1) The proposed site shall have one property line abutting a major
thoroughfare as designated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan, and
the site shall be so planned as to provide ingress and egress
directly onto or from said major thoroughfare.
(2) Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, except on
those sides adjacent to nonresidential districts; the Planning
Commission shall determine a reasonable setback. All yards shall
be landscaped in trees, shrubs, grass and terraced areas; all such
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall
be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except for
required entrance drives and those walls and/or fences used to
obscure the use from abutting residential districts.
(3) All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so
arranged and maintained so as to direct the light away from all
residential lands which adjoin the site.
(4) Whenever the parking plan is so laid out as to beam automobile
headlights toward any residential land, an architectural masonry
screening wall, or an obscuring landscape planting screen, shall be
provided along that entire side of the parking area, and said wall or
planting screen shall be subject to the requirements of Articles XX
and XXII in this chapter.
§ 370-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-14
336:914
(5) Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, said
pool area shall be provided with a protective fence, six feet in
height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less
than 1/2 of the member families and/or individual members. Prior
to the issuance of a building permit, bylaws of the organization
shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for
computing the off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking
areas shall be subject to the provisions of Article XX in this chapter.
(7) All plans for storm sewers, sanitary sewers and other utilities shall
be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
K. Private noncommercial recreational areas; institutional or community
recreation centers subject to the following conditions:
(1) The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein which would
attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the
immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the Major
Thoroughfare Plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all
ingress and egress directly onto or from said major thoroughfare.
(2) Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall
be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping
shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no
parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required
entrance drives and those walls used to obscure the use from
abutting residential districts.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less
than 1/2 of the member families and/or individual members. The
Planning Commission may modify the off-street parking
requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically
determined that the uses will originate from the immediately
adjacent areas, and will therefore be pedestrian.
(4) Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance
permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to
establish the membership involved for computing the off-street
parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or
organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the offstreet
parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning
Commission on the basis of usage.
L. Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to
the following conditions and subject further to review and approval by
the Planning Commission.
§ 370-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-14
336:915
(1) The site shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and egress
directly onto or from a major thoroughfare as designated on the
Major Thoroughfare Plan.
(2) The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the
major thoroughfare and any service roads, entrances, driveways,
and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular
traffic safety.
(3) Development features, including the principal and accessory
buildings and structures, shall be so located and related so as to
minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent
property. This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings
shall be not less than 200 feet from any property line of abutting
residentially zoned lands; provided that where topographic
conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view,
the Planning Commission may modify this requirement.
(4) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided
shall be as required in Article XX in this chapter for a golf course
and for each accessory use, such as but not limited to, a restaurant
or a bar.
(5) Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, said pool shall be
provided with a protective fence six feet in height, and entry shall
be by means of a controlled gate.
M. Cemeteries or mausoleums, subject to the following conditions and
subject further to approval by the Planning Commission.
(1) Any mausoleum, crypt or other building containing bodies or
remains, or a chapel, not including individual graves or columbaria,
shall not be located within 100 feet of any lot line: any such
building(s) shall not occupy more than 10% of the total land area of
the zoning lot and shall not exceed 25 feet in height; any burial
sites outside of a building shall not be located closer than 10 feet to
a side or rear property line nor closer than 25 feet to a public
thoroughfare.
(2) A service building incidental to the cemetery operation, and not
having contact with the public, may be located in a side or rear
yard area. Any such building shall be located at least seven feet
from a side or rear lot line, provided the building does not exceed
600 square feet in floor area nor more than 15 feet to the highest
point of the roof. Service buildings in excess of these limitations
shall be subject to those required in Subsection M(1) above.
Outside storage shall be limited to normal refuse, compost or other
bulk landscape material and shall be totally obscured from any
adjacent uses and public thoroughfares.
(3) The zoning lot shall have at least one lot line abutting a major
thoroughfare or collector street, and a vehicular access shall be
§ 370-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-14
336:916
directly from such thoroughfare or street across such abutting lot
line.
(4) On those sides of the zoning lot abutting any residential district, a
two-foot-high earth berm shall be provided. Such berm shall be
landscaped with plant material as provided in Article XXII of this
chapter, except that the density of plant material need not be
obscuring. A decorative masonry wall or ornamental fence, at least
two feet in height, may be used in combination with such
landscaping in lieu of the berm, the intent of the provision being to
soften the overall appearance.
(5) On those sides abutting a pubic thoroughfare, a landscaped
setback of at least 25 feet shall be provided. A berm of two feet
shall be provided within this landscape setback; a decorative
masonry wall or ornamental fence (at least two feet in height and
set back 25 feet from the thoroughfare) may be substituted for the
berm. In either instance, plantings in accordance with Subsection
M(4) above will be required. The required plantings within the
required setback shall be so located and arranged to avoid clear
vision obstructions between vehicles entering or leaving the
cemetery and adjacent sidewalks and streets.
(6) Berms shall be a landscaped earth mound, the same height as
required for a wall, and shall comply with the requirements of
Article XXII of this chapter pertaining to earth berms.
(7) A site plan shall be submitted for review by the Planning
Commission.
N. Home occupations may be permitted, provided they shall:
(1) Be conducted wholly and entirely within the principal dwelling.
(2) Be located either in the basement or on the ground floor of the
principal dwelling and shall occupy not more than 25% of the
ground floor area of the principal dwelling.
(3) Be conducted only by the inhabitants thereof as defined in Article II
of this chapter, there being no other employees or assistants
employed in connection with a home occupation.
(4) Not involve the keeping of a stock-in-trade, and no article shall be
sold or offered for sale except such as may be produced or provided
by the inhabitants thereof. All products produced on the premises
shall be sold off premises.
(5) Have no equipment or machinery used in connection with a home
occupation which is industrial in nature.
(6) Not change the character of the residential appearance and
orientation of the dwelling as a residential use.
§ 370-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-14
336:917
§ 370-15. Required conditions.
The following conditions, when applicable, shall apply to all uses permitted
in the district.
(7) Not require internal or external alterations or construction other
than that which may be required to meet local or state safety or
construction code standards, as authorized by the City.
(8) Not be carried on to an extent that will require parking in excess of
that required for a residential building by this chapter.
(9) Have no signs, advertising devices or other manifestations located
on the exterior of the dwelling structure or within any yard area
which suggests or implies the existence of a home occupation.
(10) Not include clinics, hospitals, barber or beauty shops, tea rooms,
tourist homes, kennels, dog grooming, millinery shops or any other
use similar to the above use or which does not meet the above
requirements.
(11) Be approved by the Building Department when it is determined
that the above conditions are met. The Building Department may
then issue a special use permit. Once established, no home
occupation shall deviate from the above required condition. Upon
filing of a complaint by a neighbor or by the City, no home
occupation shall be continued when the same shall be found
objectionable or in violation of the above conditions by the Zoning
Board of Appeals due to noise, electrical interference, dust, smoke
odor, vibration, traffic congestion, reduction of on-street parking,
area reduction in the living environment of the dwelling, or the
neighborhood, or other causes for which a reasonable complaint is
brought.
O. Exceptional uses, subject to qualifying standards, use restrictions and
conditions set forth in Article XIX of this chapter.
A. Single-family detached dwelling units.
(1) All single-family detached dwelling units shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) All dwelling units shall conform to all applicable City and state
codes and ordinances.
(b) All dwelling units shall be permanently attached to an
approved foundation.
(c) All dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish
materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties
and in the surrounding residential neighborhood in the R1-A
and R-1 Districts.
§ 370-14 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-15
336:918
(d) All dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and
roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent
properties and in the surrounding residential neighborhood in
the R1-A and R-1 Districts.
(e) All dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building
wall configuration which represents an average width-to-depth
or depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one or is
in reasonable conformity with the configuration of the dwelling
units on adjacent properties and in the surrounding residential
neighborhood in the R1-A and R-1 Districts, but in no instance
shall such width be less than 24 feet.
(2) The Building Department, in reviewing any such proposed dwelling
unit with respect to Subsection A(1)(c), (d) and (e) above, shall not
seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to
promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling
units, thereby protecting the economic character of dwelling units,
thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of
surrounding residential uses and the City at large. In reviewing any
such proposed dwelling unit, the Building Department shall require
the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar
documentation as it deems necessary to permit a complete review
and evaluation of the proposed dwelling unit.
B. Open storage in residential districts shall be limited to the following
conditions, there being no other open storage (outdoor storage) of any
kind permitted.
(1) One automobile may be stored in the rear yard, subject to
applicable City codes and ordinances.
(2) Firewood, cut to proper length for storage, subject to applicable
City codes and ordinances.
(3) Recreation vehicles, subject to the applicable standards of
§ 370-101 of this chapter.
C. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
D. See Article XIX, Use Permits.
E. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking layout standards.
§ 370-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-15
336:919
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
F. See Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvements guarantee.
G. See Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81, Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
H. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-101, Open storage in residential districts.
(3) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(4) Section 370-103, Residential entranceway structures.
(5) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(6) Section 370-104, Frontage on public streets.
(7) Section 370-105, Access to major thoroughfares.
§ 370-15 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-15
336:920
(8) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(9) Section 370-108, Signs.
(10) Section 370-109, Fences.
(11) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(12) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
I. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-127, Lot area.
(3) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(4) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(5) Section 370-130, Multiple dwelling side yard.
(6) Section 370-131, Porches.
(7) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(8) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-15
336:921

ARTICLE V
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
§ 370-16. Intent.
This district is designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing
areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures
between adjacent residential and commercial, office; thoroughfares or other
uses which would affect the residential character of the district. This district
also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the City where
larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to twofamily
residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures
and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and
modernization. This district also allows the construction of new two-family
residences where slightly greater densities are permitted.
§ 370-17. Principal permitted uses.
In the R-2 District, no buildings or land, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the following
specified purposes:
§ 370-18. Permitted uses subject to special conditions.
All uses permitted as conditional uses and exceptional uses in the R1-A and
R-1 Districts, provided:
§ 370-19. Required conditions.
The following conditions, where applicable, shall apply to all uses permitted
in this district.
A. All principal uses permitted and as regulated in the R1-A and R-1 One-
Family Residential Districts, except as hereinafter modified.
B. Two-family dwellings.
C. Accessory buildings, provided that they shall be located as required in
§ 370-100, Accessory uses, of this chapter.
A. The use shall comply with all standards and conditions assigned to them
in § 370-14 of this chapter.
A. All dwelling units shall be subject to the standards of § 370-15A of this
chapter.
B. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
C. See Article XIX, Use Permits.
§ 370-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-19
336:923
D. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78 Off-street loading and unloading standards.
E. See Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
F. See Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81, Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
G. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-101, Open storage in residential districts.
§ 370-19 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-19
336:924
(3) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(4) Section 370-103, Residential entranceway structures.
(5) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(6) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
(7) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(8) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(9) Section 370-108, Signs.
(10) Section 370-109, Fences.
(11) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(12) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
H. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-127, Lot area.
(3) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(4) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(5) Section 370-130, Multiple-dwelling side yard.
(6) Section 370-131, Porches.
(7) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(8) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-19
336:925

ARTICLE VI
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District (Low Rise)
§ 370-20. Intent.
The RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Low Rise District is designed to
provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses,
which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential
districts or major thoroughfares and lower density single-family districts.
The Multiple-Family District is further provided to serve the limited needs
for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium-density, single-family
community.
§ 370-21. Principal permitted uses.
In the RM-1 District, no building or land, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the
following specified purposes and shall be permitted, subject to the review
and approval of the site plan by the Planning Commission. Such review of
the site plan is required to find proper relationships between the following
development features as they relate to traffic safety, and further, to
minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties:
service roads, driveways, parking areas; accessory buildings and uses and
open space.
§ 370-22. Permitted uses subject to special conditions.
A. All uses permitted in the R1-A and R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts,
subject to the applicable requirements of those districts.
B. Multiple-family dwellings (two stories or less).
C. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the
permitted uses set forth in this section.
A. Nonprofit clubs, providing that no residential facilities of any kind shall
be, or become, a part of the premises.
B. Adult foster care small group home as defined in this chapter and adult
foster care large group home as defined in this chapter, provided that
any and all licensing requirements by the State of Michigan shall be
met, for up to 12 and up to 20 adults, respectively, subject to the
following conditions. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
(1) Any such facility will require issuance of a use permit by the City.
(2) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each caregiver,
plus two spaces for customer dropoff and pickup.
(3) All refuse containers will be kept in the rear yard and shall be
screened from view.
§ 370-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-22
336:927
(4) Any use permit issued for a small or large foster care group home
shall terminate upon any change of ownership or noncompliance
with any applicable local or state regulatory standards.
C. Child-care or day-care centers, subject to the following:
(1) Day-care centers that care for children, provided that any and all
licensing requirements by the State of Michigan shall be met and
shall: [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
(a) Require issuance of a use permit by the City.
(b) Provide at least 5,000 square feet of on-site play area when
more than 12 children are to be cared for.
(c) Screen from view all required play areas from any adjoining
single-family dwellings in a residential district.
(d) Off-street parking as required in Article XX of this chapter.
(2) Day-care centers that care for adults, regardless of the number,
shall be permitted upon issuance of a use permit by the City, and
shall be subject to all applicable local and state codes, including the
off-street parking requirements of Article XX of this chapter.
(3) A use permit issued for any day-care center shall terminate upon
change of ownership or noncompliance with applicable local orstate
regulatory standards.
D. General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for the
treatment of persons who are mentally ill or have contagious diseases,
with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are
met:
(1) All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at
least 10 acres in area.
(2) The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare (a thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of right-ofway,
existing or proposed). All ingress and egress to the off-street
parking area, for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses
to the facilities, shall be directly from a major thoroughfare.
(3) The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from
bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for all twostory
structures. For every story above two, the minimum yard
distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet.
(4) Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all
residential view with an obscuring wall.
E. Independent elderly housing as defined in this chapter, not to exceed a
height of two stories, when the following conditions are met:
§ 370-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-22
336:928
(1) All housing for the elderly shall be provided as a planned
development consisting of the following:
(a) Cottage-type dwellings and/or apartment-type dwelling units,
subject to the floor area requirements of § 370-60 of this
chapter.
(b) Common services containing, but not limited to, central dining
rooms, recreational rooms which may include exercise rooms,
an auditorium, meeting rooms, central lounges and workshops.
(c) Self-contained services such as a barber or beauty shop, gift
shop and pharmaceutical dispensary for use of the residents
only, and with no outside signs or advertising.
(2) The maximum number of dwelling units per acre shall be
predicated on the applicable standards of § 370-60 of this chapter.
F. Dependent elderly housing as defined in this chapter, not to exceed a
height of two stories, when the following conditions are met:
(1) The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio
on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the convalescent
home there shall be provided not less than 150 square feet of land
area per bed which shall provide for a landscaped setting, off-street
parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements,
employee facilities, and space required for accessory uses. The
one-hundred-fifty-square-foot requirement is over and above the
building coverage area.
(2) No building shall be closer than 40 feet from any property line.
(3) Such uses shall be located on a major or secondary thoroughfare as
identified in the City's Master Plan.
G. Lodging and boarding houses, subject to the density, off-street parking
and off-street parking layout standards of this chapter.
H. Bed-and-breakfast facilities, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Application to establish or reestablish a discontinued operation
shall be made to the Building Department for its review and
approval. The application shall include:
(a) A floor plan of the dwelling, drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch equals 50 feet and showing the layout of the building,
the location of the guest room(s), bathroom(s) and such other
information as may be required to facilitate an adequate
review of the application.
(b) A plan view of the lot, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet and showing the existing principal residential
§ 370-22 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-22
336:929
§ 370-23. Required conditions.
The following conditions, where applicable, shall apply to all uses permitted
in this district.
building, all accessory buildings and the location of driveways
and off-street parking spaces.
(2) The Building Department, in making its review of the application,
shall find that the following conditions are met:
(a) Not more than 25% of the total existing floor area or not more
than 50% of the total number of bedrooms of the dwelling
structure at the time of application, whichever is the more
restrictive, shall be devoted to bed-and-breakfast operations.
The method for determining floor area shall be based on the
definition of "floor area residential," as defined in 370-5, Terms
defined, in this chapter.
(b) The dwelling building shall contain at least two doorway exits
to the outside.
(c) Room(s) utilized for guest sleeping shall have a minimum of 80
square feet of floor area for two occupants, with an additional
30 square feet of floor area provided for each additional
occupant up to a maximum of four occupants per room.
(d) No separate cooking facilities shall be provided for bed-andbreakfast
guests, nor shall existing cooking facilities be made
available for use by bed-and-breakfast guests.
(e) Adequate lavatories and bathing facilities shall be provided to
all guests in a bed-and-breakfast facility.
(f) No transient occupant shall reside on the premises for more
than 14 consecutive days, nor more than 30 days in any one
year.
(g) No outside employee(s) shall be used in the operation of a bedand-
breakfast facility.
(h) Each sleeping room shall meet all applicable local and state
fire codes.
(i) Any signage shall be subject to the sign control standards as
set forth in Chapter 264 of the Roseville Code.
(j) The off-street parking and off-street parking layout standards
of §§ 370-76 and 370-77 of this chapter shall be met.
I. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
uses.
§ 370-22 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-23
336:930
A. All one- and two-family uses permitted in the RM-1 District shall be
subject to the applicable requirements of the R-1, R-1A and R-2
Districts.
B. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by a permitted
land use, the maximum dwelling unit density permitted, and building
setbacks.
C. See Article XIX, Use Permits.
D. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
E. See Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
F. See Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
§ 370-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-23
336:931
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
G. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-101, Open storage in residential districts.
(3) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(4) Section 370-103, Residential entranceway structures.
(5) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(6) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
(7) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(8) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(9) Section 370-108, Signs.
(10) Section 370-109, Fences.
(11) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(12) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
H. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-128, Yard regulations.
(3) Section 370-129, Lots adjoining alleys.
(4) Section 370-131, Porches.
(5) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(6) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-23 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-23
336:932
ARTICLE VII
RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District (High Rise)
§ 370-24. Intent.
The RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential High Rise District is designed to
provide sites for high-density multiple-dwelling structures adjacent to high
traffic generators commonly found in the proximity of large acreage
nonresidential development and areas abutting major thoroughfares and
expressways. This district is further provided to serve the residential needs
of persons desiring the apartment type of accommodation with central
services as opposed to the residential patterns found in the One-Family,
Two-Family and RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts. This district is
further designed so as to provide a zone of transition between high traffic
generators and other residential districts through the requirements of lower
building coverage which, in turn will result in more open space.
§ 370-25. Principal permitted uses.
In the RM-2 District, no building or land, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the
following specified purposes and shall be permitted, subject to the review
and approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission. Such review of
the site plan is required to find proper relationships between the following
development features as they relate to traffic safety and further to minimize
the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties, service
roads, driveways, parking areas; accessory buildings and uses and open
space.
A. Multiple-family dwelling units as permitted and regulated in the RM-1
District.
B. High-rise structures (three stories or greater), subject to the conditions
herein imposed:
(1) The proposed site for any such use shall have one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare as set forth in § 370-106 in this
chapter.
(2) The entire area of the site shall be treated so as to service only the
residents of the multiple-family development, and any accessory
buildings, uses, or services shall be developed solely for the use of
residents of the main building. Uses considered herein as accessory
uses include parking structures, swimming pools, recreation areas,
pavilions, cabanas, and other similar uses.
C. General hospitals which meet all of the conditions set forth in § 370-22D
in the RM-1 District.
D. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
permitted uses.
§ 370-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-25
336:933
§ 370-26. Required conditions.
E. Business uses shall be permitted on the site when developed as retail or
service uses clearly accessory to the main use, within the walls of the
main structure, and totally obscured from any exterior view. No
identifying sign for any such businesses or service use shall be visible
from any exterior view. Such businesses or services shall not exceed
25% of the floor area at grade level, or 50% of a subgrade level, and
shall be prohibited on all floors above the first or grade-level floor.
A. The following conditions, where applicable, shall apply to all uses
permitted in this district:
B. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
C. See Article XIX, Use Permits.
D. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
E. Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
F. Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
§ 370-25 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-26
336:934
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
G. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-101, Open storage in residential districts.
(3) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(4) Section 370-103, Residential entranceway structures.
(5) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(6) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
(7) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(8) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(9) Section 370-108, Signs.
(10) Section 370-109, Fences.
(11) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(12) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
H. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-127, Lot area.
(3) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(4) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(5) Section 370-130, Multiple dwelling side yard.
(6) Section 370-131, Porches.
(7) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
§ 370-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-26
336:935
(8) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-26 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-26
336:936
ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)
VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-26
336:937

ARTICLE IX
OS Office Service District
§ 370-27. Intent.
The OS Office Service District is designed to accommodate office uses,
office sales, and certain basic personal service uses. The district may also
serve as a district of land use transition between high traffic corridors and
residential districts, and between nonresidential and residential districts.
§ 370-28. Principal permitted uses.
The following regulations shall apply to all OS Districts, and no building,
structure or premises except as otherwise provided in this chapter shall be
erected, altered, or used except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 370-29. Uses permitted subject to special conditions.
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to review and approval by the
Building Department or the Planning Commission.
A. Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive;
administrative; professional; accounting; writing; clerical;
stenographic; drafting; and sales, subject to the limitations contained
herein and § 370-30, Required conditions, in this chapter.
B. Medical offices, including clinics.
C. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses
that may include drive-through facilities when an accessory function to
the principal building.
D. Articleshops, photographic studios, and interior decorating studios.
E. Publicly owned buildings, exchanges, and public utility offices, but not
including storage yards, transformer stations, substations or gas
regulator stations.
F. Personal service establishments, including barber shops, beauty shops
and health salons.
G. An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by
this section, such as, but not limited to, a pharmacy or apothecary shop;
stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service,
may be permitted.
A. Facilities for human care such as hospitals and sanitariums, subject to
the following conditions.
(1) All such uses shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least
10 acres in area.
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-29
336:939
§ 370-30. Required conditions.
(2) The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare (a thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of right-ofway,
existing or proposed). All ingress and egress to the off-street
parking area for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses
to the facilities, shall be directly from a major thoroughfare.
(3) The minimum distance to any principal use, or accessory building
of two stories or more, from a residential district shall be at least
100 feet. For every story above two stories, the minimum setback
from any parcel line shall be increased by at least 20 feet, except no
setback shall be less than 100 feet from a residential district.
B. Dependent care facilities, as defined in this chapter, subject to the
requirements of § 370-22F of this chapter.
C. Churches, subject to the requirements of § 370-14B of this chapter.
D. Child day care, or day-care center, as defined in this chapter and
licensed by the State of Michigan for children or adults, subject to the
conditions set forth in § 370-14H of this chapter.
A. No interior display of any kind for any use permitted in the district shall
be visible from the exterior of the building, and the total area devoted to
display, including both the objects displayed and the floor space set
aside for persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed 25%
of the usable floor area of either the first or second story, or in the
basement.
B. The outdoor storage of goods or materials of any kind shall be expressly
prohibited.
C. Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that
normally incident to the above-permitted uses, shall be prohibited.
D. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
E. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
F. Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
§ 370-29 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-30
336:940
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
G. Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
H. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(3) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(4) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
(5) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(6) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(7) Section 370-108, Signs.
(8) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(9) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
§ 370-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-30
336:941
I. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(3) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(4) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(5) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-30 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-30
336:942
ARTICLE X
B-1 Local Business District
§ 370-31. Intent.
The B-1 Local Business District, as herein established, is designed to meet
the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing
in the adjacent residential area.
§ 370-32. Principal permitted uses.
The following regulations shall apply to all B-1 Districts, and no building,
structure or premises, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be
erected, altered, or used except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 370-33. Permitted uses subject to special conditions.
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the
Building Department, or the Planning Commission.
A. Any principal permitted use permitted in the OS Office Service District,
except child day-care centers when they would be the principal use of
the land.
B. Generally recognized retail business that supplies commodities on the
premises, such as but not limited to groceries, meats, dairy products,
baked goods, or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions, or
hardware.
C. Personal service establishments which perform services on the
premises, such as but not limited to repair shops (watches, radios,
televisions, shoes, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops,
photographic studios, and self-service laundries.
D. Dry cleaning establishments, or pickup stations, dealing directly with
the consumer. Central dry-cleaning plants servicing more than one
retail outlet shall be prohibited.
E. Business establishments that perform services on the premises, such
as, but not limited to, banks, loan companies, insurance offices, and real
estate offices.
F. Other uses similar to the above uses.
G. Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the abovepermitted
uses.
A. Any conditional use permitted in the OS District, subject to the
requirements specifically set forth for the use.
B. Dining, drinking, and reception facilities: [Amended 2-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 1308]
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-33
336:943
(1) Bars, taverns, lounges, breweries, and distilleries.
(2) Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments (indoor
and without a drive-through or drive-in).
C. Electric transformer stations and substations; gas regulator stations
with service yards, but without storage yards; water and sewage
pumping stations, subject to all applicable screening requirements of
this chapter.
D. Post office and similar governmental office buildings, serving persons
living in the adjacent residential area, subject to the off-street parking
and parking layout standards of this chapter, and subject further to all
applicable exterior lighting, landscaping and screening requirements of
this chapter.
E. Outdoor cafes are allowed in accordance with the following regulations:
[Added 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1308]
(1) An outdoor cafe may be set up and used from March 15 through
October 31. The permitted hours of operation are from 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 midnight in B-3 Business Districts unless longer hours are
specifically approved by the Planning Commission and the City
Council. Noise radiating from an outdoor café which exceeds 50
DBA between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, or other approved
hours, or 55 DBA between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. shall constitute
prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the
comfort, quiet and repose of persons in the area. The "DBA"
represents the sound pressure level in decibel measured on the "A"
scale of a standard sound level meter. Noise level measurements
shall be taken at the zoning district boundary of any residential
zoning district, recreation unit district and any planned
development as may be appropriate. In all other districts, noise
level measurements shall be taken at the property line of an
affected property. The City Council may, by resolution, extend the
dates of operation or the hours of operation for a stipulated number
of days, not to exceed a total of 30 days per calendar year.
(2) A site drawing showing the detailed plan of the outdoor cafe must
be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. The
detailed plan is to include the design, relevant details and location
of all temporary structures such as awnings, planters, landscaping,
railing, tables, chairs and other equipment, as well as lighting and
electrical outlet locations. The layout shall show all seating, tables
and chairs and shall be used to determine maximum occupancy
load for the outdoor cafe. The occupancy load shall be posted in a
conspicuous location.
(3) Outdoor cafes, including any canopy or cover associated with such
a cafe, shall be permitted within the required setback.
§ 370-33 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-33
336:944
(4) Outdoor cafes within the required setback shall not be enclosed,
except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
(5) Outdoor cafes shall be exempt from any parking requirement if
they have less than 30 seats. Outdoor cafe seating areas that have
more than 30 seats shall provide one space for each three outdoor
seats provided above 30 seats.
(6) If alcohol is being served, it will include a fence, subject to approval
of the Planning Commission.
(7) No food and beverage preparation would occur in the outdoor cafe.
All food and beverage preparation will incur inside the building
housing the principal use and brought to the customer or carried by
the customer to the outdoor cafe.
(8) All fixtures associated with an outdoor cafe must be portable and
related, as well as limited to food service (e.g., tables, chairs,
serving trays). Furnishings of an outdoor cafe shall consist solely of
readily removable awnings, covers, canopies, railings, tables,
chairs, planters containing plants and accessories. Furnishings
may not be attached, even in a temporary manner, to the sidewalk
or other public property, except that canopies and railings, if
specifically approved by the Planning Commission and the City
Council, may be secured by means of flush-mounted anchors or
other methods approved by the Building Director. No objects which
are part of an outdoor cafe, except lighting fixtures, railings,
awnings, or other nonpermanent covers or canopies, may be
attached, even in a temporary manner, to any building or structure
on which the outdoor cafe abuts.
(9) The outdoor cafe must be part of a licensed restaurant and meet all
the requirements of the Department of Health and any other local,
county or state requirements, including the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission (if applicable).
(10) Outdoor cafes are typically located immediately adjacent to the
building housing the principal use.
(11) Outdoor cafes do not have to be removed daily or on any regular
schedule.
(12) Outdoor cafes can have heating as long as they are not enclosed
and the heating can be removed.
(13)No signs or any other forms of advertising are permitted in the
outdoor dining area with the exception of an identification or menu
sign. The name of the establishment may appear on the valance of
an umbrella.
(14) Plans for setting up the outdoor cafe must be approved by the
Building Department to provide for the free passage of pedestrians
§ 370-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-33
336:945
§ 370-34. Required conditions.
along the sidewalks, by the Police Department to provide for traffic
and pedestrian safety, and by the Fire Department for fire safety
issues. If alcohol is served, entrance to the outdoor cafe is required
to be from inside the building. An outdoor cafe which is adjacent to
residential properties or shares an alley with residential properties
shall be screened with a solid fence a minimum of six feet high.
(15) Lighting requirements are subject to the applicable requirements
of Article XXIII, § 370-102.
A. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises
shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
B. All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
C. The outdoor storage of goods or materials of any kind shall be expressly
prohibited.
D. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
E. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
F. Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 2100 Site Plan Process.
(2) Section 2101 Improvements Guarantee.
G. Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
§ 370-33 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-34
336:946
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
H. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(3) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(4) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
(5) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(6) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(7) Section 370-108, Signs.
(8) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(9) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
I. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(3) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(4) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(5) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-34
336:947

ARTICLE XI
B-2 Community Business District
§ 370-35. Intent.
The B-2 Community Business District is designed to cater to the needs
of a larger consumer population than is served by the Local Business
District, and is generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster
of establishments served by a common parking area and generating large
volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
§ 370-36. Principal permitted uses .
The following regulations shall apply to all B-2 Districts, and no building,
structure, or premises, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall
be erected, altered, or used except for one or more of the following specified
uses:
A. Any principal permitted retail business or service use in B-1 Districts.
B. All retail business or service establishments or processing uses as
follows:
(1) Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of
merchandise in an enclosed building.
(2) Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop
nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker,
printer, upholsterer; or any establishment doing radio or home
appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service
establishments that require a retail adjunct.
(3) Fraternities, clubs, lodges, social or recreational buildings and
facilities.
(4) Dining, drinking, and reception facilities: [Amended 2-26-2019
by Ord. No. 1308]
(a) Restaurants, including those with carry-out, and fast food sitdown
without drive-through. (Accessory lounges are
permitted.)
(5) Restaurant (carry-out), as defined in this chapter, except that
seating for customers may be provided as regulated in § 370-33B of
this chapter.
(6) Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of
assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings.
(7) Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for
profit.
(8) Other uses similar to the above uses.
§ 370-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-36
336:949
§ 370-37. Permitted uses subject to special conditions.
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the
Building Department.
(9) Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the abovepermitted
uses.
A. Conditional uses permitted in the B-1 Districts, subject to the
conditions set forth in the B-1 Districts for each use.
B. Open-air business uses when developed in conjunction with a planned
commercial center within the B-2 District as follows:
(1) Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site, and sales of
lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies,
provided further that such uses shall be located at the exterior end
of the building mass, but not in any minimum setback requirement
of the district.
(2) Recreational space providing children's amusement park and other
similar recreation when part of a planned development, provided
further that such use be located at the exterior end of the building
mass located in a B-2 District, but not at the intersection of two
major thoroughfares. Such recreation space shall be fenced on all
sides with a minimum four-foot chain-link-type fence.
C. Bowling alleys, billiard halls, indoor archery ranges, indoor tennis
courts, indoor skating rinks, or similar forms of indoor commercial
recreation except arcades when located at least 100 feet from the
nearest wall of the building to any front, rear, or side yard of any
residential lot in an adjacent residential district.
D. Arcades, provided they are located within a planned commercial center
as defined in this chapter and subject further to the applicable
requirements of Chapter 73, Amusements, of the Roseville Code of
Ordinances.
E. Automobile service centers, when developed as part of a planned
commercial center designed so as to integrate the automobile service
center within the site plan and architecture of the total shopping
center; and provided further that a building permit shall not be issued
separately for the construction of any automobile service center within
the B-2 District.
F. Freestanding accessory uses such as offices, banks and savings and
loan outlets and their accessory drive-through facilities, medical offices,
or clinics, sit-down, drive-through fast food carry-out and fast food sitdown
restaurants as defined in this chapter, as well as retail
commercial uses, except gasoline service stations as provided.
§ 370-36 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-37
336:950
(1) They must be accessory to a principal permitted use on the land
and shall be erected only in conjunction with or subsequent to
erection of the principal use on the land.
(2) Only an accessory office bank savings and loan or medical clinic
shall be permitted on any accessory use site next to a residential
district.
(3) If an interior access road is provided for the principal use, all
access to any accessory use permitted herein shall be only from the
interior access road. If an interior access road is not provided, one
of the following alternatives shall apply.
(a) If the site for the accessory use lies next to a driveway entrance
to the principal use, access for the accessory use shall be via
that entrance.
(b) If the land along the principal site's frontage is available for
two or more contiguous accessory uses, provisions shall be
made for the location of an access drive to serve the accessory
uses. The access drive may be located at the front or at the rear
of the site of the accessory use, but its location shall be
uniformly the same for all accessory uses.
(c) If access cannot be gained in either manner outlined above,
access to an accessory use may be gained directly from a road
fronting the site, provided such access is at least 60 feet from
any other entrance to the principal use.
(4) The use shall meet the applicable numerical off-street parking
requirements and the off-street parking layout standards, as well as
loading and unloading requirements of this chapter, and all such
requirements will be met within the lot, parcel or area of a site
specifically designated for the use. For uses having drive-up or
drive-through window services, see §§ 370-76 and Section 370-77
of the Ordinance Code.
(5) Existing off-street parking spaces for the principal use of the site
may not be used to meet the off-street parking requirement of a
secondary use unless they are in excess of the minimum number of
parking spaces required for the principal use.
(6) Whenever existing excess parking may be used for a secondary use
on the site, that parking shall be physically separated from parking
used for the principal use by means of raised (curbed) landscape
islands, except nothing herein is intended to discourage direct
limited access to a secondary use from the off-street parking area
of the principal use.
(7) Whenever an accessory use as permitted herein shall be attached
in any way or manner to the principal building or use of the
property, the minimum building setback requirements of the
§ 370-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-37
336:951
district shall apply. Whenever a secondary use shall be housed in
a building detached and physically independent of the principal
building or use, the following minimum building setback
requirements may be applied to the secondary use,
(a) Front yard setback: 40 feet. Within this setback, a minimum of
10 feet of landscaped lawn panel shall be provided between the
front property line and any intersecting service drive or offstreet
parking space if a site access service drive is required as
set forth in Subsection F(3)(b) above the drive shall be 22 feet
wide and shall be set back 10 feet from the nearest accessory
site line and shall extend in a continuous manner and at a
continuous elevation from one accessory site to the next.
(b) Side yard setback (each side): 20 feet, except in the case of an
exterior side yard, the minimum setback shall be the same as
the front yard and all conditions applicable to the front yard
setback shall apply.
(c) Rear yard setback: 20 feet, except in the case of a double
frontage lot, the minimum setback shall be the same as a front
yard and all conditions applicable to the front yard setback
shall apply.
(8) Except as otherwise permitted herein, all loading, unloading, as
well as the location of a trash receptacle shall be restricted to the
rear yard area. The trash receptacle shall be screened in
accordance with the screening requirements of this chapter.
Loading, unloading and the trash receptacle with corresponding
screening structure may be located in the interior side yard when
the Building Department or the Planning Commission shall
determine that:
(a) The site of the accessory use is a double frontage site.
(b) The size or configuration of the site, or the required location of
the accessory use on the site, results in a less desirable rear
yard location for these operations.
(c) In determining if the interior side yard alternative is preferred
to the required rear yard location, the Building Department or
the Planning Commission shall be satisfied that an interior side
yard location will result in a more efficient use of both
functions. The Building Department or the Planning
Commission shall also be satisfied that the alternative location
shall not have an adverse visual or functional impact on any
adjacent use and that all such interior side yard functions will
be effectively screened from view.
(9) The minimum building height limitations of the district
notwithstanding, the maximum building height of all secondary
uses shall be 25 feet.
§ 370-37 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-37
336:952
G. Dining, drinking, and reception facilities: [Added 2-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 1308247]
(1) Bars, taverns, lounges, breweries, and distilleries.
(2) Restaurants with a liquor license, drive-in or drive-through,
meeting the following standards:
(a) Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from
the intersection of any two streets.
(b) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential
districts.
(c) A completely obscuring architectural masonry screen wall as
required in Article XXII of this chapter shall be provided when
abutting or adjacent to R, OS, B-1, B-2 or B-3 Districts. For OS,
B-1, B-2, B-3 Districts, the applicant can submit evidence to
demonstrate that a waiver of the screen wall does not result in
any unnecessary hardship on surrounding properties and
businesses. The Plan Commission may approve such waiver
upon finding that such waiver does not result in any
unnecessary hardship of surrounding properties and
businesses.
(3) Outdoor cafes are allowed in accordance with the following
regulations:
(a) An outdoor cafe may be set up and used from March 15
through October 31. The permitted hours of operation are from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight in B-3 Business Districts unless
longer hours are specifically approved by the Planning
Commission and the City Council. Noise radiating from an
outdoor café which exceeds 50 DBA between 8:00 p.m. and
12:00 midnight, or other approved hours, or 55 DBA between
7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. shall constitute prima facie evidence
that such noise unreasonably disturbs the comfort, quiet and
repose of persons in the area. The "DBA" represents the sound
pressure level in decibel measured on the "A" scale of a
standard sound level meter. Noise level measurements shall be
taken at the zoning district boundary of any residential zoning
district, recreation unit district and any planned development
as may be appropriate. In all other districts, noise level
measurements shall be taken at the property line of an affected
property. The City Council may, by resolution, extend the dates
of operation or the hours of operation for a stipulated number
of days, not to exceed a total of 30 days per calendar year.
(b) A site drawing showing the detailed plan of the outdoor cafe
must be submitted to and approved by the Planning
247. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection G as Subsection H.
§ 370-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-37
336:953
Commission. The detailed plan is to include the design,
relevant details and location of all temporary structures such
as awnings, planters, landscaping, railing, tables, chairs and
other equipment, as well as lighting and electrical outlet
locations. The layout shall show all seating, tables and chairs
and shall be used to determine maximum occupancy load for
the outdoor cafe. The occupancy load shall be posted in a
conspicuous location.
(c) Outdoor cafes, including any canopy or cover associated with
such a cafe, shall be permitted within the required setback.
(d) Outdoor cafes within the required setback shall not be
enclosed, except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
(e) Outdoor cafes shall be exempt from any parking requirement if
they have less than 30 seats. Outdoor cafe seating areas that
have more than 30 seats shall provide one space for each three
outdoor seats provided above 30 seats.
(f) If alcohol is being served, it will include a fence, subject to
approval of the Planning Commission.
(g) No food and beverage preparation would occur in the outdoor
cafe. All food and beverage preparation will incur inside the
building housing the principal use and brought to the customer
or carried by the customer to the outdoor cafe.
(h) All fixtures associated with an outdoor cafe must be portable
and related, as well as limited to food service (e.g., tables,
chairs, serving trays). Furnishings of an outdoor cafe shall
consist solely of readily removable awnings, covers, canopies,
railings, tables, chairs, planters containing plants and
accessories. Furnishings may not be attached, even in a
temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public property,
except that canopies and railings, if specifically approved by
the Planning Commission and the City Council, may be secured
by means of flush-mounted anchors or other methods approved
by the Building Director. No objects which are part of an
outdoor cafe, except lighting fixtures, railings, awnings, or
other nonpermanent covers or canopies, may be attached,
even in a temporary manner, to any building or structure on
which the outdoor cafe abuts.
(i) The outdoor cafe must be part of a licensed restaurant and
meet all the requirements of the Department of Health and any
other local, county or state requirements, including the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission (if applicable).
(j) Outdoor cafes are typically located immediately adjacent to the
building housing the principal use.
§ 370-37 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-37
336:954
§ 370-38. Required conditions.
(k) Outdoor cafes do not have to be removed daily or on any
regular schedule.
(l) Outdoor cafes can have heating as long as they are not
enclosed and the heating can be removed.
(m) No signs or any other forms of advertising are permitted in the
outdoor dining area with the exception of an identification or
menu sign. The name of the establishment may appear on the
valance of an umbrella.
(n) Plans for setting up the outdoor cafe must be approved by the
Building Department to provide for the free passage of
pedestrians along the sidewalks, by the Police Department to
provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, and by the Fire
Department for fire safety issues. If alcohol is served, entrance
to the outdoor cafe is required to be from inside the building.
An outdoor cafe which is adjacent to residential properties or
shares an alley with residential properties shall be screened
with a solid fence a minimum of six feet high.
(o) Lighting requirements are subject to the applicable
requirements of Article XXIII, § 370-102.
H. Permitted and special uses allowed in the B3 and OS Districts shall be
allowed on property containing an enclosed mall on at least 40 acres of
land, subject to the conditions set forth in the appropriately noted
District. The Building Director or his or her designee may request a
public hearing at the Planning Commission level. [Added 8-11-2015
by Ord. No. 1285]
A. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. All goods provided on the premises
shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
B. All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking;
loading and those open-air uses indicated as being subject to special
conditions in § 370-37 above, shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings.
C. Except as permitted in § 370-37 above, the outdoor storage of goods or
materials of any kind shall be expressly prohibited.
D. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
E. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
§ 370-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-38
336:955
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
F. Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
G. Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
H. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(3) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(4) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
§ 370-38 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-38
336:956
(5) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(6) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(7) Section 370-108, Signs.
(8) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(9) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
I. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(3) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(4) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(5) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-38
336:957

ARTICLE XII
B-3 General Business District
§ 370-39. Intent.
The B-3 General Business District is designed to provide sites for more
diversified business types and is often located so as to serve passerby
traffic. The General Business District is thus typically mapped along major
traffic arteries and/or adjacent to the Community Business Districts.
§ 370-40. Principal permitted uses.
The following regulations shall apply to all B-3 Districts, and no building,
structure, or premises, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall
be erected, altered, or used except for one or more of the following specified
uses:
A. Any principal permitted retail business or service establishment in the
B-2 Districts.
B. Mortuary establishments, when adequate assembly area is provided as
set forth in § 370-76A of this chapter, off-street parking for vehicles to
be used in a funeral procession, and provided further that such
assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street
parking area. A caretaker's or proprietor's residence may be provided
within the main building of mortuary establishments.
C. Motor vehicle car wash, when completely enclosed in a building.
D. Bus passenger stations.
E. New and used car salesroom, showroom or office.
F. Governmental office or other governmental use; public utility offices,
exchanges, transformer stations, pump stations and service yards, but
not including outdoor storage.
G. Dining, drinking, and reception facilities: [Added 2-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 1308248]
(1) Restaurants, including those with carry-out, and fast food sit-down
without drive-through. (Accessory lounges are permitted.)
(2) Banquet halls.
H. Other structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
248. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection G as Subsection H.
§ 370-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-41
336:959
§ 370-41. Uses permitted subject to special conditions.
The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the
Building Department or Planning Commission.
A. Any conditional use permitted in the B-2 District, subject to the
conditions specifically set forth for the use.
B. Outdoor sales space for the exclusive sale, lease or rental of new or
used automobiles, house trailers, boats, or trailers, subject to the
following: [Amended 7-23-2013 by Ord. No. 1263]
(1) The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and
dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose
of all surface water accumulated within the area.
(2) Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60
feet from the intersection of any two streets.
(3) No major vehicle repair, as defined in this chapter, shall be done on
the lot.
(4) All exterior site lighting shall be subject to the applicable
requirements of § 370-102 of this chapter.
(5) Elevated display stands of vehicles are prohibited.
(6) The minimum lot frontage requirement of a parcel for outdoor sales
space for the exclusive sale, lease, or rental of new or used
automobiles, house trailers, boats, or trailers shall be 100 feet.
(7) A minimum eight-foot-wide landscape area shall be provided
between the sidewalk or property line, whichever is greater, and
the parking or display area of the vehicles.
(8) All parking and display spaces shall have a raised curb or parking
block located to prevent cars from parking on the lawn panel,
grass, etc. Parking blocks shall be 72 inches long, eight feet wide
and five inches tall.
(9) No vehicles shall be parked or displayed in the setback.
(10)No more than two such uses shall be permitted within 400 feet of
each other.
(11) The applicable requirements of Chapter 332, Used Car Lots, of the
Roseville Code of Ordinances, as amended, are met.
C. Motel, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Ingress and egress shall be provided so as not to conflict with the
adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major
thoroughfare.
§ 370-41 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-41
336:960
(2) Each unit shall contain not less than 200 square feet of floor area.
(3) No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more
than 30 days within any calendar year.
D. Dining, drinking, and reception facilities: [Amended 2-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 1308]
(1) Bars, taverns, lounges, breweries, and distilleries.
(2) Restaurants with a liquor license, drive-in or drive-through,
meeting the following standards:
(a) A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any
existing or proposed street must be maintained;
(b) Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from
the intersection of any two streets;
(c) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential
districts;
(d) A completely obscuring architectural masonry screen wall as
required in Article XXII of this chapter shall be provided when
abutting or adjacent to R, OS, B-1, B-2 or B-3 Districts. For OS,
B-1, B-2, B-3 Districts, the applicant can submit evidence to
demonstrate that a waiver of the screen wall does not result in
any unnecessary hardship on surrounding properties and
businesses. The Plan Commission may approve such waiver
upon finding that such waiver does not result in any
unnecessary hardship of surrounding properties and
businesses.
E. Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided all activities, including the
boarding of pets, is conducted within a totally enclosed main building,
and provided further that all abutting or adjacent property is within OS,
B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 or 1-2 Districts.
F. Motor vehicle service station, as defined in this chapter, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not
be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic
hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances
shall be no less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured
from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts.
(2) Minimum lot area.
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, and so
arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles that
are required to wait.
§ 370-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-41
336:961
(b) Automobile service stations which are intended solely for the
sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories, and having no
facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles (including
lubricating facilities) or any accessory retail adjunct, may be
permitted on lots of 10,000 square feet, subject to all other
provisions herein required.
(3) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
G. Residential occupancy of commercial buildings of two stories or greater
may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met.
(1) No dwelling shall occupy any part of a commercial building at
grade level,
(2) A business use may occupy any number of total floors, but no
business shall be located on the same floor as a residential dwelling
unit and no floor may be used for a business purpose which is
located above a floor occupied by a residential dwelling.
(3) No such dwelling unit shall exceed a maximum of two bedrooms
and shall meet all other applicable City codes, including building
and fire codes.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall meet the minimum applicable floor area
requirements of the RM-2 District as set forth in Article XVIII of
this chapter.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth and required in
Article XX of this chapter.
H. Motor vehicle repair shops (general), as defined in this chapter, subject
to the following conditions:
(1) Vehicles awaiting same-day repair may be parked in any required
yard.
(2) All outdoor storage, including vehicles requiring more than sameday
repair, shall be stored in an interior side yard or rear yard area
behind an architectural masonry screen wall as set forth and
regulated in Article XXII of this chapter.
(3) All repair work shall be performed inside an enclosed building.
(4) The outdoor storage of used automobile parts or partially
disassembled automobiles, for the purposes of salvaging usable
parts and/or sale to automotive wrecking yards, shall be expressly
prohibited.
I. Self-storage facilities, subject to the following conditions.
(1) All access to the facility will be from a major thoroughfare as
designated on the City's Master Plan For Future Land Use Map, as
amended.
§ 370-41 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-41
336:962
(2) Except as otherwise permitted in this subsection, access to all
storage spaces shall be from the interior of a building only, there
being no direct outside access to any such storage space permitted.
(3) When placed in conjunction with any loading and unloading area at
the rear of the building, direct outside access to storage spaces
may be permitted along the rear wall of the building and along not
more than the rear 75% of one interior side wall of the building,
provided the sidewall abuts a commercial or industrial district.
(4) An office area and a manager's or security person's living quarters
may be provided in the storage building or in a separate building on
the property. Any such living quarters shall meet the minimum
applicable floor area requirements of this chapter for a multiplefamily
dwelling. An attached or detached private garage may be
provided in conjunction with the living quarters for the sole use of
its occupant(s). If so provided, the garage shall not be made
available for customer storage.
(5) Except for trash receptacles, no outdoor storage of any kind shall
be permitted either as the principal use or as an use accessory to
the principal use.
J. Massage parlors. Massage parlors, as defined in Chapter 193 of the
Roseville Code, and amendments thereto, shall only be permitted in the
B-3 District, subject further to the following requirements and
conditions:
(1) An application to establish the use permitted in this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. A site
plan shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in
accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXI of this
chapter. In conducting its review, the Planning Commission shall
apply the following requirements.
(a) The site shall not be contiguous to a One-Family Residential
District.
(b) The site shall be so located as to abut a major thoroughfare
right-of-way, and all ingress-egress to the site shall be directly
from said major thoroughfare.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space per
15 square feet of usable floor area in the waiting room, lobby
or similar use area, plus one space per massage table or bench,
plus one space per employee.
(d) Any such establishment shall further comply with Chapter 193
of the Roseville Code, as amended, and any other applicable
codes or ordinances of the City of Roseville.
§ 370-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-41
336:963
(2) The Planning Commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a
public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140
of this chapter.
K. Sexually oriented businesses:
(1) It has been demonstrated that the establishment of adult
businesses in business districts which are immediately adjacent to
and which serve residential neighborhoods has a deleterious effect
on both business and residential segments of the neighborhood,
causing blight and a downgrading of property values. A prohibition
against the establishment of more than two regulated uses within
1,000 feet of each other serves to avoid the clustering of certain
businesses, which, when located in close proximity to each other,
tend to create a skid row atmosphere. However, such prohibition
fails to avoid the deleterious effects of blight and devaluation of
both business and residential property values resulting from the
establishment of adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters
and adult mini motion-picture theaters in a business district which
is immediately adjacent to and which serves residential
neighborhoods. The concern for and pride in the orderly planning
and development of a neighborhood should be encouraged and
fostered in those persons who comprise the business and
residential segments of that neighborhood. The Roseville Planning
Commission should be guided by the expressed will of those
businesses and residents which are immediately adjacent to the
proposed location of, and therefore most affected by the existence
of, any adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater and adult mini
motion-picture theater.
(2) An adult bookstore is an establishment having, as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined in this
chapter), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to
the sale or display of such material. An adult motion-picture theater
is an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used
for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined in this
chapter) for observation by patrons therein. An adult mini motionpicture
theater is an enclosed building with a capacity for less than
50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
(as defined in this chapter), for observation by patrons therein.
(3) Adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, and adult mini
motion-picture theaters, as defined in this chapter, shall only be
§ 370-41 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-41
336:964
permitted in the B-3 District, subject to the following requirements
and conditions:
(a) An application to establish any use permitted in this section
shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning
Commission. A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall
be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of
Article 21 of this chapter. In conducting its review the Planning
Commission shall apply the following conditions.
[1] Not more than two such uses shall be permitted within
1,000 feet of each other.
[2] It shall be unlawful to establish any such uses in a B-3
District if the proposed location is within 500 feet of a
residentially zoned district unless the prohibition is waived
upon the presentment of the Roseville Planning
Commission of a validated petition requesting such waiver,
signed by 51% of those persons owning, residing or doing
business within 500 feet of the proposed location.
[3] The site shall abut a major thoroughfare right-of-way, and
all ingress-egress to and from the site shall be directly via
that major thoroughfare.
L. Dependent adult housing, as defined in this chapter, not to exceed a
height of two stories, when the following conditions are met: [Added
1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 1210]
(1) The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio
on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the facility there
shall be provided not less than 150 square feet of land area per bed
which shall provide for a landscaped setting, off-street parking,
service drives, loading space, yard requirements, employee
facilities, and space required for accessory uses. The one-hundredfifty-
square-foot requirement is over and above the building
coverage area.
(2) No building shall be closer than 40 feet from any property line.
(3) Such uses shall be located on a major or secondary thoroughfare as
identified in the City's Master Plan.
M. Outdoor cafes are allowed in accordance with the following regulations:
[Added 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1265]
(1) An outdoor cafe may be set up and used from March 15 through
October 31. The permitted hours of operation are from 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 midnight in B-3 Business Districts unless longer hours are
specifically approved by the Planning Commission and the City
Council. Noise radiating from an outdoor café which exceeds 50
DBA between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, or other approved
§ 370-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-41
336:965
hours, or 55 DBA between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. shall constitute
prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the
comfort, quiet and repose of persons in the area. The "DBA"
represents the sound pressure level in decibel measured on the "A"
scale of a standard sound level meter. Noise level measurements
shall be taken at the zoning district boundary of any residential
zoning district, recreation unit district and any planned
development as may be appropriate. In all other districts, noise
level measurements shall be taken at the property line of an
affected property. The City Council may, by resolution, extend the
dates of operation or the hours of operation for a stipulated number
of days, not to exceed a total of 30 days per calendar year.
(2) A site drawing showing the detailed plan of the outdoor cafe must
be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. The
detailed plan is to include the design, relevant details and location
of all temporary structures such as awnings, planters, landscaping,
railing, tables, chairs and other equipment, as well as lighting and
electrical outlet locations. The layout shall show all seating, tables
and chairs and shall be used to determine maximum occupancy
load for the outdoor cafe. The occupancy load shall be posted in a
conspicuous location.
(3) Outdoor cafes, including any canopy or cover associated with such
a cafe, shall be permitted within the required setback.
(4) Outdoor cafes within the required setback shall not be enclosed,
except as specified elsewhere in the ordinance.
(5) Outdoor cafes shall be exempt from any parking requirement if
they have less than thirty seats. Outdoor cafe seating areas that
have more than thirty seats shall provide one space for each three
outdoor seats provided above thirty seats.
(6) If alcohol is being served, it will include a fence, subject to approval
of the Planning Commission.
(7) No food and beverage preparation would occur in the outdoor cafe.
All food and beverage preparation will incur inside the building
housing the principal use and brought to the customer or carried by
the customer to the outdoor cafe.
(8) All fixtures associated with an outdoor cafe must be portable and
related, as well as limited to food service (e.g. tables, chairs,
serving trays). Furnishings of an outdoor cafe shall consist solely of
readily removable awnings, covers, canopies, railings, tables,
chairs, planters containing plants and accessories. Furnishings
may not be attached, even in a temporary manner, to the sidewalk
or other public property, except that canopies and railings, if
specifically approved by the Planning Commission and the City
Council, may be secured by means of flush-mounted anchors or
other methods approved by the Building Director. No objects which
§ 370-41 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-41
336:966
are part of an outdoor cafe, except lighting fixtures, railings,
awnings, or other nonpermanent covers or canopies, may be
attached, even in a temporary manner, to any building or structure
on which the outdoor cafe abuts.
(9) The outdoor cafe must be part of a licensed restaurant and meet all
the requirements of the Department of Health and any other local,
county or state requirements, including the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission (if applicable).
(10) Outdoor cafes are typically located immediately adjacent to the
building housing the principal use.
(11) Outdoor cafes do not have to be removed daily or on any regular
schedule.
(12) Outdoor cafes can have heating as long as they are not enclosed
and the heating can be removed.
(13)No signs or any other forms of advertising are permitted in the
outdoor dining area with the exception of an identification or menu
sign. The name of the establishment may appear on the valance of
an umbrella.
(14) Plans for setting up the outdoor cafe must be approved by the
Building Department to provide for the free passage of pedestrians
along the sidewalks, by the Police Department to provide for traffic
and pedestrian safety, and by the Fire Department for firesafety
issues. If alcohol is served, entrance to the outdoor cafe is required
to be from inside the building. An outdoor cafe which is adjacent to
residential properties or shares an alley with residential properties
shall be screened with a solid fence a minimum of six feet high.
(15) Lighting requirements subject to the applicable requirements of
Article XXIII,§ 370-102.
N. Internet cafes. [Added 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1265]
O. Dog day care, dog grooming or other dog service establishments, with
no boarding or overnight stay, subject to the following conditions:
[Added 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1265]
(1) Overnight stay of animals shall be prohibited.
(2) The minimum size of the dog grooming area shall be 15 square feet
with:
(a) Minimum width dimension: three feet.
(b) Minimum depth dimension: three feet.
(3) Each grooming facility shall be equipped with at least a bath tub, a
grooming table, hot and cold running water, a drier, clippers,
§ 370-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-41
336:967
combs, brushes, and shears. All equipment must be sterilized after
each use and kept in sanitary condition.
(4) Dogs shall be securely confined. Dogs shall not be allowed to
wander at large.
(5) Facilities that keep dogs for grooming for longer than four hours
must have an indoor or outdoor dog exercise area. The exercise
area must measure at least three feet by eight feet, with a covered
top.
(6) Interior building surfaces, including walls, ceilings, and floors shall
be constructed so as to be water resistant and capable of being
readily cleaned and maintained.
(7) Readily accessible washrooms or sinks shall be provided,
convenient to all work areas, to ensure maintenance of personal
hygiene by dog caretakers. A sink in good repair shall be provided
for washing and sanitizing equipment and utensils. Single-service
soap and towel dispensers must be available at all hand-washing
sinks.
(8) All facilities shall be adequately ventilated with fresh or filtered air
to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation and to provide
for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Ventilation
shall be provided by either natural or mechanical means. The
necessary equipment or comparable means shall be provided to
exhaust the air from the dog area to outside of the building.
(9) The groomer must keep the grooming area, and exercise area, if
necessary, disinfected, clean, and sanitary at all times.
(10) Dog waste areas, either indoor or outdoor, shall be constructed of a
hard surface that is easily cleaned. Such areas shall be connected
to a sanitary system.
(11) All dog grooming facilities shall have drying cages, which shall be:
(a) Kept clean and sanitary; and
(b) Large enough to comfortably contain the dog. The dog shall be
able to stand, lie down, and turn around. The recommended
dimensions are: 22 inches to 24 inches wide, by 24 to 28 inches
high, by 30 to 34 inches deep.
(12) Outdoor areas where animals will be allowed shall:
(a) Not be within 300 feet of a residential district;
(b) Be permitted only in the rear and side yards;
(c) Be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the property line and
landscaped with one canopy tree, one evergreen tree and four
§ 370-41 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-41
336:968
shrubs per each 30 linear feet along the property line, rounded
upward; and
(d) Fully enclosed by a six-foot screening fence or wall providing
full containment for the animals in accordance with Article
XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(13) Hours of operation shall start no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and shall be
closed no later than 10:00 p.m. All animals shall be kept indoors
from 6:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. and from 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(14) A written statement of operating procedures must be submitted,
such as those recommended by the Pet Care Services Association
or the American Kennel Club. The procedures, which are to be
followed for the life of the business, must address, at a minimum,
the following items:
(a) Identification and correction of dog behavior that impacts
surrounding uses, including excessive noise (barking);
(b) The time interval anticipated for waste removal and method of
cleanup;
(c) Identification of the hours of operation and timing of shift
changes, if applicable;
(d) Indication of staffing levels during all shifts and the
qualifications of each staff member; and
(e) Membership in the Voluntary Facilities Accreditation program
via the Pet Care Services Association is strongly encouraged.
P. To encourage and provide for land use diversity and to promote
economic vitality, residential occupancy shall be permitted in buildings
of two stories in height or greater located along Gratiot Avenue south of
Maryland Street, on Utica from Gratiot to 12 Mile Road (including
parcels fronting both sides of 12 Mile Road), and on 10 Mile Road. In
buildings used for the mixing of business and residential occupancy, the
following shall be subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for
each use and subject further to the review and approval of the Planning
Commission at a duly advertised public hearing in accordance with
§ 370-87: [Added 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1265]
(1) No dwelling unit shall occupy any portion of the floor area of the
building at grade level.
(2) Business uses may occupy any number of total floors in the
building, but no business shall be located on the same floor as a
residential use.
(3) No floor in the building may be used for business purposes that is
located above a floor used for residential purposes.
§ 370-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-41
336:969
§ 370-42. Required conditions.
(4) No dwelling unit shall have more than two bedrooms.
(5) Each dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum applicable floor
area requirements set forth in § 370-60, Schedule of Regulations, in
this chapter.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit in
accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XX in this
chapter unless otherwise excused.
A. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. All goods provided on the premises
shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
B. All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking;
loading and those open-air uses indicated as being subject to special
conditions in § 370-41 above, shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings.
C. Except as permitted in § 370-41 above, the outdoor storage of goods or
materials of any kind shall be expressly prohibited.
D. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
E. In the area noted on the Future Land Use Map as Town Center Overlay
District, all businesses identified as commercial or quasi public shall
have entrances that face the street/sidewalk. [Added 1-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 1265249]
F. See Article XIX, Use Permits.
G. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
H. Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
249. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections E through J as
Subsections F through K, respectively.
§ 370-41 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-42
336:970
I. Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(5) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(6) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(7) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(8) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(9) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(10) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(11) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(12) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(13) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(14) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(15) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
J. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(3) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(4) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
(5) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(6) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(7) Section 370-108, Signs.
(8) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(9) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
K. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
§ 370-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-42
336:971
(3) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(4) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(5) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-42 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-42
336:972
ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)
VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-42
336:973

ARTICLE XIV
I-1 Light Industrial District
§ 370-43. Intent.
The I-1 Light Industrial District is designed so as to primarily accommodate
wholesale and warehouse activities, and industrial operations whose
external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no
manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The
I-1 District is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses,
the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or
treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared
material, it being the intent of this district that the processing of raw
material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at
another location, not be permitted.
§ 370-44. Principal permitted uses.
The following regulations shall apply to all I-1 Districts, and no building,
structure, or premises, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall
be erected, altered, or used except for one or more of the following uses:
A. Any use charged with the principal function of basic research design,
and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within
a completely enclosed building. The growing of any vegetation requisite
to the conducting of basic research shall be excluded from the
requirement of enclosure.
B. Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or
processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(1) The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or
treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals, toiletries, and food products.
(2) The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of
articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers,
feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics,
rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal,
shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw and planing
mills), and yarns.
(3) The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only
by electricity or gas.
(4) Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or
rubber stamps, or other small, molded rubber products.
(5) Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios, and phonographs.
§ 370-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-44
336:975
§ 370-45. Uses permitted subject to special conditions.
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the
Building Department or Planning Commission.
(6) Laboratories - experimental, film, or testing.
(7) Manufacture and repair of electronic or neon signs, light sheet
metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment,
cornices, eaves and the like.
(8) Central dry-cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such plants
shall not deal directly with consumers at retail.
(9) All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures,
storage yards and other related uses.
(10) Offices and office uses.
C. Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings
and yards. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings,
electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator
stations. Water supply and sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tank
holders. Railroad transfer and storage tracks. Railroad rights-of-way.
Railroad and truck terminal freight facilities.
D. Storage facilities for building materials, and gravel, stone and lumber.
Storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is
enclosed within a building or within an obscuring masonry wall and
intense landscape planting screen on those sides abutting a more
restrictive district or a public thoroughfare. In any I-1 District, the
height of the wall may be determined by the Building Department or the
Planning Commission in accordance with the standards set forth in
Article XXII in this chapter.
E. Trade or industrial schools.
F. Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above
permitted uses.
G. Nonaccessory, freestanding signs, subject to the requirements of
Chapter 264, Signs, in the Roseville Code of Ordinances.
H. Commercial kennels, when located at least 250 feet from any R
Residential District.
A. Motor vehicle repair (major), as defined in this chapter, automobile or
other machinery assembly plants, painting and varnishing shops,
undercoating shops, lumber and planing mills.
B. Uses which serve the convenience needs of the industrial district such
as select convenience commercial uses, eating and drinking
§ 370-44 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-45
336:976
§ 370-46. Required conditions.
The following conditions, where applicable, shall apply to all uses permitted
in the 1-1 District.
establishments, bank, savings and loan association, credit union,
automobile service station, motel, bowling alley, trade or industrial
school, or industrial clinic.
C. Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character, and which
will not be injurious or have an adverse effect on adjacent areas, and
may therefore be permitted subject to such conditions, restrictions and
safeguards as the Planning Commission may deem necessary in the
interest of public health, safety and welfare.
D. Cemeteries and mausoleums existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter subject to the applicable standards of § 370-14M of this
chapter.
E. Self-storage facilities, provided any outdoor storage shall be effectively
screened from view from any abutting public road right-of-way, from
any commercial district, any office district and any residential district.
Such facilities may include the dwelling of a caretaker or security
person, subject to the applicable requirement of this chapter.
F. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
A. The outdoor storage of products and materials shall be permitted,
provided:
(1) All outdoor storage shall be located in the rear yard or within a
nonrequired interior side yard only. No outdoor storage of any kind
shall be permitted in any designated parking or loading, unloading
area.
(2) All outdoor storage shall be screened from view in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article XXII in this chapter.
B. All uses permitted in the I-1 District shall comply fully with the
applicable standards of § 370-111 in this chapter.
C. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
D. See Article XIX, Use Permits.
E. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
§ 370-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-46
336:977
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
F. Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
G. Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
H. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(3) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(4) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
§ 370-46 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-46
336:978
(5) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(6) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(7) Section 370-108, Signs.
(8) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(9) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
I. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
(2) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(3) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(4) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(5) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-46
336:979

ARTICLE XV
I-2 General Industrial District.
§ 370-47. Intent.
The I-2 General Industrial District is designed primarily for manufacturing,
assembling, and fabrication activities, including large-scale or specialized
industrial operations, whose external effects may be felt to some degree
by surrounding districts. The I-2 District is so structured as to permit the
manufacturing, processing, and compounding of semifinished or finished
products from raw material as well as from previously prepared material.
§ 370-48. Principal permitted uses.
The following regulations shall apply to all I-2 Districts, and no building,
structure, or premises, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall
be erected, altered, or used, except for one or more of the following uses:
A. Any principal use first permitted in an I-1 District.
B. Heating and electric power-generating plants, and all necessary uses.
C. Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or
storage of materials, goods or products which shall not be injurious to
the occupants of adjacent premises or districts by reason of the
emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or particulate
matter, toxic and noxious materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards, or
glare or heat.
D. Junkyards, provided such are entirely enclosed within a building or
behind a completely obscuring wall, and provided further that one
property line abuts a railroad right-of-way. There shall be no outdoor
burning on the site, and all industrial processes involving the use of
equipment for cutting, compressing or packaging shall be conducted
within a completely enclosed building. There shall be no stocking of any
material above the height of the wall, except that movable equipment
used on the site may exceed the wall height.
E. Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved
and enclosed incinerator plant, provided further that no outdoor or
open storage of such materials shall be permitted and provided further
that such uses shall receive approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
F. Tool and die shop.
G. Metal plating, buffing and polishing.
H. Stamping plant.
I. Machine shop.
J. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
§ 370-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-49
336:981
§ 370-49. Permitted uses subject to special conditions. [Added
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 1235250]
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the
Building Department or Planning Commission.
§ 370-50. Required conditions.
The following conditions, where applicable, shall apply to all uses permitted
in the I-2 District.
A. Uses, which serve the convenience needs of the industrial district such
as eating and drinking establishments.
A. The outdoor storage of products and materials shall be permitted,
provided:
(1) All outdoor storage shall be located in the rear yard or within a
nonrequired interior side yard. No outdoor storage of any kind shall
be permitted in any designated off-street parking or loading,
unloading area.
(2) All outdoor storage shall be screened from view in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article XXII of this chapter.
B. All uses permitted in the I-2 District shall comply fully with applicable
standards of § 370-111, Performance standards, of this chapter.
C. See Article XVIII, Schedule of Regulations; District Options, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by
land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements.
D. See Article XIX, Use Permits.
E. See Article XX, Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Section 370-75, General parking requirements.
(2) Section 370-76, Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements.
(3) Section 370-77, Off-street parking space layout standards.
(4) Section 370-78, Off-street loading and unloading.
F. Article XXI, Site Plan Review.
(1) Section 370-79, Site plan process.
(2) Section 370-80, Improvement guarantee.
250. Editor's Note: This chapter also redesignated former § 370-49 as § 370-50.
§ 370-49 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-50
336:982
G. Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping.
(1) Section 370-81 Screening devices required.
(2) Section 370-82, Screen wall structures.
(3) Section 370-83, Landscaped earth berms.
(4) Section 370-84, Landscape planting screen.
(5) Section 370-85, Building wall serving as screen.
(6) Section 370-86, Approvals and waivers.
(7) Section 370-87, Landscape planting standards.
(8) Section 370-88, Required conditions for landscape planting
screens.
(9) Section 370-89, Planting plan.
(10) Section 370-90, Planting plan review.
(11) Section 370-91, Layout standards; plant materials.
(12) Section 370-92, Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
(13) Section 370-93, Aesthetic landscape areas.
(14) Section 370-94, Cost estimates and surety.
(15) Section 370-95, Exterior utility equipment screens.
(16) Section 370-96, Trash receptacle screens.
H. See Article XXIII, General Provisions.
(1) Section 370-100, Accessory uses.
(2) Section 370-102, Exterior site lighting.
(3) Section 370-104, Corner clearance.
(4) Section 370-105, Frontage on public streets.
(5) Section 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares.
(6) Section 370-107, Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
(7) Section 370-108, Signs.
(8) Section 370-110, Use restrictions.
(9) Section 370-111, Performance standards.
I. See Article XXV, General Exceptions.
(1) Section 370-126, Height limit.
§ 370-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-50
336:983
(2) Section 370-128, Lots adjoining alleys.
(3) Section 370-129, Yard regulations.
(4) Section 370-132, Projections into yards.
(5) Section 370-133, Access through yards.
§ 370-50 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-50
336:984
ARTICLE XVI
P-1 Vehicular Parking District
§ 370-51. Intent; applicability.
§ 370-52. Permitted uses.
Land in a P-1 District shall be used only for the off-street parking of motor
vehicles and shall be developed and maintained as hereinafter set forth.
§ 370-53. Permitted uses subject to special conditions.
The following uses shall be permitted in the P-1 District, subject to the
conditions hereinafter imposed and subject further to review and approval
by the Planning Commission.
§ 370-54. Required conditions.
A. The P-1 Vehicular Parking District is intended to permit the
establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private
passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district
will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a land use that
has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. The
district can also serve, where applicable, as a district of land use
transition between a nonresidential district and a residential district.
B. The following regulations shall apply to all P-1 Districts.
A. Trash receptacles and their accompanying screening device, when it
can be clearly shown that the location and functional use of a trash
receptacle cannot be achieved on the same parcel with the principal
use of land for which the trash receptacle is intended to serve. After
review of the site, the Planning Commission may permit a trash
receptacle and its accompanying screening device to be placed in a
developed or developing off-street parking lot in the district, provided
the following conditions are met.
(1) The trash receptacle will be used only by the principal use or uses
for which the off-street parking lot is provided.
(2) The trash receptacle is located next to the improved public alley
right-of-way or improved private access drive.
(3) Proper service access to the trash receptacle can be gained from an
improved public alley which abuts the P-1 District and the parking
lot, or from an improved private access drive which provides access
to the P-1 District and the parking lot from the abutting property
containing the principal use.
(4) The trash receptacle will be effectively screened and maintained in
strict compliance with the applicable screening requirements of
§ 370-96 of this chapter.
§ 370-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-54
336:985
§ 370-55. Minimum distances and setbacks.
§ 370-56. Parking space layout, standard, construction and
maintenance.
A. The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with,
one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in
adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or
more existing professional or institutional office buildings or
institutions.
B. Parking areas shall be contiguous to a RM-1, RM-2, OS, B-1, B-2, B-3,
I-1 or I-2 District. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to said
districts or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street that
is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a
private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1
District and the above-listed districts.
C. Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of private passenger
vehicles and shall not be used for off-street loading, unloading or the
placement of trash receptacles.
D. No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display
thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area.
E. No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area.
F. No building, other than those for shelter of attendants, shall be erected
upon premises, and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
G. Applications for P-1 District rezoning shall be made to the Building
Department by submitting the dimensional layout of the area
requested, showing the intended parking plan. The plan shall be laid
out in accordance with the requirements of this article and in
accordance with the requirements of Article XXI of this chapter.
A. Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to the side
and/or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district,
required screening, as set forth in Article XXII in this chapter, shall be
located along said lot line.
B. Front yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a residentially
zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with
residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have yet
been erected, there shall be a setback equal to 1/2 the required
residential setback for said residential district. The required wall shall
be located on this minimum setback line.
A. P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts shall be laid out, developed and
maintained in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article
XX of this chapter.
§ 370-54 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-56
336:986
B. All required screening and landscaping shall adhere to the applicable
requirements of Article XXII of this chapter.
§ 370-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-56
336:987

ARTICLE XVII
Special Districts
§ 370-57. Sign Overlay Zone. [Added 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1243]
§ 370-58. Planned Unit Development District. [Amended 3-26-2013
by Ord. No. 1261]
The PUD Planned Development District is intended to permit the private or
public development or redevelopment of commercial and industrial zoned
areas throughout the City which shall be substantially in accord with the
goals and objectives of the City of Roseville Master Plan in providing
for a balanced land use pattern for homes, business, industry, community
A. Within the area of the City that borders Interstates I-696 and I-94,
specific overlay zones have been established in which the placement of
off-premises signs (as defined in § 370-5) may be erected in accordance
with the guidelines and applicable standards set forth in this section
and in this article.
B. The Sign Overlay Zone, as depicted on the Overlay Zoning Map in
§ 370-59, and on the Roseville Zoning Map, is designed to permit the
construction of off-premises signs along an interstate.
C. Required conditions. The following conditions shall be applicable to the
Sign Overlay District outlined in this article:
(1) All requirements consistent with § 264-6 shall apply to commercial
and office districts as defined in this chapter.
(2) The Sign Overlay Zone shall extend 100 feet from the MDOT rightof-
way line, excluding entrance and exit ramps, or to the end of the
first parcel from the right-of-way line, whichever is closer.
(3) A minimum setback of 500 feet from any property used and/or
zoned as residential is required. The five-hundred-foot setback may
be reduced for property zoned residential but not used as
residential and nonconforming residential property in commercial
and office districts with special use approval from the Planning
Commission. A request for special use approval under this
subsection shall require notice to be made to property occupants
within 500 feet of the property in which the sign shall be located.
The required setback shall be measured from the residential
property line to the closest portion of the sign structure.
(4) Exterior site lighting shall comply with the applicable requirements
of § 370-102 of this chapter and Chapter 264.
(5) Signs must be within 15° of perpendicular to the MDOT right-ofway
line along the interstate.
(6) Only one sign is allowed per lot or parcel.
§ 370-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-58
336:989
facilities and services. Homes shall be single-family or condominium
projects with the obligation of being developed for owner-occupants. The
land use patterns of the areas involved shall provide a desirable
environment and shall be harmonious with the general surrounding uses,
permitting flexibility in overall development while ensuring adequate
safeguards and standards for public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. It is further the intent of this district to provide for development
which will be carried out in such manner as to preserve natural features
and their accessibility to the public and to promote energy efficient
development. Such Planned Development Districts may embrace a mixture
of one or more uses or zoning categories all in accord with the City of
Roseville Master Plan For Future Land Use.
A. Procedure for application. Application shall be made to the City Council
under this district. The person applying shall be required to make a
submittal of the following material for review and recommendation by
the Planning Commission.
(1) A proof of ownership of land where land is being requested for
rezoning. A property area survey of the exact area being requested
(scale: one inch equals 100 feet).
(2) A topography map of the entire area at a contour interval showing
one-foot changes in elevation. This map shall indicate all natural
and man-made features (scale: one inch equals 100 feet).
(3) A preliminary plan of the entire area carried out in such detail as to
show the land use being requested, the business area, industrial
buildings and uses, the housing densities being proposed, where
applicable, the system of collector streets, and off-street parking
system.
(4) Building elevation drawing and proposed building materials.
(5) A written statement explaining, in detail, the full intent of the
sponsor indicating the specifics of the development plan as it
relates to the type of dwelling units contemplated and resultant
population; the extent of nonresidential development and the
resultant traffic generated and parking demands created; and
providing supporting documentation such as but not limited to
market studies, supporting land use request, and the intended
scheduling of development.
B. Stage I preliminary site plan.
(1) The preliminary site plan shall be referred to the City Building
Official or his/her designee, to other City agencies or consultants to
the City as may be deemed necessary to provide guidance to the
Planning Commission and the City Council in their review of the
project.
§ 370-58 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-58
336:990
(2) In reviewing and approving the preliminary site plan, the following
procedures and conditions shall be followed:
(a) The proposed development in a PUD District shall be of such
area as to represent a sound carrying out of the Master Plan of
land use, it not being the intention of this district that an
unrelated parcel-by-parcel development be effectuated.
(b) The preliminary site plan shall be reviewed and a report with
recommendation shall be made by the Planning Commission to
the City Council relative to the plans meeting the intent and
the requirements of the Master Plan For Future Land Use and
the requirements of this chapter.
(c) Recommendation by the Planning Commission shall be given
only after public hearing. Such hearing shall be carried out in
accord with the requirements of Act 110 of 2006,251 as
amended.
(d) Approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council shall not
constitute approval of the final site plan. It shall be deemed as
approval of the land use plan submitted and shall serve as a
guide in the preparation of the final plan.
(e) Acceptance of the preliminary site plan by the City Council
shall be effective for a period of two years.
(f) In an area zoned PUD District, no development shall take place
therein nor use made of any part thereof except in accordance
with the site plan as originally approved, or in accordance with
an approved amendment thereto.
C. Stage II final site plan.
(1) The final site plan shall be submitted to the City Council and
referred to the City Building Official or his/her designee, and to
other City agencies or consultants to the City as may be deemed
necessary to provide guidance to the Planning Commission and the
City Council in their review of the project.
(2) In reviewing the final site plan, the following conditions shall be
followed:
(a) A final overall site plan for the entire area being requested
under this PUD District shall be submitted. This plan shall be
worked out, in detail, showing specific uses, building location,
off-street parking, street alignment changes, open spaces and
other physical plan details being proposed. Supporting
documentation in the form of building floor plans, building
251. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 370-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-58
336:991
elevation drawings, type of building material and schedule of
construction shall be submitted.
(b) The final plan shall reflect and adhere to those use patterns as
approved in the preliminary plan. Standards for building,
density, height, bulk, setbacks from public streets and offstreet
parking shall be equal to at least the minimum standards
set forth for like uses in the Schedule of Regulations and offstreet
parking requirements of this chapter; provided,
however, that the Planning Commission and City Council may
modify these standards where the objectives of the district can
be proved to be better served by such modifications. Density
standards for multiple-family dwellings shall generally follow
the requirements of the RM-1 Districts for one-, two- and threestory
buildings and the RM-2 District requirements for
buildings above three stories, subject to modification where it
can be shown that such modification will provide a more
desirable planned development. In those instances where
mixed uses utilize a PUD District, the Planning Commission
may vary setback and height requirements to accomplish a
desirable planned development.
(c) A presentation of the final site plan shall be made to the City
Council. Prior to action by the City Council, the final site plan
shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation.
D. Stage II final site plan approval. In approving the final plan, the
following conditions shall be set forth:
(1) Approval of the final site plan (Stage II) may be granted by the City
Council after review and recommendation is made by the Planning
Commission. A public hearing shall not be required on the Stage II
site plan; however, a resolution of the City Council is required,
determining that such Stage II site plan is in compliance with the
planned development representations made at the time of approval
of the Stage I site plan, and also meets the requirements set forth
in Subsection E, which follows. Final approvals may be granted in
stages, provided such stages are in keeping with previously
approved preliminary site plans.
(2) All dedications of public rights-of-way or planned public open
spaces shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the
site.
(3) Upon issuance of a certificate of site plan approval, the site plan,
building elevations and other development proposals, including the
proposed uses, shall become an integral part of the PUD District
and for purposes of recordation, shall be referred to as "Planned
Development No. _____," which number shall be recorded on the
§ 370-58 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-58
336:992
§ 370-58.2. Groesbeck Overlay District. [Added 10-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 1273]
appropriate properties of the City Zoning Map. All approved plans
shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(4) Approval of the final site plan shall be effective for a period of three
years, providing that development is commenced within one year,
as evidenced, at a minimum, by issuance of a building permit. If
development is not commenced within one year or not completed
within three years, the Planning Commission shall review progress
to date and make a recommendation to the City Council as to action
relative to permitting continuation under original approval.
E. Required conditions. The following are the required conditions of the
PUD District.
(1) Provisions satisfactory to the City Council have been made to
provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the plan
for open spaces and common use areas which are to be provided by
the applicant, and that maintenance of such improvements is
assured by a means satisfactory to the City Council. Such
assurance may include bonding or other suitable guarantee of
performance.
(2) The cost of installing all streets, necessary utilities and site
amenities has been assured by a means satisfactory to the City
Council.
(3) The final plan of each project area of the approved plan is in
conformity with the overall approved plan. Any changes or
amendments requested shall suspend approval of the overall plan
until such changes or amendments have been reviewed and
approved as in the instance of the first submittal, it being the intent
of this section that no other administrative or Board of Appeals
action shall constitute official approval of such changes or
amendments to the overall plan. Denial by City Council of any
requested changes or amendments shall not void the originally
approved plan.
(4) A change of occupancy, a change in type of use, or the alteration of
a building or the site in a previously approved PUD District shall
require the review of the Building Official. The Building Official
may request a review by the Planning Commission where a
question arises relative to whether such change falls within the
intent of the previously approved PUD District.
(5) Fees for review of plans and for services required to supplement
City staff as may be required to provide background for decisions of
the Planning Commission and the City Council shall be established
by resolution of the City Council.
§ 370-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-58.2
336:993
A. Purpose: The Groesbeck Overlay District is intended to provide and
promote opportunities for development and redevelopment within the
area as set forth in the Roseville Master Plan. These regulations are
intended to provide opportunities, with the goal of maintaining and/or
improving the character of Roseville, for an appropriate mix of
residential and nonresidential uses within the Groesbeck Overlay
District.
B. The following regulations shall govern the use of property within the
boundaries of the Groesbeck Overlay District, and shall permit a
building or unified group of buildings to be erected or used, and a lot to
be occupied for any of the following purposes:
(1) Additional retail uses include the following:
(a) Department store, variety store, clothing shop, bakery, ice
cream shop, specialty shop, or similar use providing sales and
services to customers.
(b) Restaurant or catering establishment, including outdoor
dining.
(c) Bank or similar financial institution.
(d) Indoor amusement arcade when accessory to a permitted retail
use.
(e) Medical offices.
(f) Workshops and studios.
(g) Greenhouses and nurseries.
(h) Farmers markets
(i) Outdoor commercial recreation facilities.
(j) Indoor commercial recreation facilities.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings (two stories or less).
(3) High-rise structures (three stories or greater), subject to the
conditions herein imposed:
(a) The proposed site for any such use shall have one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare as set forth in § 370-106 in this
chapter.
(b) The entire area of the site shall be treated so as to service only
the residents of the multiple-family development, and any
accessory buildings, uses, or services shall be developed solely
for the use of residents of the main building. Uses considered
herein as accessory uses include parking structures, swimming
§ 370-58.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-58.2
336:994
§ 370-58.2. Extractive District. [Added 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 1282]
pools, recreation areas, pavilions, cabanas, and other similar
uses.
(4) General hospitals which meet all of the conditions set forth in
§ 370-22D in the RM-1 Districts.
(5) Church or similar place of worship, including not more than one
dwelling unit.
(6) Public school or municipal facility.
(7) Motor vehicle parking structure.
(8) Accessory uses on the same lot incidental to the foregoing
permitted uses.
A. The E-1 Extractive District is established as a district in which the
principal use of land is for the excavation and removal of sand and
gravel deposits. Specially, this district is designed and intended to allow
for the removal of valuable mineral deposits, to protect land
surrounding excavation projects from the inherent nuisance effects of
mineral mining operations, such as dirt, dust, noise, vibration and
traffic, and to assure that once the excavation operation is complete or
otherwise abandoned, the land will be rehabilitated and restored in
such a manner that it will not result in dangerous or unsightly
conditions which could be detrimental to the general health, safety and
welfare of residents and property owners in the City. Since the E-1
Extractive District is tailored exclusively to mineral mining operation
and those functions directly related to extractive operations, this
district is considered a finite district which will someday be replace by a
more permanent zoning classification of the land.
B. Principal permitted uses. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall
hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no
new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building,
structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(1) The excavation, mining, stockpiling or removal of sand or gravel
deposits.
(2) Processing plants used in connection with the washing, grading, or
other similar procession of material excavated on the premises.
(3) Stockpiles of sand or gravel as the product of an excavation
operation being presently conducted on the premises.
(4) Plants for the manufacture of concrete, commonly known as
"ready-mix-plants."
§ 370-58.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-58.2
336:995
§ 370-59. Special Districts Map.252
§ 370-59.1. Educational Enterprise Zone (EEZ). [Added 4-26-2016
by Ord. No. 1288]
The Educational Enterprise Zone is intended to provide and promote
opportunities for educational and economic development and
redevelopment within the area as set forth in the Roseville Master Plan
by introducing incentives for reinvestment while maintaining the essential
physical integrity of the area consistent with Groesbeck Corridor
Improvement Plan.
(5) Accessory buildings and uses, including those customarily
incidental to the uses permitted in this district.
C. Applicable conditions. The following conditions shall apply to all uses
permitted in this district:
(1) All mining, excavation, stockpiling or removal of sand or gravel
deposits shall take place on not less than 50 contiguous acres of
land.
(2) All processing equipment shall be located no closer than 250 feet to
the nearest abutting zoning district other than an E-1 District. This
setback provision does not apply to stockpiling or conveyors, which
may be placed no closer than 100 feet to the nearest abutting
zoning district other than an E-1 District.
(3) Limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot
by permitted land use, the maximum dwelling unit density
permitted and building setback and development options are the
same as the I-2 General Industrial District.
252. Editor's Note: The Special Districts Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 370-58.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-59.1
336:996
ARTICLE XVIII
Schedule of Regulations; District Options
§ 370-60. Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by
zoning districts.253
§ 370-61. Density bonus option for RM-2 Multiple-Family
Residential District (High Rise).
§ 370-62. One-family cluster option.
The intent of this section is to permit the development of alternative onefamily
residential housing patterns that will not be out of character with
surrounding one-family areas and, through design innovation, will introduce
A. The intent of this section is to encourage the development of high-rise
multiple-dwelling projects, which are so designed as to provide a
greater proportion of at-grade, on-site open space for landscaping and
recreational use than is otherwise required under § 370-60 in this
article.
B. When this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met:
(1) Where part or all of the off-street parking spaces for a multiple
dwelling, as required in Article XX of this chapter, are provided
within the principal building, the total number of rooms permitted
in § 370-80 in this article applicable to the RM-2 District may be
increased by a maximum of 20% in accordance with the following
formula:
A
B
x 20% = Percent increase in total number of rooms
permitted.
Where:
A = The number of off-street parking spaces to be
provided within the principal building.
B = The total number of off-street parking spaces
required for the multiple-family dwelling.
(2) The additional number of off-street parking spaces required to
service the added dwelling units, as permitted in Subsection B(1)
above, shall be provided within the principal building.
(3) In no instance shall be dwelling unit density exceed 174 rooms per
acre (as defined herein).
(4) In no instance shall this option be exercised for multiple-family
dwellings of less than three stories in height.
253. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-60 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-62
336:997
flexibility so as to provide for the sound physical administration of site
plans in situations where the normal subdivision approach would otherwise
be unconventional or impractical. To accomplish this, the following
modifications to the One-Family Residential District shall be permitted,
subject to the conditions herein set forth:
A. In the residential districts, one-family cluster housing shall be
permitted on property containing at least one net usable acre of land
that has direct frontage access to a major or secondary thoroughfare as
designated on the City's Master Plan Map, and provided further that
the Planning Commission, upon review of an application, shall find that
at least one of the following additional conditions exists on the site.
(1) The irregular or dimensionally restricted shape of the parcel makes
it impractical or unconventional to develop the land under the
normal subdivision approach because it would:
(a) Result in the platting of undersized lots, requiring variances to
the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of the
district.
(b) Result in the establishment of public rights-of-way that would
be detrimental to adjacent existing development and to the
functional movement of traffic within the site.
(2) Development of the site under the normal subdivision approach
would create unconventional lot shapes, making them difficult to
develop, or would be so shaped that portions of the lot would be left
unused, creating potential maintenance problems.
(3) Development under the normal subdivision approach would
destroy or substantially diminish a natural asset of environmental
significance, which could be more fully preserved under the cluster
housing option.
(4) The Planning Commission, upon review of alternative development
layouts, finds that development under the cluster housing option
will result in a more orderly and appropriate use of the land, by
showing a better relationship between dwelling units on site and
adjacent land use off site, will provide for a more efficient and
functional traffic circulation system and will provide for more
pleasing and more extensive greenbelt areas than could be
achieved under the normal subdivision approach.
(5) The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, vary the
thoroughfare frontage requirement and permit access to a local
residential street when the cluster housing development is on
property that abuts a multiple-family or a nonresidential zoning
district and that abutting property has frontage on a major or
secondary thoroughfare or on a nonresidential-oriented street.
B. The following methods of development shall be permitted.
§ 370-62 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-62
336:998
(1) The attaching of one-family homes shall be permitted when said
homes are attached through a common party wall which does not
have over 50% of its wall in common with an abutting dwelling
wall; by means of an architectural wall detail which does not form
interior room space or through a common party wall in only the
garage portion of adjacent structures, there being no common
party wall relationship permitted through any other portion of the
residential unit.
(2) The detaching of one-family homes within clusters shall be
permitted, provided said homes shall be spaced not less than six
feet apart when opposing dwelling unit walls contain no openings,
and not less than 10 feet apart when opposing dwelling unit walls
contain openings. The distance between opposing garage walls
within a cluster shall meet local fire codes, except that in no case
shall said walls be less than six feet apart.
(3) The maximum number of attached or detached homes in a cluster,
as set forth above, shall be subject to review by the Planning
Commission but in no case shall a cluster contain more than three
homes.
CLUSTER EXAMPLES
C. Density. Except as may be otherwise restricted in this section, i.e.,
dwelling density shall not exceed the net dwelling unit density of the
district, or six dwelling units per acre, whichever is less.
D. Yard requirements. Yards shall be provided in the following manner.
(1) Front yard. A minimum 25 feet of front yard setback shall be
provided between the front wall and sidewall of a building and the
front property line of the development site.
(2) Exterior side yard (street side, side yard). A minimum setback
equal to the minimum front yard setback requirement of this
§ 370-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-62
336:999
subsection shall be provided between the front or sidewall of a
building on the development site and any bordering street.
(3) Interior side yard. A minimum 10 feet of side yard setback shall be
provided between the sidewall of a dwelling building on the
development site and the site yard area of an abutting single-family
lot. When the dwelling building on the development site is attached
to another dwelling building, the side yard setback shall be
increased to a minimum of 15 feet.
(4) Rear yard. A minimum 35 feet of rear yard setback shall be
provided between the rear wall of a dwelling building and the rear
yard area of an abutting single-family lot. A minimum 20 feet of
setback may be provided when the sidewall of a dwelling building
on the development site is opposite the rear yard area of an
abutting single-family lot.
E. Building orientation.
(1) Except as otherwise set forth in this subsection, a dwelling building
shall maintain a side or rear wall orientation to the front lot line of
the development site. When the rear wall of a dwelling building on
the development site shall face a street bordering the development
site, 20 feet of rear yard area shall be provided in addition to the
minimum front yard setback requirement set forth in Subsection D
of this section, except when there are homes on abutting lots on
both sides of the development site, or on lots directly across the
street from the development site and they face into the same street
that fronts the development site, the dwelling building or buildings
nearest the front lot line of the development site shall maintain a
front wall orientation to the front property line.
(2) When the front or a side wall of a dwelling building shall be
opposite an interior street or service drive within the development
site, the dwelling building shall maintain a minimum setback of 20
feet, except when the wall contains a garage opening, a minimum
setback of 23 feet shall be provided.
F. Parking requirements. Parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit
in accordance with the numerical parking requirements of this chapter
for a single-family dwelling. Parking spaces may be provided in any
peripheral yard of the development site except the minimum required
front yard, unless the dwelling building or buildings are required to
face the front lot line of the development site, as set forth and regulated
in Subsection E of this section. In that case, parking shall be allowed on
the driveway between the dwelling unit and the site's front property
line.
§ 370-62 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-62
336:1000
G. Site screening.
(1) Except as otherwise permitted in this subsection, when the rear
wall of a dwelling unit shall face the front property line of the
development site, as permitted in Subsection E of this section, an
architectural masonry screen wall structure with an inverted
masonry vee cap shall be provided along the minimum required
front yard setback line of the development site. The exterior face of
the screen wall structure shall consist of face brick, as defined in
this chapter, or real or cultured stone materials, except in place of a
masonry wall, the Planning Commission may allow a six-foot-high
decorative wood fence.
(2) The screening device shall be opaque and shall be six feet high and,
except where otherwise prohibited in this chapter, shall extend
across the entire width of the development site's frontage. The
front yard between the screening device and the front property line
shall consist of a landscaped lawn panel with informal groupings of
accepted landscape planting materials.
H. Minimum floor area. For each dwelling building, the minimum floor
area of the dwelling shall be not less than the minimum applicable
requirement of § 370-65 in this chapter for lots 50 feet or greater in
width.
§ 370-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-62
336:1001
I. Building height. The height of any individual dwelling unit in a cluster
shall conform to the building height limitations of the one-family
districts set forth in § 370-64 in this chapter.
J. Lot coverage. The total permitted land coverage by all buildings,
including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 30% of the net usable
land area of the development site.
K. Additional requirements. Upon approval of a site for development
under the standards of this section, the Planning Commission shall
require the following:
(1) Landscaping plan. A landscape plan prepared by a registered
landscape architect shall be submitted. The seal or registration of
the landscape architect shall appear on the plan. The landscape
plan shall also show the landscaping treatment of all open space
areas, any landscape screening areas, and any detail planting areas
next to driveways, streets or service drives, or along the perimeter
walls of any dwelling buildings. The landscape plan shall include a
list of all planting materials shown on the landscape plan, including
their botanical as well as their common names, their size or spread
at the time of planting, and their location on the site. A statement
detailing the manner in which all landscaping will be maintained
shall appear on the landscape plan. The applicable site landscaping
standards set forth in Article XXII in this chapter shall be followed.
(2) Floor plans and exterior building wall elevation drawings.
(a) Floor plans of each different dwelling building proposed for the
development and its related exterior building wall elevation
drawings shall be submitted with the site plan. Floor plans
shall be prepared at an architectural scale of 1/4 inch equals
one foot. The exterior building wall elevation drawings shall be
drawn to the same scale, or to an architect's scale of 1/8 inch
equals one foot, and shall identify all exterior building wall
materials proposed for the walls.
(b) Floor plans shall include all pertinent dimensions and the
overall floor area of the dwelling unit. The exterior building
wall elevation drawings shall include the overall height of the
building, measured halfway up the highest pitched roof.
(3) Existing conditions. An existing conditions drawing of the
development site, including a legal description of the property or
properties, and showing all property lines with dimensions,
topographic contour-lines drawn at one-foot intervals, any on-site
utility easements, tree cover, and the footprint (building envelope)
of any existing buildings or structures on the property, and the
center line of any bordering streets.
L. Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public
hearing duly advertised in the manner outlined in § 370-140 in this
§ 370-62 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-62
336:1002
§ 370-63. One-family site condominium option.
The intent of this section is to permit the development of single-family
detached dwellings by site planning the layout of individual dwellings or
condominium units as defined in this chapter, along with all streets, utilities,
open spaces, etc., as permitted in MPA 59 of 1978, as amended, being the
State Condominium Act.254 To accomplish development under this option,
the following conditions shall apply.
chapter. The hearing shall be held at the time the applicant appears
before the Planning Commission for approval to develop property under
the one-family cluster housing option.
M. Approval limitations. Approval of a site plan under this section shall be
effective for a period of two consecutive years, commencing on the date
the site plan was approved by the Planning Commission. At the end of
the second approval year, if substantial development beyond any initial
site clearance is not underway on the property, site plan approval shall
expire and no site improvements or development shall take place on the
property thereafter until site plan approval has once again been given
by the Planning Commission. Thirty days before site plan approval shall
expire, the applicant may request an extension. The Planning
Commission, at its discretion, may grant one, one year extension to a
previously approved site plan.
A. In the One-Family Residential District, the site planning of individual
single-family detached dwellings, or condominium units, may be
permitted after review by the Planning Commission of a site plan. The
site plan shall be prepared in strict accordance with the applicable
requirements of Article XXI of this chapter. The Planning Commission
shall conduct its review at a public hearing. The hearing shall be
advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140 of this chapter.
B. In making its review, the Planning Commission shall find that the
following minimum requirements are fully met.
(1) The maximum number of individual single-family detached
dwellings per acre shall not exceed the dwelling unit density level
of the One-Family Residential Zoning District in which the site is
located.
(2) An area at least equal to the minimum lot area requirement of the
zoning district in which the site is located shall be provided for
each dwelling or condominium unit. This area may be called the
"limited common element," as defined in this chapter.
(3) Setbacks equal to the minimum building setback requirements of
the zoning district in which the site is located shall be provided for
each dwelling or condominium unit. Each setback shall extend from
254. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 370-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-63
336:1003
the applicable wall of the dwelling or condominium unit to the
corresponding limited common element line.
(4) All streets shall be public streets in public rights-of-way; all such
streets and rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed to the
City's applicable public street and road rights-of-way standards.
(5) All utilities shall be provided and constructed to applicable
standards and shall be located in appropriate utility easements.
(6) The maximum number of stories and the maximum building height
limitations of the zoning district in which the site is located shall be
met.
(7) At least the minimum applicable square feet of floor area shall be
provided, as required in this chapter, for each single-family
detached dwelling or condominium unit.
(8) Any detached accessory building or structure shall comply with the
applicable standards of this chapter. All such setbacks shall be
measured from the applicable lot or limited common element line.
C. When the Planning Commission finds that all of the requirements
outlined in Subsection B of this section are met, it shall grant the
applicant preliminary site plan approval. The Planning Commission
may, at its discretion, grant preliminary site plan approval with
conditions, provided the conditions are minimal and few.
D. The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the Planning
Commission shall give leave to the applicant to prepare a final site plan.
The final site plan shall include any conditions placed by the Planning
Commission on the preliminary site plan. The Planning Commission
may grant final site plan approval only after it is satisfied that all
conditions have been met, and that the master deed and the Association
of Home Owners Bylaws are deemed by the City to be in order.
§ 370-63 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-63
336:1004
ARTICLE XIX
Use Permits
§ 370-64. Intent.
§ 370-65. Outdoor movie theaters.
Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used
only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular
traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be
permitted in the I-2 District only and shall not be adjacent to existing or
proposed residential areas. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the
following conditions:
A. Because the uses hereinafter referred to in this section possess unique
characteristics making it impractical to include them in a specific use
district, they may be permitted upon approval by the reviewing
authority specified herein. The specified reviewing authority shall
conduct its review and shall act on the request for a special use permit
at a duly advertised public hearing in the manner set forth and
regulated in § 370-140, Public hearings, in this chapter.
B. In every case, the uses herein set forth shall be expressly prohibited
from any residential district, unless otherwise specifically permitted in
this article.
C. The uses permitted herein require special consideration since they
service an area beyond the City and/or require sizable land areas and/or
create potential control problems with respect to adjacent land use and
use districts, traffic, noise, appearance, and general safety.
D. Those uses falling specifically within the intent of this article are set
forth and regulated in the following sections:
A. An application for an outdoor movie theater shall be subject to review
and approval by the Planning Commission. A site plan shall be
submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with the
applicable requirements of Article XXI, Site Plan Review, in this
chapter. In conducting its review, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following:
(1) The internal design has been reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer regarding adequacy of drainage and other site
engineering aspects of the development.
(2) Outdoor theaters shall abut a major thoroughfare, and points of
ingress and egress shall be available only from such major
thoroughfare.
(3) All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be
provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to
wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way.
§ 370-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-65
336:1005
§ 370-66. Commercial and public utility towers.
Radio and television towers, public utility microwave towers, public utility
television transmitting towers and their attendant facilities shall be
permitted in I-1 and I-2 Districts, subject to review and approval by the
Planning Commission, provided that:
§ 370-67. Nonessential wireless telecommunications facilities.
[Amended 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. 1260]
Nonessential wireless telecommunications antenna arrays, and, where
permitted, related support structures, shall be permitted, subject to the
following requirements.
As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
CO-LOCATE — To place or install wireless communications equipment on
an existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing
equipment compound. "Co-location" has a corresponding meaning.
(4) The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from
being viewed from residential areas or from adjacent major
thoroughfares. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so
installed as to be confined within, and directed only onto, the
premises of the outdoor theater site.
B. The Planning Commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a
public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140,
Public hearings, in this chapter.
A. Application to establish a use permitted in this section shall be subject
to review and approval by the Planning Commission. A site plan shall be
submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with the
applicable requirements of Article XXI, Site Plan Review, in this
chapter. In conducting its review, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following:
(1) Any such communication tower or towers shall be located centrally
on a continuous parcel of not less than one times the height of the
tower, measured from the base of the tower to all points on each
property line.
(2) All accessory buildings erected in conjunction with the tower or
towers shall observe the minimum building setback requirements
of the district.
B. The Planning Commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a
public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140,
Public hearings, in this chapter.
§ 370-65 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-67
336:1006
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area surrounding or adjacent to the base
of a wireless communications support structure and within which wireless
communications equipment is located.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — The set of equipment and
network components used in the provision of wireless communications
services, including, but not limited to, antennas, transmitters, receivers,
base stations, equipment shelters, cabinets, emergency generators, power
supply cables, and coaxial and fiber optic cables, but excluding wireless
communications support structures.
A. Approval.
(1) The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the application not
more than 60 days after the application is considered to be
administratively complete. If the Planning Commission fails to
timely approve or deny the application, the application shall be
considered approved and the Planning Commission shall be
considered to have made any determination required for approval.
(2) After an application for a special land use approval is filed with the
Building Department, the Department shall determine whether the
application is administratively complete. Unless the Building
Department proceeds as provided under Subsection A(3), the
application shall be considered to be administratively complete
when the Building Department makes that determination or 14
business days after the Building Department receives the
application, whichever is first.
(3) If, before the expiration of the fourteen-day period under
Subsection A(2), the Building Department notifies the applicant
that the application is not administratively complete, specifying the
information necessary to make the application administratively
complete, or notifies the applicant that a fee required to
accompany the application has not been paid, specifying the
amount due, the running of the fourteen-day period under
Subsection A(2) is tolled until the applicant submits to the body or
official the specified information or fee amount due. The notice
shall be given in writing or by electronic notification. A fee required
to accompany any application shall not exceed the actual,
reasonable costs to review and process the application or $1,000,
whichever is less.
B. Authorization. The City of Roseville shall authorize the establishment of
a nonessential wireless telecommunications antenna array, and, where
permitted in this section, a support structure and its ancillary
equipment, only when such facility is fully in compliance with the
applicable requirements and guidelines of this section and only in a
manner that will preserve the integrity, character, property values and
aesthetic quality of the site, the area around it and the City at large.
§ 370-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-67
336:1007
C. Recognition. Recognizing the increasing number of providers
authorized to establish and operate wireless telecommunications
services within a defined area, it is the intent and purpose of this
section to:
(1) Facilitate adequate and sufficient provision of sites for nonessential
wireless telecommunications facilities;
(2) Establish predetermined locations for the placement of wireless
telecommunications antenna arrays, and, when permitted, the
erection of support structures, in accordance with the applicable
requirements of this section;
(3) Ensure that wireless telecommunications facilities are
appropriately located so as to minimize any adverse impact they
may have on other land uses on the site or on surrounding
properties;
(4) Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community;
(5) Provide adequate information about plans for the location of
wireless telecommunications facilities in the City so that the City
may determine the proper location and development of wireless
telecommunications facilities in accordance with the location
guidelines and applicable site requirements of this section;
(6) Minimize the adverse impact of technological obsolescence of such
facilities in a timely manner, including requirements to remove and
restore sites where such facilities are no longer in use, or which
have become unnecessary; and
(7) Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless
telecommunications facilities on residential areas, office,
commercial and industrial sites, public and quasi-public sites,
community landmarks, including historic sites, natural beauty
areas and in public rights-of-way.
D. Existing facilities. Achieving this end contemplates the establishment of
as few tower types or support structures as reasonably feasible, instead
relying on the use of existing support structures, buildings and other
existing structures in the City or in adjoining communities that can
meet the applicant's service area needs.
E. Adverse impact. The Roseville City Council believes that the presence
of numerous wireless telecommunications support structures located
throughout the City, and particularly in residential neighborhoods,
would diminish the attractiveness of the community, thereby destroying
its character. This, in turn, could have an adverse impact on property
values. Therefore, the City Council believes it is necessary to minimize
the adverse impact on the community that the presence of numerous
relatively tall wireless telecommunications support structures with
§ 370-67 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-67
336:1008
their characteristically low architectural and aesthetic appeal could
have on the City, while at the same time recognizing that the absence
of any regulation would likely result in a material impediment to the
maintenance and promotion of property values, and further recognizing
that this growing service is promoting economic gain and aiding in
maintaining the health, safety and general welfare of the City.
F. Location by order of priority. A nonessential wireless
telecommunications antenna array shall be permitted in one of the
following locations by order of priority. The first location set forth in this
subsection shall be considered as the first or top priority location with
each location thereafter descending in the order of priority.
(1) On an existing nonessential wireless telecommunications support
structure located on land in any zoning district in the City, subject
to review and approval by the City's Building Department.
(2) An internal nonvisible location within an existing building or
structure in any zoning district, subject to review and approval by
the City's Building Department. All equipment customarily
accessory to an antenna array shall also be placed so as to not be
visible beyond the exterior walls of the building,
(3) An external location on an existing building or structure in an IIndustrial
or B-Business zoning district, subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission.
(4) An external location on an existing building or structure in an RResidential
zoning district, subject to review by the Planning
Commission at a duly advertised public hearing, and approval by
the Planning Commission.
(5) On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications
support structure to be located in an I-Industrial District, subject to
review by the Planning Commission at a duly advertised public
hearing, and approval by the Planning Commission.
(6) On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications
support structure to be located on public property in an RResidential
District, subject to review by the Planning Commission
at a duly advertised public hearing and approval by the Planning
Commission.
(7) On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications
support structure to be located on private property in an RResidential
District, subject to review by the Planning Commission
at a duly advertised public hearing and approval by the Planning
Commission.
G. Required conditions. The following standards shall apply, where
applicable, to all applications to locate a nonessential wireless
telecommunications antenna array or support structure in the City.
§ 370-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-67
336:1009
(1) Before an applicant may locate on a site of lower priority than the
site priority listed in Subsection F(1), the applicant shall prepare
and submit sufficient information to clearly show why the applicant
must locate at a lower priority site. For each location of lower
priority than any higher priority location(s), sufficient explanation
shall be provided as to why none of the higher priority locations can
be used by the applicant. This information shall take into
consideration any existing structure located beyond Roseville's
corporate limits that could serve the applicant's needs.
(2) For the priority sites listed in Subsection F(1) and (2), plans,
drawings and specifications requested by the Building Department
shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the
Building Department.
(3) For the priority site listed in Subsection F(3), plans, drawings and
specifications drawn to scale and containing sufficient information
for review, including exterior structural or building wall elevation
drawings illustrating how the antenna array will appear on the
structure or building and all other applicable information set forth
in Article XXI, Site Plan Review, in this chapter, shall be submitted
for review and approval by the Planning Commission. This shall
include the statements mandated in Subsection F(1). During its
review, the Planning Commission may request that additional
information be submitted that it deems reasonably necessary in
conducting its review.
(4) For the priority sites listed in Subsection F(4), (5), (6) and (7), all of
the information outlined in Subsection G(3) shall be submitted for
review by the Planning Commission at a duly advertised public
hearing. Planning Commission approval of the application is
required.
(5) Any nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure,
as permitted in the priority sites listed in Subsection F(5), (6) and
(7), shall:
(a) Be a monopole structure only;
(b) Consist only of nonwood materials;
(c) Not exceed 199 feet in overall height measured from the
ground at the base of the structure to the highest point of the
structure or any antenna attached to the structure;
(d) Provide co-location capacity for not less, nor more than, three
antenna arrays;
(e) Not require the use of any supporting guide wires; and
§ 370-67 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-67
336:1010
(f) Not be lighted in any way unless lighting is required to meet
applicable Federal Aviation Association (FAA) guidelines, and if
painted shall be light blue or light gray in color.
(6) A sufficient means of access shall be provided to any antenna array,
support structure and to any ancillary structures used in
conjunction with an antenna array. When the array is located in the
interior of a property and access cannot be gained via a parking lot,
alley or other driveway approach, a gravel lane shall be provided.
When such a lane is necessary, care will be taken to make certain
that its point of access to an alley, parking lot, street or other public
way shall meet all applicable state and local requirements.
Sufficient area shall be provided for the parking of a service
vehicle, the location and extent of which will be subject to review
and approval by the specified reviewing authority.
(7) Unless the antenna array and its ancillary equipment will be
housed inside a building, or completely enclosed within an addition
to the building, any outdoor or detached structures housing the
equipment shall be placed within a fully enclosed compound.
Enclosure may be provided by a wall or a fence. The wall or fence
shall be not less than eight feet high measured from the ground at
the base of the structure to the top of the structure. A wall shall
consist of architecturally attractive masonry material approved by
the Planning Commission. If a fence, it shall be a tightly woven wire
(chain link) type of fence to discourage climbing. A fenced
compound shall also be screened by evergreen planting materials
in the manner set forth and regulated in Article XXII, Screening
Devices and Landscaping, in this chapter. The ground area of the
compound will be of adequate size to house all of the necessary
ancillary equipment for three antenna arrays.
(8) When a nonessential wireless telecommunications support
structure shall be permitted as outlined in Subsection F(5), (6) or
(7), the compound in which the support structure is located shall
observe the minimum building setback requirements of the district
it is located in measured from the outside perimeter of the
compound to all property lines, except when the support structure
is located on property occupied by a residential dwelling or is
located on a site on property next to property containing a
residential dwelling, the support structure, but only the support
structure, shall be separated from the residential dwelling by a
distance equal to 1/2 the full height of the support structure. This
distance shall be measured from the outer face of the support
structure nearest the residential dwelling to the nearest wall of the
residential dwelling. When the support structure will be located on
property occupied by a nonresidential use in a nonresidentialoriented
building, the support structure shall be set back not less
than 10 feet from the nonresidential building, unless a greater
setback is required by other applicable local, state or federal codes.
§ 370-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-67
336:1011
(9) An applicant shall submit written assurances that the owner or
operator of any nonessential wireless telecommunications facility
permitted in this section shall at all times conduct all operations of
the system in full compliance with all applicable Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) permits and conditions,
including preventing any objectionable levels of interference.
(10) An applicant shall submit written assurances that the owner or the
operator of any wireless telecommunications facility permitted in
this section shall at all times conduct all operations of the system in
full compliance with all current state or federal regulations
pertaining to nonionizing electromagnetic radiation, and
furthermore, the owner and/or operator agrees, in writing, that if
more restrictive state or federal regulatory standards are adopted
during the operating life of the facility, the applicant or owner shall
commence efforts to bring the facility into compliance with the new
standards within 60 days of adoption of any such standards, and
the owner or the operator agrees that he or she will bear the costs
of testing and verification of compliance with such standards.
(11) The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the site in a
structurally safe and attractive manner and shall maintain all
landscaping and lawn areas in a living, growing condition, neat and
orderly in appearance.
H. Co-location sharing.
(1) The policy of the City of Roseville towards nonessential wireless
telecommunications facilities is for co-location. Therefore, the
entity that owns a wireless telecommunications support structure
shall not fail or refuse to alter its structure so as to accommodate
other antenna arrays on the support structure, particularly when
such alteration would permit the support structure to remain
within the structural guidelines of this section.
(2) Failure or refusal of the owner of a wireless telecommunications
facility to alter its structure to accommodate co-location to the
maximum extent permitted in this section shall be deemed to be in
direct violation and contradiction of the City's co-location first
policy. Consequently, the owner shall be regarded by the City as
having taken full responsibility for the violation and contradiction
and shall be prohibited by the City from securing any additional
approvals for the location of any more of its antenna arrays or
related support structures in the City for a period of not less than
seven years, commencing on the date of failure or refusal to permit
co-location on its support structure or structures in the City of
Roseville. The entity may seek a variance and obtain relief from the
Roseville Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA), provided the owner can
clearly demonstrate entitlement to a variance. To that extent, the
owner must demonstrate to the BZA that enforcement of the sevenyear
prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers
§ 370-67 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-67
336:1012
of functionally equivalent nonessential wireless
telecommunications services, or that such enforcement would have
the effect of prohibiting the provision of any personal wireless
telecommunication services to the City.
I. Use regulations. The following use of property standards shall apply to
all applicants to locate a nonessential wireless telecommunications
antenna array or support structure in the City.
(1) Wireless communications equipment is a permitted use of property
and is not subject to special land use approval or any other
approval under this chapter if all of the following requirements are
met:
(a) The wireless communications equipment will be co-located on
an existing wireless communications support structure or in an
existing equipment compound.
(b) The existing wireless communications support structure or
existing equipment compound is in compliance with this
chapter or was approved by the Planning Commission or
Building Official.
(c) The proposed co-location will not do any of the following:
[1] Increase the overall height of the wireless communications
support structure by more than 20 feet or 10% of its
original height, whichever is greater.
[2] Increase the width of the wireless communications
support structure by more than the minimum necessary to
permit collocation.
[3] Increase the area of the existing equipment compound to
greater than 2,500 square feet.
(d) The proposed co-location complies with the terms and
conditions of any previous final approval of the wireless
communications support structure or equipment compound by
the Planning Commission or Building Official.
(2) Wireless communications equipment that meets the requirements
of Subsection I(1)(a) and (b) but does not meet the requirements of
Subsection I(1)(c) or (d) is a permitted use of property if it receives
special land use approval under Subsection I(3) and (4).
(3) An application for special land use approval of wireless
communications equipment described in Subsection I(2) shall
include all of the following:
(a) A site plan as required under Section 501 of Public Act 110 of
2006, including a map of the property and existing and
proposed buildings and other facilities.
§ 370-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-67
336:1013
§ 370-68. Outdoor athletic and entertainment facilities.
Outdoor athletic and entertainment facilities, including stadiums,
amphitheaters, coliseums, arenas, golf driving ranges, golf courses, tennis
courts, racquetball courts, football, baseball, softball, soccer, polo and
similar athletic track and field events, including equestrian contests, but
excluding any form or type of competitive motor vehicle contests, theme
parks, or amusement parks, provided:
(b) Any additional relevant information that is specifically required
by a zoning ordinance provision described in Section 502(1) or
Section 504 of Public Act 110 of 2006.
(4) Special land use approval of wireless communications equipment
described in Subsection I(2) may be made expressly conditional
only on the wireless communications equipment’s meeting the
requirements of all local ordinances and of federal and state laws
before the wireless communications equipment begins operations.
J. Surety. Sufficient surety acceptable to the City shall be provided by the
applicant to adequately cover the cost of removing the facility, along
with any accessory equipment, including compound walls or fencing,
and restoring the site when its usefulness as a wireless
telecommunications facility is concluded. Estimates to remove the
entire facility and carrying out restoration of the site shall be prepared
and submitted to the City for review and acceptance by the City.
K. Permits. A use permit shall be issued by the City for an approved
nonessential wireless telecommunications antenna array, and, where
permitted, for a support structure and related equipment cabinets, but
only after review and approval of an application, in the manner set forth
in this section, has been approved by the City or by the Planning
Commission.
A. An application to establish any use permitted in this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. A site plan
shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with
the applicable requirements of Article XXI, Site Plan Review, in this
chapter. In conducting its review, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following:
(1) All such permitted uses shall be located in an I-1 or I-2 District only.
(2) All such permitted uses shall have direct access to a major
thoroughfare.
(3) All exterior lighting shall be directed inward towards the use and
away from adjacent uses.
(4) Except for the green areas of golf courses and golf driving ranges,
i.e., fairways and open driving range areas, a minimum setback of
150 feet shall be provided for the principal use, together with all
§ 370-67 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-68
336:1014
§ 370-69. Accommodations for helicopters.
accessory uses, except off-street parking which may be located no
less than 50 feet from any residential district. Within these two
setbacks, there shall be provided and maintained earth berms and
extensive landscape plantings of sufficient height and intensity so
as to effectuate a substantial landscape planting screen between
uses and the adjacent residential district.
B. The Planning Commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a
public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140,
Public hearings, in this chapter.
A. Facilities for the accommodation of helicopters are considered
separately under this section. For purposes of accommodating
helicopters, the facilities are herein defined as the following:
HELIPAD — An area on a roof or on the ground used by helicopters or
steep-gradient aircraft for the purpose of picking up and discharging
passengers or cargo, but not including fuel service, maintenance or
overhaul or tie-down space.
HELIPORT — An area used by helicopters or by other steep-gradient
aircraft, which area includes passenger and cargo facilities,
maintenance and overhaul, fueling service, storage space, tie-down
space, hangars and other accessory buildings and open spaces.
HELISTOP — An area on a roof or on the ground used by helicopters
or steep-gradient aircraft for the purpose of picking up or discharging
passengers or cargo, including fuel service and tie-down space.
B. An application to establish any use permitted in this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. A site plan
shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with
the applicable requirements of Article XXI, Site Plan Review, in this
chapter. In conducting its review, the Planning Commission shall apply
the following conditions.
(1) Heliports shall be permitted in the I Industrial Districts only.
Helistops and helipads shall be permitted in all districts except the
residential districts.
(2) When reviewing an application for a heliport, helistop or helipad,
the Planning Commission shall require contemporary standards
recommended by the Federal Aviation Agency and Michigan
Aviation Commission for the proper operation of such facilities.
(3) Adequate provision is made to control access to the facility.
(4) The surface of the facility is such that dust, dirt or other matter will
not be blown onto adjacent property by helicopter operations.
§ 370-68 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-69
336:1015
§ 370-70. Arcades, billiard parlors and similar uses.
Arcades, billiard parlors and similar uses providing facilities and space
where there are four or more pinball machines, video games or similar
gaming devices for use by their patrons or where there are four or more
pool or billiard tables or similar activities for use by their patrons shall
be permitted in the B-3 District, and subject further to the following
requirements.
§ 370-71. Tattoo parlors, pawn shops and used goods.
(5) All applicable provisions of building, fire and health codes are met,
including special provisions applicable in the case of rooftop
heliports.
(6) Appropriate provision is made for off-street parking.
C. The Planning Commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a
public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140,
Public hearings, in this chapter.
A. An application to establish any use permitted in this section shall be
subject to review and approval of a site plan by the Planning
Commission. A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall be
prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXI,
Site Plan Review, in this chapter. In conducting its review, the Planning
Commission shall apply the following conditions.
(1) The site, or any vehicular parking district attached thereto, shall
not be located within 200 feet of any residential zoning district.
(2) The site shall abut a major thoroughfare right-of-way, and all
ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from said major
thoroughfare.
B. The Planning Commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a
public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140,
Public hearings, in this chapter.
A. It has been demonstrated that the establishment of tattoo, pawnbroker
and used good uses in business districts which are immediately
adjacent to and serve residential neighborhoods have a deleterious
effect on both business and residential segments of the neighborhood,
causing blight. Prohibition against the establishment of more than two
regulated uses within 1,000 feet of each other serves to avoid the
clustering of certain business which, when located in close proximity of
each other, tends to create a skid-row atmosphere. Such prohibition
fails to avoid the deleterious effects of blight and devaluation to both
business and residential property values resulting from the
establishment of these businesses in a business district that is
immediately adjacent to and serves residential neighborhoods. The
orderly planning, development and preservation of neighborhoods
§ 370-69 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-71
336:1016
§ 370-72. Reuse of vacant former public school facilities.
should be encouraged and fostered by properties and persons that
comprise the business and residential segments of each neighborhood.
B. Pawnbroker, tattoo and used goods uses, as defined in this Zoning
Code, shall only be permitted in the B-3 Zoning District, subject to the
following requirements and conditions.
(1) An application to establish any use permitted in this section shall
be subject to review and approval of a site plan by the Planning
Commission. A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall be
prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article
XXI, Site Plan Review, in this chapter. In conducting its review, the
Planning Commission shall apply the following conditions.
(a) Not more than two such uses shall be permitted within 1,000
feet of each other.
(b) It shall be unlawful to establish any such use in a B-3 District if
any portion of the property upon which such business is
situated is within 300 feet of a residential zoning district,
church or school, unless the prohibition is waived upon
presentment to the Planning Commission of a validated
petition requesting such waiver signed by 51% of those
persons owning, residing, or doing business or by any church
or school within 300 feet of the proposed location.
(c) The site shall abut a major thoroughfare right-of-way, and all
ingress and egress to and from the site shall be via that major
thoroughfare.
(2) The Planning Commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a
public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in § 370-140,
Public hearings, in this chapter.
A. Typically, various types of land use and land use activities are provided
for in one or more zoning districts. The criteria for such allocations are
based upon similarities in the nature of the uses and their relationship
to other such uses and, in turn, their relationship to adjacent land use
and to thoroughfares. Zoning districts are not only established to
achieve a progression of order in land use distribution, but they are also
established to coordinate land use development in a logical and valid
manner in accordance with a master land use plan.
B. There are, however, a limited number of uses and certain
characteristics of land use that may warrant special consideration for
placement within a particular zoning district that would otherwise
prohibit them. The particular characteristics of these uses are such that
their influence on adjacent land use is a positive one, or one that will
not adversely impact adjacent land use.
§ 370-71 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-72
336:1017
C. The intent of this section is to permit a limited number of specialized
land use types to develop through a special use process that does not
require rezoning, provided that certain conditions and procedures as
herein set forth are met.
(1) Conditions. The following conditions shall be found to exist on the
land before any application for a use permit may be approved.
(a) The land shall be zoned in a residential district that does not
permit the proposed use as a matter of right in the district.
(b) The proposed use is designed and intended to occupy a vacant
existing former school building on the site.
(c) Sites containing 10 acres of land or less shall have direct
frontage on, and direct access to, a public street. Sites
containing over 10 acres of land shall have direct frontage on,
and direct access to, a major thoroughfare as designated on
the City's Master Plan Map. Access to any other street shall be
prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by the Planning
Commission.
(2) Permitted uses. No vacant existing former school building, nor any
new buildings to be erected in conjunction with the reuse of a
vacant existing former school building, shall be used except for one
of the following specified uses and shall be subject to the conditions
hereinafter assigned to each use.
(a) Housing for the elderly (senior citizen housing), subject to the
requirements of § 370-22E, except as otherwise specified
herein.
[1] The total number of dwelling units shall not exceed the
number of motor vehicles that would be generated on the
land if it were developed with single-family dwellings. The
following ratios shall apply in determining the total
number of dwelling units permitted.
Number of single-family dwellings per acre: 6.0
Number of single-family trip ends per day (average):
10.0
Number of senior citizen trip ends per day (average): 3.3
(6.0 x 10.0) x (number of site acres) / (3.3) = A
A - Total number of dwelling units
[2] The erection of new buildings on the same parcel with a
vacant existing former school building, when erected in
conjunction with the rehabilitation and reoccupation of the
vacant existing former school building, may be permitted,
provided:
§ 370-72 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-72
336:1018
[a] The new buildings shall contain the same use and
function restricted to the existing building on site.
[b] The overall dwelling unit density for the site, as above
set forth and regulated, shall not be exceeded.
[c] The new buildings shall meet the applicable
requirements of the RM-1 District with respect to
building setbacks, distances between buildings and
percent of lot coverage of all buildings.
[d] New buildings shall not exceed the number of stories
or the height of a majority of the single-family homes
bordering the site.
[3] The Planning Commission, in reviewing an application to
erect additional buildings, shall determine if:
[a] The site contains sufficient vacant land area to
properly accommodate new development, including
required setbacks, off-street parking and building
coverage restrictions.
[b] Dwelling unit density will remain within the standards
herein set forth.
[c] The vacant land is not intended, nor proposed, for any
other use, such as, but not limited to, parkland, open
space area, future potential school use, single-family
residential use.
[4] The numerical off-street parking and off-street parking
layout standards of this chapter are met.
[5] All applicable landscaping and screening requirements of
this chapter are met.
(b) Convalescent care facility, subject to the requirements of
§ 370-22F of this chapter, and subject further to the applicable
off-street parking, screening and landscaping requirements of
this chapter.
(3) Submittal procedure. Applications for a use permit under this
section shall be processed in the following manner.
(a) Applications may be obtained from the Building Department,
and upon fully completing the application form, it shall be
submitted to the Building Department.
(b) Each application shall be accompanied by a processing fee as
established by resolution of the City Council.
(c) The application shall be accompanied by a report or document
stating:
§ 370-72 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-72
336:1019
[1] The type of use proposed for the site.
[2] The anticipated impact of the proposed use on the
surrounding neighborhood with respect to traffic
generated, public service demands, including trash and
garbage pickup demand and how such items will be dealt
with to minimize their impact on the surrounding
neighborhood.
(d) Each application shall include a complete site plan prepared
and submitted in accordance with § 370-79 of this chapter and
the guideline checklist provided in the Site Plan Review
Procedures Manual available at the Building Department.
(4) Review procedure. Upon receipt of a complete application for a use
permit, the Planning Commission shall set a date for a public
hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of
§ 370-140 in this chapter.
(a) The Planning Commission, in conducting its review, shall find
sufficient evidence that the proposed use:
[1] Will be in harmony with and in accordance with the
general objectives of the City's adopted Master Plan;
[2] Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in
harmony with the existing and intended character of the
general vicinity, so that such use will not change the
essential character of that area;
[3] Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;
[4] Will represent an improvement to property in the
immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole;
[5] Can be served adequately by essential public services and
facilities such as highways, streets, drainage structures,
police and fire protection and refuse disposal, or that
persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of
the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for
such services.
[6] Will not create excessive additional requirements at public
cost for public facilities and services, and will not be
detrimental to the economic welfare of the community;
[7] Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be
detrimental to any persons, property or the general
welfare by reason of excessive or noxious smoke, fumes,
glare, noise, vibration or odors;
§ 370-72 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-72
336:1020
§ 370-73. (Reserved)255
§ 370-74. Uses permitted subject to special conditions. [Amended
5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 1281]
Composting facilities and composting transfer stations shall be permitted in
the I-2 District subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission,
provided that they meet the conditions and standards set forth in this
section.
[8] Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this
chapter.
A. Definitions.
COMPOSTING — Processing waste in a controlled environment to
produce a stable product by microbiologically degrading organic matter
under aerobic conditions.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility where organic matter that is
derived primarily from off site is to be processed by composting and/
or is processed for commercial purposes. Activities of a composting
facility may include management, collection, transportation, staging,
composting, curing, storage, marketing, or use of compost.
COMPOSTING TRANSFER STATION — A place for the acceptance by
donation, redemption, or purchase of plant debris for transfer to an offsite
facility for composting.
B. Conditions and standards.
(1) The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and
dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose
of all surface water accumulated within the area.
(2) All access to the facility will be from a major thoroughfare as
designated on the City's Master Plan For Future Land Use Map, as
amended.
(3) Except for trash receptacles, no outdoor storage of any kind shall
be permitted as an use accessory to the principal use.
(4) Height of composting shall not exceed 25% of the maximum height
of buildings in the district.
(5) Composting shall be placed within a completely obscuring
architectural masonry screen wall as required in Article XXII of this
chapter.
(6) Composting shall be set back a minimum 75 feet from any property
lines.
255. Editor's Note: Former § 370-73, Medical marihuana dispensaries, added 10-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 1229, was repealed 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 1293.
§ 370-72 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-74
336:1021
§ 370-74.1. Oil and gas wells. [Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. 1289]
The following requirements shall apply to the location, installation, drilling
and operation of any well for the commercial extraction of oil, gas or other
hydrocarbons in the City:
(7) Total amount of lot coverage used for composting shall not exceed
35%.
(8) No composing facility and/or composing transfer station shall be
permitted within 1,000 feet of another composing facility and/or
composing transfer.
(9) A completely obscuring architectural masonry screen wall as
required in Article XXII of this chapter shall be provided along the
property line abutting all other districts.
(10) All exterior site lighting shall be subject to the applicable
requirements of § 370-102 of this chapter.
A. It may be allowed only in the I-2 General Industrial District.
B. It shall be situated on a minimum lot size of three acres.
C. Spacing and well setbacks. In addition to the spacing and setback
requirements of the State of Michigan and regulations of its Supervisor
of Wells, the drilling operation or operation of oil or gas wells or well
sites shall not be located within 300 feet from any road right-of-way,
500 feet of a residentially zoned or used property, or any property used
for a religious facility, public or private school, hospital, hospital clinic
or health-care facility and 100 feet from any other property line. No
installation, drilling and operation of any well shall be located within 15
feet from another drilling operation or operation of an oil or gas well or
well site. The proponent seeking to engage in activity shall also
demonstrate to the City a legal entitlement to drill on adjacent
properties through mineral right acquisition or other means.
Measurement of setback shall be made from the edge of the well site (in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects) to
the closest exterior point of the adjacent parcel.
D. Height. The completed wellhead structure shall not exceed 22 feet in
height. Any temporary drilling derrick or other facility shall not exceed
110 feet in height. Temporary drilling derricks and rigs shall not be in
place for longer than 60 days. A permit for an additional 30 days may be
secured upon presentation to the City Manager of sufficient
documentation demonstrating that reasonable progress has occurred
throughout the initial sixty-day period and that operations can be
completed within an additional 30 days.
E. Fencing, landscaping and lighting. An oil or gas well site shall be
completely enclosed with a six-foot-high fence with materials compliant
with ordinances. Staggered six-foot-tall evergreen trees shall be placed
§ 370-74 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-74.1
336:1022
around the perimeter of the fence with a minimum landscape greenbelt
buffer of 25 feet in depth. This landscaping buffer shall be in place
within 30 days of the removal of the temporary drilling deck/rig.
Exterior lighting shall comply with the provisions of the City's
ordinances and shall be shielded so as not to be disruptive to adjoining
parcels.
F. Nuisance mitigation. The drilling, completion, or operation of oil or gas
wells or other wells drilled for oil and gas exploration purposes shall
comply with the additional site requirements of this chapter and any
other applicable ordinance provisions. Such standards address
potential nuisances such as noise, smoke, dust, and the like. To the
extent this section is more restrictive the provisions of this section shall
control.
G. Dust, noise, vibration, and odors. All operations shall be conducted in a
manner so as to minimize, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or
noxious odors and shall be in accordance with the best accepted
practices defined by the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality for the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances
in urban areas. All equipment used shall be constructed and operated
so that vibration, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or
effects will be minimized by the operations carried on at any time, or
from anything incidental thereto, and to minimize the annoyance of
persons living or working in the vicinity. Additionally, the site or
structures on the property shall not be permitted to become
dilapidated, unsightly, or unsafe. The City may impose additional
reasonable restrictions upon such operations as to reduce adverse
impacts upon adjacent properties.
H. Oil and gas processing facilities. Associated processing facilities that
separate oil, gas and brine and hold said products for transport off site
for further refinement and processing are not permitted.
I. Compliance with laws and permit issuance. The drilling, completion, or
operation of oil and gas wells or other wells drilled for the purpose of oil
or gas exploration shall be done in conformity with all state and federal
laws, statutes, rules, and regulations pertaining thereto and
particularly with the State of Michigan and regulations of its Supervisor
of Wells. This shall include obtaining the required permit from the
Supervisor of Wells, which permit shall be provided to the City prior to
the City issuing special use approval under this section. This
requirement applies to, but is not limited to, the plugging of wells, the
exploring for, producing, marketing and transportation of petroleum
products and the disposition and removal of any byproducts utilized and
associated with said activities.
J. Associated permits and approvals. Special use approval for the drilling,
completion, or operation of oil or gas wells or other wells drilled for oil
or gas exploration purposes is in addition to and not in lieu of any
permit or plan which may be required by any other provision of the City
§ 370-74.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-74.1
336:1023
of Roseville Zoning Ordinance, Building and Fire Codes, or by any other
governmental agency, unless expressly outlined.
K. Operations.
(1) Permitted construction activity hours. Site preparation and
construction of well sites are limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. Construction activities associated with establishing of
well sites may be eligible for an exception by the Building
Department if such activities are in compliance with applicable
laws and permits and it is demonstrated that noise and disturbance
from such activities will not be annoying or disturbing to
surrounding uses.
(2) The movement of drilling rigs, tanker trucks or heavy equipment
used in connection with drilling or operation of oil or gas wells over
City roads and streets shall require the approval of the City
Manager in conjunction with a review by the City Engineer. A
proposed traffic route and the axle weight, vehicle weight and
description shall be submitted in advance to the City by the
Applicant.
(3) All brine, mud, slush, saltwater, chemicals, wastewater, chemical
fluids or waste produced or used in the drilling of production of oil
or gas shall be safely, lawfully and properly disposed of to prevent
infiltration of or damage to any freshwater well, groundwater,
watercourse, pond, lake or wetland. Such materials shall be
promptly removed from the site and shall not be continuously
stored upon the site.
(4) The oil or gas well site shall be kept in a clean and orderly
condition, free of trash and debris, with vegetation cut. Machinery
which is not expected to be used on the site within a two-week
period shall not be kept or stored at the well site.
(5) An oil or gas well shall include measures or controls satisfactory to
the City Engineer to prevent migration, runoff or discharge of any
hazardous materials, including but not limited to chemicals, oil or
gas produced or used in the drilling or production of oil or gas, to
adjoining property, or to the sanitary sewer system, storm water
system or any natural or artificial watercourse, pond, lake, or
wetland. There shall be no off-site discharge of storm water except
to an approved drainage system in accordance with the City's
engineering requirements.
L. Inspection. The Building Official and any other designee of the City
Manager shall have the right and privilege at any time during the
construction phase and any drilling operation to enter upon the
premises subject to special land use approval for the purpose of making
inspections to determine if the requirements of this section and other
applicable ordinances are complied with.
§ 370-74.1 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-74.1
336:1024
M. Injection wells. Injection wells used for brine disposal or other
chemicals from production of wells or from other sources are prohibited
within the City.
N. Pipelines. No operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the
conveyance of fuel, water, oil, gas or petroleum liquids under or
through the streets, alleys or other properties owned by the City
without an easement or right-of-way issued by the City.
O. Submittal requirements. In addition to the requirements for a site plan
and other submittal requirements under the general provisions of
special land use, the following information shall be submitted as part of
the application:
(1) Environmental impact study. The applicant shall submit an
environmental impact statement filed with the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality in connection with a well
permit under the applicable provisions of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act, MCLA § 324.101 et seq., or as
otherwise amended and administrative rules promulgated
thereunder.
(2) Hydrogeological analysis.
(3) Emergency response plan. Pursuant to state and federal law, the
operator shall provide any information necessary to assist the City
Emergency Services Department with an emergency response plan
and hazardous materials survey establishing written procedures to
minimize any hazard resulting from the operation. The emergency
response plan shall include emergency contact information.
(4) Reclamation plan: a written statement describing how the land will
be returned to a stable and productive condition post drilling
operations shall be furnished. Time for completion of reclamation
shall be provided. The City shall require a bond calculated at the
estimated cost of reclamation procedures which shall be returned
following reclamation or may be drawn upon in the event
reclamation is not completed if provided in a timely fashion.
(5) The operations plan shall include identification of site ingress and
egress, a haul route map, hours of operation, s soil erosion, mud
and dust control plan, a noise control plan, identification of
operational noise impacts, including documentation of establishing
noise levels and mitigating noise levels, shall provide topography,
shall provide an odor and fume control plan, pollution prevention
plan, impact mitigation plan, and monitoring and control plan.
§ 370-74.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-74.1
336:1025

ARTICLE XX
Off-Street Parking Standards
§ 370-75. General parking requirements. [Amended 7-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 1213]
There shall be provided in all districts, at the time of erection or
enlargement of any main building or structure, or enlargement of existing
parking lots, automobile off-street parking spaces with adequate access to
all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces in conjunction with all
land or building uses shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, as prescribed in this article.
A. Except as specifically permitted in the P-1 Vehicular Parking District,
off-street parking or off-street parking lots shall not be permitted as the
sole or principal permitted use in any zoning district.
B. Off-street parking spaces and accompanying vehicle maneuvering lanes
may be located within a rear yard or within a side yard except as
otherwise permitted or restricted in this chapter.
C. Off-street parking for other than a residential use shall be either on the
same lot as the principal use, or within 300 feet of the building it is
intended to serve. The distance shall be measured from the nearest
point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot,
except no off-street parking for a use in a nonresidential district shall be
permitted in a residential district, and no off-street parking lot in a
nonresidential district shall be accessed through a residential district.
Ownership shall be shown for all lots or parcels intended for use as
parking by the applicant.
D. Required off-street parking.
(1) Required off-street parking for single- and two-family dwellings
may be provided in a stacking configuration in a driveway or
garage, or combination thereof.
(2) Required off-street parking for all other uses shall consist of an
unencumbered parking stall or strip, parking bay, vehicle
maneuvering space, driveway or garage, or combination thereof.
All residential parking shall be located on the premises it is
intended to serve. Parking garages or structures, when accessory
to a principal use, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of
§ 370-100, Accessory uses, in this chapter.
E. Minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by
any other use unless and until equal parking facilities are provided
elsewhere.
F. Off-street parking, existing on the effective date of this chapter, used in
connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not
be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar
§ 370-75 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-75
336:1027
new building or new use. Any permitted expansion, alteration or change
of use which increases the required number of parking spaces shall
require a corresponding increase in the number of spaces provided,
subject to appropriate review and approval requirements.
G. Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required offstreet
parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces
shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several
individual uses computed separately.
H. In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces, where
operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the Planning Commission
may grant an exception to the requirements of § 370-76 of this article.
I. The sale, renting, leasing or storage of any construction trailers,
merchandise or motor vehicles, or trailers for sale or rent, or the repair
of vehicles, is prohibited on off-street parking lots, except where law
permits the sale of vehicles in an off-street parking lot owned by the
owner of the vehicle that is for sale.
J. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for offstreet
parking facilities shall be in accord with a use that the Building
Official considers to be similar in type.
K. When units or measurements determining the number of required
parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including 1/2 shall be disregarded and fractions over
1/2 shall require one parking space.
L. For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required,
the applicable definition of usable floor area (floor area, usable), as
defined in Article II, Word Usage; Definitions, in this chapter shall apply.
M. Wherever the City Council shall establish off-street parking facilities by
means of a special assessment district or by any other means, the City
Council may determine, upon completion and acceptance of such offstreet
parking facilities by the City Council, that all existing buildings
and uses and all buildings erected or uses established thereafter within
the special assessment district or districts may be exempt from the
requirements of this article for privately supplied off-street parking
facilities.
N. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall
be determined in accordance with the numerical off-street parking and
vehicle stacking space requirements of § 370-76 of this article.
O. Bicycling parking reduction. A reduction in the number of off-street
parking spaces required by § 370-76 (excluding parking spaces for
persons with disabilities) shall be permitted for the provision of bicycle
parking in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and OS Districts, provided that:
(1) No fee is required for using the bicycle parking made available.
§ 370-75 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-75
336:1028
(2) When calculation of the maximum number of reduced parking
spaces results in a fraction, the resulting number shall be rounded
to the next highest number.
(3) The reduction in the number of automobile parking spaces shall be
reduced by no more than one space for each bicycle parking space,
but by no more than 15% of the total required spaces.
(4) Bicycle racks shall be located at least as close to the building
entrance as to the nearest parking space (excluding accessible
parking spaces).
(5) Bicycle spaces shall meet the minimum federal highway standard
noted below:
P. General parking reduction. To request a waiver of reduction of up to
20% of the full parking requirements of § 370-76, an applicant must
submit evidence to demonstrate that the waiver or reduction does not
result in any unnecessary hardship on surrounding properties,
businesses, and residences, and meets all of the criteria listed in
§ 370-77. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section
§ 370-140 of this chapter.
(1) The Planning Commission may approve such waiver or reduction
upon finding that such waiver or reduction does not result in any
unnecessary hardship on surrounding properties, businesses, and
residences, and meets all of the criteria listed in Article XX.
(2) An applicant may request a reduction in parking requirements
pursuant to § 370-76, provided that certain findings are met. If the
applicant is unable to meet these findings, a variance is required.
(3) Although not necessary, an applicant may elect to apply for a
reduction in parking requirements for projects located in Business
and Office Districts. This application is not applicable for projects
located in zoning districts other than B-1, B-2, B-3, and OS.
(4) In approving a reduction in off-street parking requirements
authorized by this Code, the Planning Commission shall consider
and apply the following criteria:
(a) The reduction in the parking requirement is justified by the
reasonably anticipated automobile usage by residents of and
visitors to the project;
§ 370-75 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-75
336:1029
(b) The reduction in the parking requirement will not be
detrimental to the health, safety, convenience, or general
welfare of persons residing in or working in the vicinity;
(c) The minimization of conflict of vehicular and pedestrian
movements;
(d) The availability of transportation modes other than the
automobile;
(e) The pattern of land use and character of development in the
vicinity; and
(f) Such other criteria as the Planning Commission deems
appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case.
(5) Pertaining to parking tradeoffs, a growing trend has been to
facilitate and encourage the use of electric vehicles and to expedite
the establishment of a convenient, cost-effective electric vehicle
infrastructure that such use necessitates. For all nonresidential
areas:
(a) "Electric vehicle" means any vehicle that is licensed and
registered for operation on public and private highways, roads,
and streets; either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy
from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board
via a battery for motive purpose. "Electric vehicle" includes:
[1] A battery electric vehicle; and
[2] A plug-in hybrid electric vehicle.
(b) In order to proactively plan for and accommodate the
anticipated future growth in market demand for electric
vehicles, it is strongly encouraged, but not required, that all
new and expanded nonresidential development parking areas
provide the electrical capacity necessary to accommodate the
future hardwire installation of Level-2 electric vehicle charging
stations. It is recommended that a typical parking lot (e.g.,
1,000 or fewer parking spaces) have a minimum ratio of 2% of
the total parking spaces be prepared for such stations. (The
following definitions would have to be included if adopted:
"Level-1" is considered slow charging: voltage including the
range from zero through 120. "Level-2" is considered medium
charging: voltage is greater than 120 and includes 240.
"Level-3" is considered fast or rapid charging: voltage is
greater than 240.)
(c) It is noted and understood that large-sized parking may require
fewer electric vehicle charging stations than recommended
above to accommodate the anticipated market demand.
§ 370-75 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-75
336:1030
§ 370-76. Off-street parking and vehicle stacking space
requirements. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 1213]
(6) Pertaining to parking in side or rear lots only, we suggest the
following language for all nonresidential areas identified on the
Future Land Use Map as Town Center Overlay District:
(a) Parking lots shall be placed in rear and/or interior side yards.
(b) Parking spaces shall not be located within five feet of a right-ofway.
(c) Rear yard setbacks are not required, provided that
dimensional requirements for screen walls are accommodated.
(d) New drives shall not be sited directly adjacent to an existing
driveway.
(e) Any area not required for parking shall be landscaped.
A. Minimum off-street parking requirements are as follows:
Use
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces
Per Unit of Measure
Residential
One- and two-family Two for each dwelling unit.
Multiple-family Two for each dwelling unit, plus 0.5 space
for each additional bedroom over two,
plus one visitor parking space for every
10 parking spaces.
Housing for the elderly Two for every three units, plus one for
each employee in the largest working
shift. Should units revert to general
occupancy, the requirements for multiplefamily
housing shall apply.
Adult foster care family
home for up to six adults
Two for each dwelling unit, plus one offstreet
parking space for each caregiver.
Child-care center or daycare
center for children
One off-street parking space for each
caregiver, plus one space for each 10
children in the facility.
Child-care institution One off-street parking space for each
caregiver, plus one space for each 10
children in the facility.
Dependent day-care
center for adults
One off-street parking space for each
caregiver, plus one space for each 10
adults in the facility.
§ 370-75 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-76
336:1031
Elderly Day Care One off-street parking space for each
caregiver plus one space for each six
adults in the facility.
Foster family home or
foster family group home
for up to six children
Two for each dwelling unit, plus one offstreet
parking space for each caregiver.
Family child-care home or
group child-care home for
children
Two for each dwelling unit, plus one offstreet
parking space for each caregiver.
Institutional
Place of worship One for every three seats or persons
permitted to capacity as regulated by
local or state fire codes, or one for every
six feet of pews in the main unit of
worship, whichever is the greater number.
Fraternity or sorority One for every five active members or one
for every two beds, whichever is the
greater number.
Group home One for each employee in the largest
working shift, plus one for every five
resident occupants.
Foster care facilities One for each two residents plus one for
each employee.
Golf courses open to the
general public, except
miniature or "par-3"
courses
Six for each golf hole and one for each
employee plus spaces required for each
accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar.
Homes for the aged, infirm
and convalescent homes
One for every four beds, plus one for each
employee in the largest working shift.
Hospitals Two for each bed, plus, when outpatient
services are provided, either within the
hospital or as a detached adjunct to the
hospital, the requirements for the
professional offices of doctors or dentists
and other similar professions shall apply.
Library, museum One for every 150 square feet of usable
floor area.
Nursery school or daycare
center
One for each staff person in the largest
working shift, plus one space for every 10
cared-for occupant, plus off-street
driveway stacking space for not less than
four vehicles.
§ 370-76 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-76
336:1032
Post office One for every 150 square feet of usable
floor area, plus one for each employee in
the largest working shift.
Private clubs or lodge
halls
One for every three persons allowed
within the maximum occupancy load as
established by local, county or state fire,
building or health codes.
Private golf clubs,
swimming pool clubs,
tennis clubs or other
One for every two member families or
individuals, plus spaces required for each
accessory use, such as a restaurant, bar
or similar use.
Schools, elementary and
junior high (middle)
One for each employee (teacher,
administrator, or other employee), or the
requirements of the auditorium,
whichever is the greater number.
School, senior high One for each employee (teacher,
administrator, or other employee), plus
one for every 10 students, or the
requirements of the auditorium,
whichever is the greater number.
Stadium, sports arena, or
other similar place of
outdoor assembly
One for every four seats, or seven feet of
bench length, whichever is the greater
number.
Theaters and auditoriums One for every four seats, or 55 square feet
of floor area in an assembly room without
fixed seats, whichever is the greater
number, plus one for every two employees
in the largest working shift.
Offices
Banks One space for every 150 square feet of
usable floor area, plus any required
vehicle stacking space as set forth in this
section.
Business offices or
professional offices except
as indicated in the
following item
One for each 200 square feet of usable
floor space.
Professional offices of
doctors or dentists or
similar profession
Three for each examining room, treatment
room, dental chair, plus one for each
employee in the largest working shift
§ 370-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-76
336:1033
Federal, state or local
offices providing services
such as, but not limited to,
social security and
employment security
offices, Secretary of State
offices for licensing, etc.
One for every 75 square feet of usable
floor area.
Business and
commercial
Appliance center (major) One for every 200 square feet of usable
floor area.
Arcade One for each game device or machine.
Automobile wash
(automatic)
One for each employee, plus vehicle
stacking space as required herein.
Automobile wash (selfservice
or coin-operated)
One space, plus vehicle stacking spaces as
required herein.
Beauty parlor, barber
shop, nail or tanning salon
Two spaces for each work station chair,
plus one for each employee in the largest
working shift.
Billiard hall Three for each table, plus one for each
employee in the largest working shift,
plus accessory uses.
Bowling alley Five for each bowling lane plus spaces
required for each accessory use such as a
restaurant, bar or billiard parlor.
Dance hall or roller
skating rink
One for every 200 square feet of floor
area used for dancing or skating, plus one
for each employee in the largest working
shift, plus accessory uses
Dry cleaning pickup Four spaces.
Exhibition or assembly
hall
One for every 45 square feet of exhibition
or assembly hall floor area, plus one for
each employee in the largest working
shift, plus accessory uses.
Furniture and
neighborhood appliance
store, household
equipment, repair shops,
show room of a plumber,
decorator, electrician,
shoe repair, and other
similar uses
One for every 800 square feet of floor
area. (For floor area used in processing,
one additional space shall be provided for
each person employed therein).
§ 370-76 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-76
336:1034
Gasoline service or filling
station
Two for each stall, rack, or pit, plus one
parking space for each employee in the
largest work shift, plus one space for each
150 square feet of usable floor space in
any retail store area, plus vehicle stacking
space as required in this section.
Laundromats and coinoperated
dry-cleaning
machines
One for each two washing and/or drycleaning.
Miniature or "par-3" golf
courses
One for each hole, plus one for each
employee.
Mortuary establishments One for every 50 square feet of usable
floor area.
Motel, hotel, or other
commercial lodging
establishments
One for each occupancy unit, plus one for
each one employee in the largest working
shift, plus 1/2 the requirement for
accessory uses.
Motor vehicle sales and
service establishments
One for each 200 square feet of usable
floor space in the sales room, plus two for
each auto mechanical service stall, and
one for each employee in the largest
working shift.
New planned commercial
or shopping center,
wherein the occupants of
the center are unknown at
the time of site plan
approval
One for every 150 square feet of usable
floor area for the first 20,000 square feet,
plus one for every 200 square feet of
usable floor area over 20,000 to 400,000
square feet of usable floor area, plus one
for every 250 square feet of usable floor
area over 400,000 square feet.
Restaurant (sit-down) One for every two seats in a restaurant,
bar, lounge or tavern, plus one for every
employee in the largest working shift.
Restaurant (fast-food sitdown)
One space for every two seats, plus one
space for every employee in the largest
working shift, plus vehicle stacking spaces
as set forth herein.
Restaurant, fast-food
(carry-out only)
One space for every 35 square feet of
usable floor area, plus vehicle stacking
space as set forth herein.
Retail stores except as
otherwise specified herein
One for every 150 square feet of usable
floor area.
Video store One for every 125 square feet of usable
floor area.
Industrial
§ 370-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-76
336:1035
Industrial or research
establishments and
related accessory offices
Five plus one for every 1 1/2 employees in
the largest working shift, or five plus one
every 350 square feet of usable floor area,
whichever is the greater; provided,
however, that where the latter shall
exceed the former, only the former need
to be installed at the time of initial
occupancy. The remainder shall be held in
reserve and improved as needed, or as
determined by the Building Department.
All such reserved parking area shall be so
designated on the officially approved
building plans. Graveled space on site
shall also be provided for all construction
workers during periods of construction.
Warehouses and wholesale
establishments and
related accessory offices
Five plus one for every one employee in
the largest working shift, or five plus one
for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor
space, whichever is the greater. Gravel
space on site shall be provided for all
construction workers during periods of
construction.
B. Vehicle stacking spaces. In addition to the numerical off-street parking
requirements of this section, wherever an accessory drive-up or drivethrough
window service is provided, vehicle stacking shall be provided.
Each vehicle stacking space shall be eight feet wide by 18 feet long and
shall be located independently of any parking space, vehicle
maneuvering lane or loading, unloading area. The following standards
shall apply:
Use
Minimum Number of Vehicle Stacking
Spaces Per Unit of Measure
Automatic car wash Five times the maximum capacity of the
auto wash. "Maximum capacity of the auto
wash" shall mean the greatest number of
automobiles possible undergoing some
phase of washing at the same time, which
shall be determined by dividing the length
in feet of each wash line by 20.
Automobile wash (selfservice)
Three for each wash stall.
Automobile wash (coinoperated)
Three for each wash stall.
Banks, savings and loan,
credit unions, ATM station
and the like
Five for each window or teller machine.
§ 370-76 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-76
336:1036
§ 370-77. Off-street parking space layout standards.
Whenever the off-street parking requirements set forth in §§ 370-75 and
370-76 of this Zoning Code shall require the establishment of an off-street
parking lot, or where P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are provided, such off-
Fast food and fast food
carry-out
10 spaces.
Gasoline station* see
diagrams below
When more than one pump is placed on a
common pump island, 1/2 vehicle stacking
space per fueling terminal. When a single
pump is placed on one pump island, one
vehicle stacking space per fueling
terminal. Each fueling space and each
stacking space shall be 18 feet long by
eight feet wide. When more than one
pump is placed on a common pump island
as in the first instance below, a ten-footwide
vehicle pass-through lane shall be
provided between vehicle fueling spaces.
When only one pump shall be placed on a
pump island as in the second instance
below, a vehicle pass-through lane is not
required. Vehicle stacking space for each
fueling terminal shall be placed as close
to the fueling terminal as possible without
diminishing traffic circulation within the
site, or blocking access to any other
vehicle fueling terminal, off-street parking
space, other stacking space or loading,
unloading area, and no vehicle parking
space, fueling space, stacking space, or
maneuvering lane shall block or otherwise
encumber in any way clear access to any
vehicle entry or exit driveways, or other
vehicle circulation lanes or service areas.
Other drive-up or drivethrough
facilities
Four spaces.
§ 370-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-77
336:1037
street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in strict
accordance with the following standards and regulations.
A. No parking lot shall be constructed, or an existing parking lot
improved, unless and until a permit has been issued by the Engineering
Department. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the
Building Department in such form as may be determined by the
Building Department and shall be accompanied by five sets of site plans
for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that
the provisions of this section have been fully complied with.
B. Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance
with the minimum dimensional requirements depicted in this section.
Parking
Pattern
Maneuvering
Lane Width
(feet)
Parking
Space
Width
Parking
Space
Length
(feet)
Total
Width of
One-Tier
Spaces
Plus
Maneuvering
Lane
Total
Width of
Two-Tier
Spaces
Plus
Maneuvering
Lane
(feet)
0° 12 8 feet 23 20 feet 28
30° to
53°
12 8 feet 6
inches
19 31 feet 50
54° to
74°
15 8 feet 6
inches
19 35 feet 6
inches
56
75° to
90°
22 9 feet 19 41 feet 60
C. Except for single-family and two-family residential uses, adequate
lighting shall be provided throughout nighttime hours when the parking
area is in operation. All lighting shall conform to the requirements of
§ 370-102, Exterior site lighting, in this Zoning Code.
D. Except for single- and two-family residential uses, all spaces shall be
provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing
directly into a street from an off-street parking space shall be
prohibited. Backing directly from an off-street parking space into an
alley right-of-way is permitted, provided the alley is hard surfaced, is in
good repair and the width of the alley right-of-way is sufficient to meet
the applicable vehicle maneuvering lane width requirements.
E. Adequate ingress and egress to a parking lot, parking deck, or to a
private garage shall be by means of a clearly defined drive or drives,
and shall be designed to applicable local, county or state guidelines.
F. Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot in a
nonresidential zoning district shall be located at least 25 feet from any
§ 370-77 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-77
336:1038
residential zoning district, and no required vehicle turning radius
extending from the edge of the driveway nearest the property line into
the right-of-way shall intersect the street pavement edge beyond the
property's side lot line.
G. All interior and abutting streets shall have rights-of-way of a sufficient
width to accommodate the vehicular traffic generated by the uses
permitted in the district or adequate provision shall be made at the time
of the approval of the parking plan for such sufficient width of rights-ofway.
The right-of-way provided to satisfy this condition shall conform to
the right-of-way standards set forth in the City's Master Plan.
H. Except for single-family residential uses, all hard-surfaced parking
areas shall be constructed with concrete curbs and gutters.
I. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface
water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude
drainage onto adjacent property or toward buildings.
J. All required parking spaces, drives, driveways and aisles shall be
pervious or impervious hard-surfaced concrete or hot mix asphalt and
constructed to specifications approved by the City Engineer. One- and
two-family parking spaces shall meet the applicable requirements of
the Michigan Residential Code. The parking area shall be hard surfaced
before a certificate of occupancy will be issued. [Amended 4-12-2011
by Ord. No. 1241]
K. Except for parallel parking, when the front of a parking space abuts a
raised curb of a private or other curbed on-site pavement that is not less
than seven feet in width, or a landscaped area that is protected in an
acceptable manner as outlined in Subsection L of this section, the
minimum required length of the parking space may be reduced by up to
two feet.
L. Wherever the front of an off-street parking space shall abut a screen
wall structure, or planting screen, or landscaped lawn panel, the
screening device and the lawn panel shall be protected from vehicles by
a two-foot-wide concrete ribbon extending along the front of the
parking space, measured from the back edge of the raised curb, or by
wheel stops placed in the parking stall, or by other means satisfactory
to the City.
M. Maneuvering lanes serving angle parking shall permit one-way traffic
movements only. Lanes serving right-angle parking shall permit twoway
movement. The mixing of one- and two-way movements within a
parking lot shall be permitted only under exceptional circumstances
and only after review and approval of the layout by the City.
N. The City may require the joining of parking lots of separate uses on
separate properties in the interest of reducing the number of curb cuts
into a public street and to facilitate movement between sites.
§ 370-77 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-77
336:1039
O. All parking spaces shall be clearly striped with lines at least four inches
in width.
P. Except for single-family and two-family uses, all parking spaces shall
have access from clearly limited and defined driveways not less than 12
feet wide for a one-way drive and 22 feet wide for a two-way drive.
Q. Access to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for multiple-family
residential use shall not be across property zoned for single-family
residential use. Likewise, access to a parking lot in a nonresidential
zoning district shall not be across land in a residential zoning district.
R. Access to a parking lot from a local residential street, as so designated
on the City's Master Plan, shall be prohibited, except as may otherwise
be permitted in § 370-106, Access to major thoroughfares, in this
chapter.
S. The off-street parking area of any nonresidential use permitted in a
residential district shall be screened by a continuous and obscuring
wall or landscaped earth berm, the height of which shall not be less
than four feet six inches measured from the surface of the parking area.
The wall or berm shall be provided on all sides where the next zoning
district is a residential district and shall contain materials and be
constructed to the standards of Article XXII, Screening Devices and
Landscaping, in this chapter.
T. When a landscape setback is required between an off-street parking
space and any property line or street right-of-way line, the area shall be
kept free of refuse and debris and shall be landscaped in accordance
with the applicable guidelines set forth in Article XXII, Screening
Devices and Landscaping, in this chapter.
PARKING LAYOUT STANDARDS
U. The required number, size, spacing and layout of handicapped parking
spaces shall be determined by state rules and regulations.
§ 370-77 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-77
336:1040
§ 370-78. Off-street loading and unloading.
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise,
or in an improved public alley that directly abuts the property, there shall
be provided and maintained adequate space for standing, loading, and
unloading in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of
dedicated streets. Such space shall be provided as follows:
V. Parallel parking spaces shall be striped so as to show a space 20 feet in
length with a six-foot maneuvering space for every two parking spaces.
W. Dead-end off-street parking aisles are discouraged, especially in
connection with business uses. Such aisles shall be no more than eight
spaces deep on any side and may be used only when there is no
reasonable alternative. If more than eight spaces deep on any side, the
layout shall provide a means for vehicles to turn around.
X. Where required, off-street parking areas shall be screened in
accordance with Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping, in
this Zoning Code.
Y. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article
XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping, in this Zoning Code.
A. Where required, unless otherwise indicated, all spaces shall be laid out
in the dimensions of at least 10 feet by 80 feet, with a clearance of at
least 14 feet in height for uses in the OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3 and I-1
Districts.
B. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an
asphaltic or cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable and
dustless surface. Loading space may be enclosed.
C. Access to a loading space shall be provided directly from a public street
or alley, or service drive, and shall be arranged so as to provide
sufficient off-street maneuvering space as well as adequate ingress to
and from a street or service drive.
D. Unless otherwise indicated, loading space is permitted in a rear yard
only. In exceptional instances, when it can be shown that such location
is necessitated by site conditions, loading space may be permitted in an
interior side yard, with approval of the Building Department. Location
of loading and unloading space in an interior side yard shall be subject
to these conditions.
(1) The location shall not have a disruptive effect on the safe and
efficient flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the site.
(2) The location shall be aesthetically and effectively screened from
view from adjoining properties and from any street in a manner
acceptable to the City.
§ 370-77 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-78
336:1041
(3) To aid in its review, the City may require submittal of exterior
building wall elevation drawings with respect to the location of
loading and unloading area, trash receptacles, the corresponding
elevations of adjoining property and streets and the means by
which these facilities will be effectively screened from view.
E. The area required for loading and unloading shall be physically
separated from the off-street parking requirements of this chapter and
shall be laid out so that when in use, the loading and unloading area will
not disrupt or diminish access to any off-street parking spaces or their
corresponding vehicle maneuvering lanes or service drives.
F. Loading, unloading spaces shall be effectively screened from view from
any public street and from any office or residential zoning district in
accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXI of this
Zoning Code.
G. In the OS-1 Districts, off-street loading and unloading shall be provided
according to the following provisions.
(1) For office buildings of 5,000 square feet or less, no loading or
unloading area shall be required.
(2) For office buildings over 5,000 square feet to 20,000 square feet in
gross floor area, at least one loading and unloading space shall be
provided with minimum dimensions of nine feet by 20 feet, and
which shall be made separate from off-street parking and parking
maneuvering lanes. The space may be located in any yard.
(3) For office buildings greater than 20,000 square feet, loading and
unloading shall be provided at the ratio of one space for each
40,000 square feet above 20,000 square feet and shall be located in
the rear yard or in an interior side yard. If a location in an interior
side yard is required, the requirements of Subsection H of this
section shall apply.
H. Loading and unloading space in the B-Commercial Districts.
(1) In the B-Commercial Districts, loading and unloading space shall
be provided in the rear yard at a ratio of 10 square feet for each
front foot of building, except in the case of a double frontage lot,
loading and unloading may be located in an interior side yard
beyond the minimum side yard setback requirement of the district.
The location of such facilities in a permitted side yard shall be
subject to review and approval by the City. The City, in making its
review, shall find that any such use shall:
(a) Not have a disruptive effect on the safe and efficient flow of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the site.
§ 370-78 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-78
336:1042
(b) Be aesthetically and effectively screened from view from
adjoining properties and from a street, in a manner acceptable
to the City.
(2) To aid in its review, the City may require submittal of exterior
building wall elevation drawings and cross section drawings
showing grade elevations with respect to the location of loading
and unloading areas, along with the corresponding topographic
elevations of adjoining property and streets and the means by
which these facilities will be effectively screened from view.
I. Within the I-Industrial Districts, all loading and unloading operations
shall be conducted in the rear yard, except in those instances where an
interior side yard is located adjacent to an I-Industrial District, loading
and unloading may be conducted in that interior side yard when located
near the rear of the building. When loading and unloading is to be
conducted within an interior side yard, the City may require aesthetic
screening of the facility in accordance with the guidelines set forth in
Article XXII, Screening Devices and Landscaping, in this chapter.
J. All loading and unloading spaces in the I-Industrial Districts shall be
provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor area.
Gross Floor
Area
(in square feet) Loading, Unloading Space Required
0 to 1,400 None
1,401 to 20,000 One space
20,001 to
100,000
One space, plus one space for each 20,000 square
feet in excess of 20,001 square feet
100,001 and over Five spaces
K. Unless as otherwise provided in this section, loading space shall be
provided for the following specified uses.
(1) Funeral homes and mortuaries shall provide one loading space for
each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each
additional 10,000 square feet.
(2) For hospitals and similar uses of less than 10,000 square feet in
gross floor area, at least one loading space with minimum
dimensions of nine feet by 20 feet, separate from off-street parking,
shall be provided and may be located in any yard.
(3) For hospitals and similar uses with a gross floor area of 10,000
square feet or greater, one loading space shall be provided, plus
one space for each 50,000 square feet in excess of 10,000 square
feet.
§ 370-78 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-78
336:1043

ARTICLE XXI
Site Plan Review (All Districts)
§ 370-79. Site plan process.
The site plan review requirements and the procedure for reviewing site
plans as set forth and regulated herein are intended to provide an essential
vehicle for the design and review of land development that will promote
compatibility between land uses in terms of internal and external
considerations and for compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
For these purposes, as well as for the purpose of promoting and protecting
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of this City
and for the preservation of its land resources, provision is made herein
for the submittal and review of site plans. In order to provide sufficient
information to properly review site development proposals in the City,
certain basic drawings, plans and pertinent site development data shall be
required as herein set forth.
A. Site plans required. A site plan shall be required for review before the
City shall issue a building permit for:
(1) Any residential building and building additions.
(2) Any nonresidential building or nonresidential building addition
permitted in a residential district.
(3) Any new office, commercial or industrial building or buildings.
(4) Any addition to an existing nonresidential building for which:
(a) Additional off-street parking is required.
(b) Required off-street parking would be lost as a result of the
addition.
(c) Alterations will be made to the general layout of the parking
area.
(5) Any use or uses permitted as a conditional use or a use permitted
subject to special conditions in this chapter.
(6) Any multiple-family residential building or development.
(7) Any public building or public utility building.
(8) Any revision to a previously approved site plan.
(9) Any building or buildings or land use for which a site plan is
required as set forth in this chapter.
(10)Off-street parking layouts in a P-1 District.
B. Site plan submittal procedure.
§ 370-79 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-79
336:1045
(1) Before submittal of a site plan as required herein, the applicant
shall first:
(a) Obtain a copy of the Roseville Zoning Ordinance and Zoning
Map to determine if the use proposed for the site is permitted
in the district in which the site is zoned and to familiarize
himself/herself with the general requirements of this chapter
with regard to building height, bulk setback, density and area
by zoning district, as well as the numerical off-street parking
requirements, parking layout standards, and the loading and
unloading requirements of this chapter.
(b) Obtain a copy of the Site Plan Review Procedures Manual and
Checklist so as to familiarize himself/herself with the
information that is to be provided on a site plan.
(2) Copies of the Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Map and the Site Plan
Review Checklist may be obtained from the City of Roseville for a
fee established by the City Council. Fees for these materials shall
be payable to the City of Roseville before issuance of any of the
materials by the Building Department.
(3) Upon submittal of a site plan for review, the Building Department
shall first examine the site plan package for completeness. No site
plans submitted shall be accepted for review until or unless they
are complete in their content, a sufficient number of site plans are
provided, the site plan review checklist has been properly filled out,
and all applicable fees for the review of a site plan as established by
City Council have been paid.
C. Site plan review process. Site plans submitted for site plan review as
set forth in this article shall be submitted to the Building Department
for its review or for distribution to the Planning Commission for its
review. The Building Department and the Planning Commission shall
review site plans for compliance with all of the applicable requirements
of the Roseville Zoning Ordinance, the procedures set forth in the City's
Site Plan Review Procedures Manual and as provided on the Site Plan
Review Checklist.
D. Site plan review (Building Department). The Building Department shall
review all site plans not specifically set forth in Subsection E of this
section for review by the Planning Commission. The Building
Department shall forward copies of site plans it will review and site
plans that will be reviewed by the Planning Commission to all
applicable review agencies for their review and comments within the
specified time limits established by the Building Department. The
Building Department shall have the authority to forward any site plan
not specifically set forth in Subsection E of this section, at its discretion,
to the Planning Commission for review.
§ 370-79 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-79
336:1046
E. Site plan review (Planning Commission). Site plans submitted to the
Building Department for review by the Planning Commission shall
include:
(1) Single-family detached site condominium subdivision
developments.
(2) Single-family attached or detached cluster housing developments.
(3) Multiple-family residential development.
(4) Any development proposed on any land that has been rezoned from
a residential district to a nonresidential district within 24 months
after the date the property was officially rezoned.
(5) A new car sales and service dealership.
(6) A used car sales lot in which such sales are the principal use of the
property.
(7) A motor vehicle rental facility, either as the principal or ancillary
use of the property, when the site will abut a residential district.
(8) A motor vehicle mechanical repair business as defined in this
chapter.
(9) A motor vehicle body repair business as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.
(10) An industrial building proposed on land next to a residential
district.
(11) Additions to an existing industrial building on land next to a
residential district.
(12) A gasoline service station or a gasoline station with commercial
adjunct.
(13) A fast-food restaurant, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, or any
additions to such a use, when such uses are located next to a
residential district.
(14) A sit-down restaurant as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, or any
additions to such a use, when such uses are located next to a
residential district.
(15) Uses for which review by the Planning Commission is specifically
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
(16) Site plans referred by the Building Department to the Planning
Commission for review.
(17) Landscape planting plans for all developments other than a singleor
a two-family dwelling.
§ 370-79 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-79
336:1047
F. Site plan review guidelines. In the process of reviewing site plans, the
Building Department, the Planning Commission and the various site
plan review agencies shall find that:
(1) The use proposed for the site is a use permitted in the district in
which the land is zoned.
(2) All applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance are met with
respect to the site plan.
(3) The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress
and egress from the site is acceptable as it relates to all streets
giving access to the site and relative to pedestrian traffic.
(4) Traffic circulation within the site relative to the location and
functional layout of off-street parking areas and loading, unloading
areas is acceptable. Traffic should flow freely within the designated
parking areas. There should be no doubling of vehicle maneuvering
lanes for loading, unloading areas, trash pickup areas, etc. When a
row of off-street parking spaces exceed eight spaces in a row,
adequate area shall be provided for vehicles to turn around,
including trucks. Such vehicle turnaround may consist of a cul-desac
turnaround, the diameter of which shall not be less than 64
feet, or by means of a hammerhead or T-type turnaround consisting
of two angular appendages extending out at the end of the vehicle
maneuvering lane. Each appendage shall be equal in length to 1/2
the required length of a parking space, plus the full required width
of the maneuvering lane, or by means of some other turnaround of
sufficient size and area to accommodate large, tandem-wheeled
service vehicles in a manner acceptable to the Building Department
and public safety officials.
(5) Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between development
proposed on a site and the existing development on contiguous
lands will he achieved through:
(a) The location of loading, unloading areas and trash receptacles
so as to minimize their impact.
(b) The use of screening devices of sufficient extent to carry out
the intent and purpose of the screening requirements of this
chapter.
(c) Design compatibility between the proposed development and
existing development so that it will be compatible with
adjacent development in terms of its architecture and the types
and color of the exterior building wall materials to be used.
(d) The provision of adequately sized and located recreation
facilities and/or open space areas where applicable.
§ 370-79 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-79
336:1048
(e) The preservation of areas of natural significance where
applicable.
(6) Landscaping within the site is located so as to provide an attractive
appearance throughout the site and is of sufficient extent to
achieve this end.
(7) Freestanding light fixtures and exterior building wall light fixtures
are such that they will present a soft visual image and not a bright
radiant or sharp light, particularly with respect to adjacent land
use, especially residential land use.
(8) All developments must provide a sidewalk on all right-of-way
(ROW) frontages. [Added 1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1265]
(9) All developments must provide clear, accessible pedestrian walks
from the ROW sidewalk to the entrance of the business. [Added
1-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1265]
G. Site plan action (Building Department). Site plans submitted to the
Building Department for review and approval, as set forth in Subsection
D of this section, shall be reviewed by the Building Department in the
manner prescribed herein and in the Site Plan Review Procedures
Manual.
(1) Review by the Building Department and involved review agencies
shall be undertaken in a workmanlike and timely manner. Upon
completion of the review of a site plan, the Building Department
shall take one of the following actions:
(a) Approve the site plan and so notify the applicant, in writing, of
the approval;
(b) Approve the site plan, subject to minor revisions; or
(c) Disapprove the site plan and notify the applicant, in writing, of
the reason or reasons for disapproval.
(2) An applicant, upon notification of disapproval of a site plan, may:
(a) Revise the site plan accordingly and resubmit the plans to the
Building Department for further review or,
(b) Seek relief before the Zoning Board of Appeals within 28 days
from the date of notification in the manner set forth by this
chapter.
H. Site plan action (Planning Commission). Site plans submitted to the
Building Department for review by the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded to the Planning Commission for its review and action in
accordance with the review guidelines set forth in the Site Plan Review
Procedures Manual, and in accordance with the following procedure.
§ 370-79 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-79
336:1049
§ 370-80. Improvement guarantee.
Guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank
letter of credit, surety bond, etc., may be required by the City to be provided
in a form acceptable to the City by the project developer. The amount
of such guarantee can be made by the City to cover all improvements
not normally covered in the building permit, such as but not necessarily
limited to landscaping, including earth berms, walls, lighting, surfacing
of drives, parking, vehicle maneuvering lanes, including acceleration and
deceleration lanes, and other traffic control and traffic circulation
improvements, sidewalks, on-site drainage structures, storm sewers, etc.
The guarantee shall include a schedule of costs assigned to the several
improvements. Monies may be released to the applicant in proportion to
work completed and accepted on the various improvements. Any partial
release of funds shall leave a balance of not less than 10% of the guarantee,
which shall be retained by the City until all work has been completed and
subsequently inspected and approved by the City.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the site plan in a
workmanlike and timely manner and upon conclusion of its review,
shall take one of the following actions:
(a) Approve the site plan.
(b) Table the site plan to allow for revisions and resubmittal by the
applicant.
(c) Approve the site plan, subject to only a minimum of minor
revisions.
(d) Disapprove the site plan.
(2) Any of the above actions taken by the Planning Commission shall be
followed by written notification to the applicant of the action taken.
(3) Disapproval of a site plan by the Planning Commission shall give
the applicant access to the Zoning Board of Appeals in a manner
prescribed by this chapter.
I. Site plan approval.
(1) Except where otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter, site
plans approved by the Building Department or by the Planning
Commission shall be in effect for one year from the date of
approval. A one-year extension may be given to a site plan. The
extension may only be given by the entity that granted the initial
approval.
(2) Sites not clearly under development within one year from the initial
date of site plan approval, and for which no extension has been
granted, shall thereafter be considered null and void and shall
require resubmittal for review and approval.
§ 370-79 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-80
336:1050
ARTICLE XXII
Screening Devices and Landscaping
§ 370-81. Screening devices required.
There shall be provided and maintained between any nonresidential district
and between any multiple-family and single-family residential districts and
between certain uses listed in this section an obscuring screening device of
the type set forth and regulated in this section.
A. Screening devices permitted.
(1) Architectural masonry screen wall with cap.
(2) Landscaped earth berm.
(3) Planting screen.
B. Where required. An obscuring screening device shall be provided and
maintained between:
(1) Any one-family residential district and any mobile home park
district;
(2) Any one-family residential district and any multiple-family
residential district;
(3) Any residential district and any office district;
(4) Any residential district and any commercial district;
(5) Any residential district and any industrial district;
(6) Any residential district and a parking district and between any offstreet
parking areas of nonresidential uses permitted in a
residential district next to or across a street from any residential
uses;
(7) Any hospital emergency entrance and any residential district;
(8) Any utility building, utility stations or substations and any
residential or office district.
C. Height requirements. The height of an obscuring screening device shall
be in accordance with the following specifications:
(1) In those instances outlined in § 370-81B(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this
article, a minimum of six feet in height, including the cap.
(2) In the instance outlined in § 370-81B(6) of this article, a minimum
of four foot six inches in height, including the cap.
(3) In the instance outlined in § 370-81B(7), four feet six inches, except
in the case of a hospital or medical clinic emergency entrance, or
§ 370-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-81
336:1051
ambulance delivery area, and in the case of public utility buildings
with outdoor substations, eight feet.
(4) In the instance outlined in § 370-81B(8), a minimum height of six
feet, or to a sufficiently greater height to effectively screen outdoor
storage areas from view, except in no case shall a screening device
designed and intended to screen outdoor storage exceed a height
of 12 feet, unless the screen consists of natural features, such as
sharp changes in topography or heavy natural foliage, all of which
shall exist on the property of the use it is intended to screen.
D. Location on property line. Required screen walls and landscaped earth
berms shall be located on the property line, except where underground
utilities interfere and except in those instances where this chapter
requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting
residential districts. When the property line of a nonresidential district
abuts the rear or side lot line of a residential district, the six-foot height
of the screening device shall terminate at the minimum applicable
building setback line of the abutting residential property. Thereafter,
the screening device shall extend towards the intersecting property line
at a height of three feet, except no screening device shall extend closer
than six feet to the intersecting property line. Any request or necessity
for locating a screen wall or landscaped earth berm other than along a
property line shall require review and approval of an alternate location
by the Building Department or by the Planning Commission. The
Building Department or the Planning Commission, in making its review
of alternate screen wall or earth berm locations, shall consider the
following:
(1) Ability of the screen wall to maintain continuity beyond the
property line;
(2) Effectiveness of the screen wall or earth berm to screen effectively
in an alternate location; and
(3) Impact an alternate location may have on site drainage, overall site
appearance and the functional well-being of the development
proposed for the property.
E. Replacing existing fences or screening devices. Whenever the location
of a screening device shall require the removal or detaching of an
existing wall, fence, planting screen or landscaped earth berm, that
wall, fence, planting screen or landscaped earth berm shall be replaced,
restored, attached or reattached to the new screening device by those
responsible for erecting the new screening device.
F. Openings for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. A screening device may
be constructed with openings that do not in any square section (height
and width) exceed 20% of the surface. Where a screening device is so
pierced, the openings shall be spaced so as to maintain the obscuring
character of the screen and shall not reduce the minimum required
height of the screening device. The arrangement of the openings shall
§ 370-81 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-81
336:1052
§ 370-82. Screen wall structures.
Whenever a screen wall structure is to be used as a screening device,
it shall be an architectural masonry structure consisting of the following
materials.
be subject to review and approval by the Building Department or by the
Planning Commission.
A. Reinforced concrete or concrete block with face brick on both sides of
the wall. If the exterior walls of the principal use on the property shall
contain any face brick material, the face brick on the screen wall
structure shall consist of the same brick.
B. Reinforced concrete with a brick-etched appearance on both sides of
the wall.
C. Natural stone materials or reinforced concrete or concrete block with
cultured stone on both sides of the wall.
D. Reinforced concrete panel walls, so long as the vertical posts are
concrete as well and are the same color as the panels they will support.
E. All masonry screen wall structures permitted in this section, including
concrete panel walls and brick-etched concrete walls, shall include a
cap. The cap shall be a vee type of cap that shall consistently extend
along the entire top of the wall. The angle of the vee shall not be less
than 45° so that it will quickly shed water and discourage walking on
top of the cap. The vee cap shall extend out beyond the vertical sides of
the wall.
F. Screen wall structures with exposed reinforced concrete surfaces may
be stained or may be made colorfast by mixing the color into the
concrete. They may not be painted. When stained or made colorfast, the
color shall be of an earth tone.
G. Reinforced concrete panel walls shall be composed of heavy-duty
panels, the size and weight of which shall require installation by
machine.
H. No screen wall structure shall consist of exposed cinder or cement
block, also known as concrete masonry units (CMU). Wood or wood
products are specifically prohibited as a screen wall material.
I. All screen walls shall be found by the Building Department to consist of
durable, weather resistant, rust proof and easily maintained materials.
J. When a screen wall structure is placed next to an off-street parking
space or parking spaces, it shall be protected by bumper blocks, a
guardrail constructed next to but physically independent from the
screen wall structure, or by other means acceptable to the Building
Department.
§ 370-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-82
336:1053
§ 370-83. Landscaped earth berms.
The Building Department or the Planning Commission may permit, in place
of an architectural masonry screen wall, a landscaped earth berm, provided
the earth berm shall have a minimum height of not less than that required
for a screen wall. An earth berm shall also:
K. All screen wall structures shall be maintained at all times in a
structurally sound condition, neat, orderly and attractive in
appearance. All screen wall structures shall be kept free of graffiti.
SCREEN WALL ILLUSTRATIONS
TRANSITION DETAILS BERM ILLUSTRATIONS
A. Have a side slope no steeper than three on one (three feet of horizontal
plane for each foot of vertical rise);
B. Consist of undulating top and side slopes;
C. Have a crest at the top of the earth berm of not less than two feet
across;
§ 370-82 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-83
336:1054
§ 370-84. Landscape planting screen.
The Building Department or the Planning Commission may permit, in place
of an architectural masonry screen wall structure or a landscaped earth
berm, the placement of a planting screen, when the following conditions are
deemed to exist on the property.
D. Include an adequately designed drainage swale on the property line
side of the berm to accommodate stormwater runoff. The drainage
swale shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer and,
where warranted, by the Macomb County Drain Commission;
E. Be seeded or covered with sod so as to prevent erosion of the sides of
the earth berm and be attractively landscaped with plant materials
acceptable to the City. The Building Department or the Planning
Commission in making its review of the landscape planting plan for the
earth berm may require installation of an automated irrigation system
to properly maintain the landscaping materials on the earth berm. All
landscape materials approved by the Building Department or the
Planning Commission for the earth berm shall be maintained in a living,
growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance.
F. In order to properly screen an area effectively, the ends of a landscaped
earth berm may be required by the Building Department or the
Planning Commission to include an architectural masonry screen wall
extension at the ends of the berm structure. The structure would be
made an integral part of the berm and would extend out from the top of
the earth berm to a peripheral property line or driveway entrance, and
shall be subject to the applicable requirements of this article pertaining
to screen wall structures, and the restricted clear corner vision
requirements as set forth in § 370-104, Corner clearance, in this
chapter.
G. Wherever an earth berm abuts any part of an off-street parking space or
parking spaces, or a service drive, it shall be placed behind a raised
concrete curb.
A. This screening alternative may be permitted only when it can be shown
that a screen wall structure or a landscaped earth berm cannot be used
due to unusual circumstances. Unusual circumstances may include;
(1) Severe soil or topographic conditions in the area of the property
where a screening device is required which precludes erecting an
architectural masonry screen wall structure or a landscaped earth
berm; or
(2) Dense foliage, which ought to be preserved, and which can
augment an effective planting screen that exists on the property
where a screening device is required, and which would be
diminished or destroyed by the erection of a masonry screen wall
structure or landscaped earth berm; or
§ 370-83 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-84
336:1055
§ 370-85. Building wall serving as screen.
The building wall of an existing or proposed building may serve as a
screening device or partial element of a screen wall when the wall shall
generally parallel the parcel line or district line along which a screen is
required by this article, provided:
§ 370-86. Approvals and waivers.
After review, the Building Department or the Planning Commission may
approve one of the screening alternatives set forth in this article or a
combination thereof. The Building Department or the Planning Commission
may also recommend to the Roseville Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) that
the screening requirements of this article be varied or waived, provided
it is determined that at least one of the following conditions exists on the
property:
(3) For aesthetic purposes, a planting screen will create a more
pleasing buffer between a one-family residential district and a
multiple-family residential district than an architectural masonry
screen wall structure or a landscaped earth berm.
B. The planting screen, where permitted, shall consist of densely placed
evergreen planting materials, the minimum height of which, at the time
of planting, shall be not less than the minimum height required for a
screen wall structure, and shall be planted and maintained in
accordance with the landscape screening requirements of § 370-84,
Landscaped planting screen, in this article.
A. The building wall shall be at least six feet in height along its entire
length;
B. The building wall shall consist of architectural masonry materials, shall
have no openings, and shall have no other accessory buildings, uses or
functions, including loading and unloading facilities or any outdoor
materials storage, located between the building wall and the property
or zoning district line;
C. The yard area between the building wall and the property line shall
consist of a landscaped lawn area that may include trees and shrubs
placed for aesthetic purposes;
D. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat
and orderly in appearance.
A. The abutting residential district for which a screening device is
required is determined to be an area in land use transition and which is
likely to become a nonresidential district in the future. The Building
Department or the Planning Commission shall rely on the land use
recommendations of the Roseville Master Plan Map when evaluating
the future use of the land abutting the subject property.
§ 370-84 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-86
336:1056
§ 370-87. Landscape planting standards.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for the
development, installation and maintenance of pervious landscaped areas
within all cluster housing, multiple-family and all nonresidential districts
and for all nonresidential uses permitted in a residential district. This article
further recognizes that the proper management and use of trees, plants and
other types of vegetation will improve the appearance, value, character and
quality of the living environment in Roseville and promote resourceful site
planning and creative design. To this end, the regulatory standards set forth
in this article are established.
B. Changes in topographic conditions between the nonresidential and
residential lands that are to be screened is such that a screen wall
structure or landscaped earth berm, as set forth and regulated in this
article, will not screen effectively and therefore will serve no useful
purpose. The planting screen alternative may be applicable in such
instances.
C. Sufficient natural vegetation exists along the common property line
between the nonresidential district and the affected residential district
to serve as an equally effective or better screen than the required
screen wall or any of the other permitted screening devices would
provide. The Building Department or the Planning Commission, in
determining this alternative, shall:
(1) Find the existing foliage to be extensive enough to create an
effective year-round screen; and
(2) Require documentation, in writing, from the landowner that the
natural screen will be preserved and maintained as a natural
screen for as long as a screening device shall be required by the
City for the property. The Building Department or the Planning
Commission, in reviewing the effectiveness of a natural screen,
may require the placement of additional planting materials to
augment the screening capability of the natural foliage.
GREENBELT PLANTING SCREEN ILLUSTRATIONS
§ 370-86 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-88
336:1057
§ 370-88. Required conditions for landscape planting screens.
Wherever in this article a landscape planting screen is permitted or
landscape planting materials are required, such landscape planting
materials shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. All planting screens and landscape planting materials shall be planted
in accordance with an approved planting plan and planted to
completion prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the
Building Department. If a use is ready for occupancy between April 1
and September 30, a certificate of occupancy may be issued. If a use is
ready for occupancy between October 1 and March 31, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued; however, all required planting
materials should be placed to completion within 60 days after March
31. Failure to have such required planting material placed to
completion within 60 days after March 31 shall be grounds for
termination or revocation of a temporary certificate of occupancy. No
additional certificate of occupancy, either temporary or final, shall be
issued thereafter until all required landscape planting materials are
placed to completion. A period of establishment shall start at the
completion of all planting and shall continue through the succeeding
summer growing season of June, July and August as set forth in this
section.
B. Whenever any aesthetic planting areas or permitted planting screens
approach a street or driveway intersection, the restricted clear corner
vision requirements of § 370-104, Corner clearance, in this chapter
shall be observed; however, in all cases, care shall be taken relative to
plant material, height and location so as not to impede the view of
pedestrians or motor vehicle traffic.
C. Trees of a species whose roots are known to cause damage to public
roadways or other public utilities shall not be planted closer than 12
feet to such roadway or public utility unless the tree root system is
completely contained within a barrier, for which the minimum interior
containing dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep, and
for which the construction requirements shall be four-inch-thick
concrete reinforced with No. 6 road mesh (six inches by six inches by
six inches, or equivalent).
D. Ground cover used in lieu of grass shall be planted in such a manner
that it will not exceed spacing from eight inches to 10 inches on center,
depending on the material used and its growth rate, so as to provide
reasonably complete coverage.
E. Grass areas shall be planted and grown as permanent lawns. Lawns
may be seeded and mulched or covered with sod and shall be protected
from erosion until the coverage is permanently established.
F. To prevent vehicular encroachment, including vehicle overhang onto or
into landscaped areas, including lawns, planting materials in areas
involving motor vehicles shall be protected by the use of wheel stops,
§ 370-88 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-88
336:1058
raised concrete curbs, or other satisfactory and acceptable methods of
barrier.
G. All open ground areas on any site, including pervious surfaces used in
the calculation of lot coverage requirements, yard areas, open ground
areas disturbed by construction, and other similar areas where such
landscaping is appropriate and feasible, shall be provided with
coverage of grass, ground cover, shrubs, or other approved landscaping
material. Materials that prevent or inhibit to an unreasonable extent
the percolation of water into the soil shall be considered unacceptable
materials for the treatment of these areas.
H. Trees and shrubs shall be provided with a minimum thickness of at least
two inches of mulch no less than at least 24 inches beyond the trunks or
stems of all newly planted trees and shrubs. Such mulch shall be
provided at the time of planting and shall be maintained and resupplied
as needed thereafter.
I. All landscaped areas shall be maintained by an automated in-ground
irrigation system approved by the Building Department. Individual
planters and isolated planting areas shall have appropriate irrigation
sources provided within each separate planting area.
J. All irrigation systems shall be maintained in an operable condition
capable of providing adequate irrigation to landscaped areas as
required. All inoperable irrigation systems and components thereof
shall be promptly repaired or replaced so that adequate coverage of
landscaped areas is restored and maintained.
K. All planting materials shall be properly planted so as to be in a healthy,
growing condition at the time of establishment. All planting material
shall consist of permanent, living plant materials and, when planted to
completion, shall thereafter be maintained in an attractive and
presentable condition, free of weeds, refuse and debris, and shall be
continuously maintained in a sound, healthy and vigorous growing
condition, free of plant diseases and insect pests.
L. Top pruning or other severe pruning or maintenance practices of
landscaping materials that results in stunted, abnormal, or other
unreasonable deviation from the normal healthy growth of trees,
shrubs, and other required landscaping components shall be
considered as the destruction of these materials, and replacement shall
be required as described in this division. Failure of the owner of the
property to maintain the premises in good condition, as set forth in
Subsection K of this section, shall make the owner liable for the
applicable penalties set forth by this chapter.
M. All plant materials shall meet current American Association of
Nurserymen standards.
N. No approved landscaped area shall be abandoned, paved over,
encroached upon by vehicular traffic, or otherwise used without
§ 370-88 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-88
336:1059
§ 370-89. Planting plan.
Whenever a landscaped earth berm or landscape planting screen is
permitted under the provisions of this article, a detailed planting plan
of such screen shall be submitted to the Building Department or to the
Planning Commission for review and approval prior to issuance of a building
permit. The planting plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the site
plan and shall accurately depict the location, spacing, starting size and
identification by botanical and common name of each type of plant material
proposed for use within the required screening area. Detailed plans shall be
submitted in accordance with the following:
§ 370-90. Planting plan review.
The planting plan shall be reviewed by the Building Department or by the
Planning Commission for conformance with the following guidelines:
submission of a site plan to and approval by the Building Department
or the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
article.
A. The minimum scale of the drawing shall be one inch equals 30 feet, or
the same scale as the site plan involved, if a requirement for site plan
approval.
B. Existing and proposed contours shall be depicted with contour intervals
not to exceed two feet.
C. The planting plan shall indicate the location, size, spacing and root type
(bare root, balled in burlap, or container-grown) of all plant materials.
D. Where an earth berm is used in conjunction with a planting screen, the
planting plan shall provide typical cross-section drawings depicting the
slope, height and width of the berm and the type of ground cover
intended to be placed on it. If architectural masonry screen walls are
used in conjunction with an earth berm, the height of the wall and the
type of materials to be used in the construction of the wall, as well as
the type of materials to be used in the wall footings, shall be shown in
cross-section format.
E. The planting plan shall depict significant construction details, where
applicable, to reflect specific site conditions, e.g., tree wells to preserve
existing trees, culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns, etc.
F. The planting plan shall indicate existing tree cover that is to be used in
conjunction with or in place of the screen planting requirements of this
article, including types of trees and overall tree height.
A. The proper types, spacing, height, placement and location of plant
materials relative to the length and width of the screen so as to insure
that the required horizontal and vertical obscuring of the land use it is
intended to screen will be at least 60% obscured at the time of planting.
§ 370-88 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-90
336:1060
§ 370-91. Layout standards; plant materials.
B. The choice and selection of plant materials so as to ensure that root
systems will not interfere with public utilities and so that fruit and other
debris, except leaves, will not constitute a nuisance within public
rights-of-way or to abutting property owners.
C. The choice and selection of plant materials so as to ensure that the type
of planting materials selected will be of a type that will thrive in the
area in which they are to be located.
D. The proper relationship between deciduous and evergreen plant
materials exists so as to assure that the desired obscuring effect will be
accomplished.
E. The size of plant material (both starting and ultimate) is sufficient to
ensure adequate maturity and optimum screening effect of the
proposed plant materials.
F. Compliance with the applicable landscape design principles set forth in
this article.
A. Landscape planting screens, when permitted as an alternative to a
masonry screening wall structure or landscaped earth berm, or in
conjunction with either, shall consist of diversified planting materials
and shall be laid out in conformance with the following guidelines:
(1) Plant materials, except creeping-vine-type planting materials, shall
not be located within four feet of the property line.
(2) Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, they shall be
staggered in rows.
(3) Evergreen trees shall not be less than six feet in height. When
planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced no less than 10
feet on center. When spaced further apart, additional screen
planting materials shall be used to achieve the desired screening
effect intended by this article. When planted in rows, they shall be
planted not less than 10 feet on center.
(4) Narrow evergreen trees shall not be less than six feet in height at
the time of planting. When planted in informal groupings, they shall
be spaced not more than 10 feet on center. When planted in rows,
they shall be planted not more than four feet on center.
(5) Except as otherwise restricted in § 370-104, Corner clearance, in
this chapter, large shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in height.
When planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced not more
than six feet on center. When planted in single rows, they shall not
be spaced more than four feet on center.
(6) Small shrubs shall not have a spread of less than 18 inches, and
shall not be planted more than four feet on center.
§ 370-90 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-91
336:1061
(7) Deciduous trees shall not be less than 2 1/2 inches in trunk caliper.
For the purpose of this section, the caliper of the trunk shall be
taken six inches above ground level, up to and including four-inch
caliper size and 12 inches above the ground level for larger trees.
When placed in informal groupings, they shall be planted not more
than 30 to 35 feet on center.
(8) Small deciduous trees shall not be less than two inches in trunk
caliper, measured in the same manner as set forth in Subsection
A(7) of this section. When planted in informal groupings, they shall
be spaced not more than 15 feet on center.
TREE CALIPER SIZE
Recommended Distances Between Like and Unlike Plant
Materials
Plant
Material
Types
Evergreen
Trees
(feet)
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees
(feet)
Large
Deciduous
Trees
(feet)
Small
Deciduous
Trees
(feet)
Large
Shrubs
(feet)
Small
Shrubs
(feet)
Evergreen
Trees
Minimum
10
Maximum
20
Minimum
12
Minimum
20
Minimum
12
Minimum
6
Minimum
5
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees
Minimum
12
Minimum
5
Maximum
10
Minimum
15
Minimum
10
Minimum
5
Minimum
4
§ 370-91 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-91
336:1062
Recommended Distances Between Like and Unlike Plant
Materials
Plant
Material
Types
Evergreen
Trees
(feet)
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees
(feet)
Large
Deciduous
Trees
(feet)
Small
Deciduous
Trees
(feet)
Large
Shrubs
(feet)
Small
Shrubs
(feet)
Large
Deciduous
Trees
Minimum
20
Minimum
15
Minimum
20
Maximum
30
Minimum
5
Minimum
15
Minimum
3
Small
Deciduous
Trees
Minimum
12
Minimum
10
Minimum
15
Minimum
8
Maximum
15
Minimum
6
Minimum
3
Large
Shrubs
Minimum
6
Minimum
5
Minimum
5
Minimum
6
Minimum
4
Maximum
6
Minimum
5
Small
Shrubs
Minimum
5
Minimum
4
Minimum
3
Minimum
3
Minimum
5
Minimum
3
B. Plant materials.
(1) Suggested (not required) plant material:
(a) Trees:
[1] Evergreen: Abies (fir), Picea (spruce), Pinus (pine),
Psuedostuga (Douglas fir), Tsuga (hemlock). Note:
Exceptions are dwarf, globe, pendulous specie/cultivars.
[2] Narrow evergreen: Juniperus (juniper), Thuja (arborvitae).
Note: Exceptions are dwarf, globe, spreading specie/
cultivars.
[3] Large deciduous: Acer (maple, except Japanese), Betula
(birch), Gleditsia (honey locust, thornless cultivars only),
Gingko (ginkgo), Platanus (sycamore, linden), Quercus
(oak), Tulip tree (Liriodendron), Linden (Tilia).
[4] Small deciduous: Amelanchier (juneberry), Cercis
(redbud), Cornus (dogwood, tree form), Crataegus
(hawthorn), Malus (crabapple, disease-resistant cultivars),
Prunus (flowering plum, tree form), Pyrus (flowering
pear), Syringa (lilac, tree form).
(b) Large shrubs:
§ 370-91 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-91
336:1063
[1] Deciduous/broadleaf evergreen: Cornus (dogwood, shrub
form), Cotoneaster (cotoneaster), Forsythia (forsythia),
Lonicera (honeysuckle), Philadelphus (mock orange),
Prunus (flowering plum), Rhamnus (buckthorn), Rhus
(sumac), Spiraea (spirea), Syringa (lilac), Viburnum
(viburnum), Weigela (weigela). Note: Defined as plants
maturing at five feet and up.
[2] Evergreen: Juniperus (hetzii, pfitzer, savin juniper), Taxus
cuspidata "Capitata" (pyramidal Japanese yew). Note:
Defined as plants maturing at five feet and up.
(c) Small shrubs:
[1] Deciduous/broadleaf evergreen: Berberis (barberry),
Buxus (boxwood), Chaenomeles (quince), Cotoneaster
(cotoneaster), Euonymus (euonymus), Forsythia
(forsythia), Hydrangea (hydrangea), Ilex (holly), Ligustrum
(privet), Lonicera (honeysuckle), Potentilla (potentilla),
Ribes (currant), Salix (willow), Spiraea (spirea), Syringa
(lilac), Viburnum (viburnum), Weigela (weigela). Note:
Defined as plants maturing under five feet.
[2] Evergreen: Abies (fir), Chamaecyparis (false cypress),
Juniperus (low spreading juniper), Picea (spruce), Pinus
(pine), Taxus (globe, spreading, upright yew), Thuja
(globe/dwarf arborvitae).
(2) Trees not suggested. Ailanthus (tree of heaven), Robinia (black
locust), Ulmus americana (American elm), and Acer negundo (Box
elder).
§ 370-91 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-91
336:1064
§ 370-92. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes.
In addition to any landscaped earth berm or landscape planting screen that
may be used on the property in place of an architectural masonry screen
wall structure to satisfy any screening requirements of this article, further
on-site landscaping shall be required, as follows.
PLANT SIZES
A. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes shall be placed throughout the
property and shall be placed in compliance with the following
guidelines.
(1) Care shall be taken to make certain that the location and size at
maturity of any landscaping materials will comply with the
applicable restricted clear corner vision requirements of § 370-104,
Corner clearance, in this chapter. Furthermore, care will be taken
with regard to the location and the height of all planting materials
placed throughout the site so as not to unduly impair the vision of
pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic within the site.
(2) Planting materials placed for aesthetic purposes shall consist of the
suggested planting materials outlined in § 370-91 in this article, or
similar, and equally acceptable nursery-grown stock, but shall not
include stock that is not suggested in the same section.
(3) All landscaping, including lawn areas, placed for aesthetic
purposes shall be maintained by an automated in-ground irrigation
system approved by the Building Department.
§ 370-91 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-93
336:1065
§ 370-93. Aesthetic landscape areas.
Landscape planting materials shall be installed and maintained wherever
called for in this article in the following places and to the following extent.
A. Except where excused in this subsection and except in those districts or
development options where greater or additional planting buffers are
required, a minimum ten-foot-wide landscaped lawn panel shall be
provided between any public road right-of-way, existing or proposed,
and any off-street parking space, service drive that parallels a road
right-of-way line, or other motor vehicle use areas, except loading and
unloading areas at the rear of a building or when next to an alley rightof-
way, according to the standards established in this section.
B. The minimum ten-foot-wide lawn panel required in Subsection A of this
section shall be landscaped in grass, ground cover, shrubs, trees or
other acceptable living plant materials. Specified natural rock
materials, brick paver materials, durable wood structures and other
durable accent pieces may be used in conjunction with live plant
materials to create visual landscaping accents. Low earth berms may be
utilized as a landscape feature within a lawn panel. Whenever an earth
berm is used it shall be covered with grass, but may also contain the
nonliving durable materials outlined in this subsection as visual accent
pieces.
C. Development which occurs in the OS, B-1, B-2, B-3, P-1, I-1 and I-2
Districts shall provide, in addition to the landscaped lawn panel
required in Subsection A of this section, additional on-site landscaped
areas. These additional landscaped areas shall be equal in area to at
least 5% of the total area of the site, less any land in public, rights-ofway,
or equal to a ratio of 10 to one: 10 square feet of landscaping for
each off-street parking space provided on site, whichever results in the
larger area. These landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the
site and may include: [Amended 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1272]
(1) Tree islands within the parking lot, placed at parking row ends,
except in the case of large parking lots, such islands may be
distributed throughout the lot at a ratio of not less than one
planting island per every 10 to 12 spaces. Wherever this landscape
feature is used, the islands shall be located so as to offer not only a
visually attractive and shading feature, but to help provide for
improved traffic circulation. The islands shall also be placed in a
uniform manner to better facilitate snow removal. A tree island
shall contain at least 150 square feet of landscape area.
(2) Pedestrian walkways, plazas, planters and other decorative
features may be included in such landscape areas when they are
made an integral part of a site's overall landscaping.
D. 256Stormwater detention or retention basins when required on site,
shall be made an integral feature of the site's landscaping. When the
§ 370-93 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-93
336:1066
§ 370-94. Cost estimates and surety.
Whenever a landscape planting plan is called for in this article, cost
estimates prepared by a licensed landscape architect or certified
nurseryman shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the site plan
review package. The cost estimate shall cover the cost of all new planting
materials proposed on the approved landscape planting plan, the cost of
their installation, including the cost of installing the automated in-ground
irrigation system required in this article. Verification by the Building
Department or its representative of the correctness of the cost estimate or
estimates submitted shall cause surety in a form acceptable to the City to
be submitted by the applicant in an amount sufficient to insure completion
within the time specified in this article and in accordance with the approved
planting plan.
§ 370-95. Exterior utility equipment screens.
All exterior climate control equipment and any other exterior mechanical
equipment, including utility outlets, transformers, other electrical
equipment, gas regulators, etc., serving any single-family cluster housing
development, multiple-family residential development, or any
nonresidential use are regarded as accessory uses and shall be restricted
to locations on the property for accessory uses as set forth in § 370-100,
Accessory uses, in this chapter and shall be effectively screened from view
from any abutting residential district or from any street in the following
manner.
side slopes of a stormwater basin will be steeper than a ratio of three
to one (three of horizontal plane for each foot of vertical rise), the basin
will be fenced with a six-foot-high black or green close link woven wire
(chain link) fence to discourage climbing. Any part of a stormwater
basin that must be placed in a front or exterior side yard next to a
street, and which must be fenced, shall be fenced along the frontage
by a decorative wrought iron fence of equal height. When a stormwater
basin shall retain water, the water shall be circulated so as to prevent
stagnation and pest infestation. A fenced stormwater basin shall be
aesthetically landscaped along its fence line with a diversified mix of
deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs.
E. The area of a site that lies in a public road right-of-way between the
property line and the back edge of the curbline of the pavement, or the
edge of the pavement when there is no curb, shall be landscaped with
grass and/or other live planting materials. Wherever such landscaping
shall be installed, it shall comply with all applicable landscaping, clear
vision or line-of-sight restrictions that are set forth and regulated by the
superintending authority in control of the right-of-way.
256. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding the I-1 and I-2 Districts, was repealed
10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1272. (See now Subsection C.) Said ordinance also provided for
the redesignation of former Subsections E and F as Subsections D and E, respectively.
§ 370-93 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-95
336:1067
§ 370-96. Trash receptacle screens.
Whenever a trash receptacle or receptacles will be used in conjunction with
any use in any district, the receptacle shall be screened from view in the
following manner.
A. Ground-level equipment shall be screened from view by any screening
device permitted in this article. The screening device need be no higher
than necessary to effectively screen the equipment from view. When the
exterior walls of the principal use of the property for which the
equipment is intended to serve contain any brick material and the
screening device is to consist of an architectural masonry screen wall
structure, its exterior sides shall consist of the same exterior masonry
materials that appear on the principal building. When a landscaped
earth berm or planting screen is to be used, except for minimum height
limitations, they shall comply with the applicable requirements of this
article.
B. Rooftop equipment that will be visible from the ground on the property
or from any abutting residential district or street shall be screened from
view by material that shall extend upwards at least 1/8 times higher
than the equipment it is intended to screen. Rooftop screening
materials may consist of lightweight weather-resistant metal or
structurally ridged vinyl or glass fiber materials approved by the
Building Department.
A. They shall be placed in architectural masonry screening structures as
such structures are permitted and regulated in this article, except the
following requirements shall apply.
(1) The exterior walls of the structure shall consist of the same
masonry materials used in the front facade of the principal
building, when such materials are structurally applicable as a
screen wall material and accepted by the Building Department as
such, except concrete masonry units (CMUs) shall be prohibited
and except when the receptacle screen wall structure is to be made
an integral part of an approved architectural masonry screening
wall structure, it may consist of the same materials that are to be
used in the screen wall structure.
(2) The minimum height of the screen wall structure shall be six feet.
(3) The screen wall enclosure shall include a gate consisting of opaque
material.
(4) Posts of adequate size and strength shall be placed at the outside
edge of the gates next to the enclosure structure to protect the
structure.
(5) The floor of the enclosure shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete in a manner acceptable to the Building Department and
§ 370-95 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-96
336:1068
shall extend outward from the gate a distance of 10 feet and shall
be one foot wider than the width of the gate on both sides.
(6) Wherever a trash receptacle screen wall structure is erected, the
area inside the structure and around the outside of the structure
shall be maintained in an orderly and structurally sound condition,
clean and free from refuse clutter.
§ 370-96 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-96
336:1069

ARTICLE XXIII
General Provisions
§ 370-97. Conflicting regulations. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No.
1294]
Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent
requirements, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by
the provisions of any other law, ordinance or code, then the provisions
of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law
or ordinance imposes more stringent requirements than are imposed or
required by this chapter, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern.
§ 370-98. Scope. [Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 1294]
No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall
be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof,
except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 370-99. Nonconforming lots, uses and structures. [Amended
2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 1294]
A. Intent.
(1) It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming lots,
structures or uses to continue until they are removed but not to
encourage their survival.
(2) It is recognized that there exist within the districts established by
this chapter, and subsequent amendments, lots, structures and
uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter
was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments.
(3) Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of
this chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(4) A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land,
or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall
not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by the
attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended
to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of
a nature which would not be permitted in the district involved.
(5) To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of
any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior
to the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this chapter
§ 370-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-99
336:1071
and upon which actual building construction has been diligently
carried on. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and
fastening them in a permanent manner, except that where
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially
begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall
be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
B. Class A nonconforming uses and structures. Nonconforming uses or
structures shall be designated Class A provided that the Planning
Commission finds all of the following exists with respect to the use or
structure:
(1) The use or structure was lawful at its inception.
(2) Continuance of the use or structure is not likely to significantly
depress property values of nearby properties.
(3) Continuance of the use or structure would not be contrary to the
public health, safety or welfare or the spirit of this chapter.
(4) No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the
provisions of this chapter with which the use or structure does not
conform.
C. Class A conditions. The decision to grant a Class A designation shall be
made in writing setting forth its findings of fact and basis for the
designation. For changes or improvements to a Class A use or structure,
site plans shall be required and the Planning Commission may condition
its approval on the following, and by the following procedure to assure
the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit and purpose of this
chapter:
(1) Conditions.
(a) Screening and landscaping in keeping with community
standards to provide compatibility with adjacent uses.
(b) Restrictions on lighting, noise, or visual impact.
(c) Prohibition of curbside parking to an extent greater than the
immediate property frontage of the nonconforming use, where
such use is in close proximity to homes.
(d) Signage in compliance with zoning district requirements.
Existing nonconforming signs may be required to be
eliminated or reduced in size and number.
(e) Exterior building materials utilized in any alteration or
rebuilding of the building shall be harmonious with materials
on abutting properties whenever practical.
§ 370-99 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-99
336:1072
(f) Enlargement or replacement of a building that does not create
a more nonconforming yard setback condition which would
impact on conforming properties in the immediate vicinity.
(g) Other reasonable safeguards and improvements imposed to
protect conforming uses in the surrounding area.
(2) Procedure.
(a) A Class A designation shall be deemed temporary until the
Planning Commission has received written verification from
the Building Director that the party requesting the Class A
designation has complied with all of the conditions set forth by
the planning commission.
(b) Once the Planning Commission has received written
verification from the Building Director that the party
requesting the Class A designation has complied with said
conditions, the Class A designation shall become final, subject
to other provisions of this chapter as hereafter prescribed.
(c) No Class A nonconforming use or structure shall be resumed if
it has been discontinued for six consecutive months, or 18
months total in any three-year period. No Class A
nonconforming use or structure shall be used, altered or
enlarged in violation of any conditions imposed in its
designation.
(d) A temporary Class A nonconforming use or structure
designation shall be void after six months if any conditions
imposed by the designation remain unmet, unless the Planning
Commission grants a written request for an extension of six
months. No more than two extensions may be granted.
D. Class B nonconforming uses and structures. All nonconforming uses or
structures not designated Class A shall be Class B nonconforming uses
or structures. Class B nonconforming uses and structures shall comply
with all the provisions of this chapter relative to nonconforming uses
and structures.
E. Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of
this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply
even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width,
or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard
dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width or both,
of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such
lot is located. If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of
lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the
time of passage or amendment of this chapter and if all or part of the
§ 370-99 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-99
336:1073
lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established
by this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
unsubdivided parcel for the purpose of this chapter and no portion of
said parcel shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and
area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of
the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot width or area below
the requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of
the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot width or area below
the requirements stated in this chapter.
F. Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, a lawful use of land exists that is made no
longer permissible under the terms of this chapter, as enacted or
amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
(2) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
(3) If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of 12 consecutive months, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the
district in which such land is located.
G. Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not
be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on
area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the
structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity; for example, existing residences on
lots of a width less than required herein may add a rear porch
provided that other requirements relative to yard space and land
coverage are met.
(2) Should such structure be destroyed to an extent of more than 50
percent of its replacement value, exclusive of the foundation at the
time of destruction, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, except that reconstruction on
the existing foundation or footing shall be permitted provided
reconstruction is commenced within 12 months from date of such
damage.
§ 370-99 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-99
336:1074
(3) Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.
H. Nonconforming uses of structures and land. If a lawful use of a
structure, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not
be allowed in this district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located, shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally
altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.
(2) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use,
and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance code, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any
land outside such building.
(3) In any B or I District, if no structural alteration is made, any
nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may
be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more
restricted classification, provided that the Planning Commission,
either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case,
shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In
permitting such change, the Planning Commission shall require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose
and intent of this chapter. Where a nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and land in combination is hereafter
changed to a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter
be changed to a less restricted classification.
(4) Any structure or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such
structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter
be resumed.
(5) When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and
premises in combination is discontinued or ceases to exist for 12
consecutive months or for 24 months during any three-year period,
the structure or structure and premises in combination shall not
thereafter be used, except in conformance with the regulation of
the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal
uses shall be exempt from this provision.
§ 370-99 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-99
336:1075
§ 370-100. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be
subject to the following regulations:
(6) When a nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
I. Repairs and maintenance. Except as otherwise permitted in this
subsection, on any building devoted in whole or in part to any
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive
months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing
walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50% of
the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of
the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this
chapter shall not be increased; except nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the public safety, upon the order of such
official.
J. Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use for
which a special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall
not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action,
be deemed a conforming use in such district.
K. Change of tenancy of ownership. There may be a change of tenancy,
ownership or management of any existing nonconforming use of land,
structure and premises provided there is no change in the nature of
character of such nonconforming use.
A. Accessory buildings.
(1) Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations
of this chapter applicable to the main building.
(2) Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required front yard
or in any required exterior side yard, except that in the case of a
narrow corner lot, where compliance with the requirement would
give an impractical depth to a private garage, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may permit the construction of such garages as near to
such side street lot line as will give a practical depth, but in no case
shall any part of such garage project beyond the building to which
it is accessory, or be closer than two feet to the interior side lot line.
(3) No accessory building(s) shall occupy more than 12% of the total
lot area in a residential district, provided that in a residential
district, the accessory building(s) shall not exceed the ground floor
area of the main residence, except that accessory garages for the
parking of private motor vehicles in residential districts shall not
§ 370-99 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-100
336:1076
exceed 900 square feet in gross floor area, or the gross floor area
of the house, whichever is less.
(4) No accessory building shall be located within an easement, or
closer than four feet to any main building, nor shall it be located
closer than two feet to any interior side lot line and five feet from a
rear lot line.
(5) In those instances where the rear lot line abuts an alley right-ofway,
the accessory building shall be no closer than one foot to such
rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be located
within an easement or dedicated right-of-way. In those instances
where the rear lot line abuts a street right-of-way, the accessory
building shall be no closer to this line than the required front yard
setback in the district in which the property is located. Whenever a
garage is at right angles to an alley, it shall be no closer than 10
feet to the rear lot line.
(6) When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the rear lot
line of which abuts an interior side lot line of an adjoining parcel in
a residential district, no part of any accessory building within 25
feet of the common lot line shall be nearer the street bounding the
side lot line than the least depth of any required front yard setback
along such lot line.
(7) No detached accessory building in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, OS, B-1, P-1,
RM-1 and RM-2 Districts shall exceed one story, or 15 feet, in
height measured to the ridgeline of the roof. Accessory buildings in
all other districts may be built to a height equal to the maximum
permitted height of the district, provided, if the accessory building
exceeds one story, or 12 feet, in height, the building shall be set
back one foot for each foot the building exceeds 12 feet in height.
(8) When an accessory building in any residential, business or office
district is intended for a use other than gazebos, doghouses, the
parking or storage of private motor vehicles, tools for personal use,
or recreation equipment, the accessory use shall be subject to
review and approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Accessory structures.
(1) Accessory structures, except where otherwise permitted and
regulated in this chapter, shall be located in the rear yard and shall
meet the setback requirements of an accessory building.
(2) Flag poles may be located within any required front or exterior side
yard. Such poles shall be located no closer to a public right-of-way
than 1/2 the distance between the right-of-way and the principal
building.
(3) Canopies covering gasoline pump islands may extend into the
required front or exterior side yards to a point 10 feet from the
§ 370-100 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-100
336:1077
§ 370-101. Open storage in residential districts.
No recreational vehicle or mobile home shall be parked or stored, nor
materials kept, in any residential district, except as specifically permitted
and regulated in this section.
street right-of-way line. Signs placed on any canopy other than
a sign showing the height of the canopy shall comply with the
applicable standards of the Roseville Sign Ordinance.257
(4) Ground-mounted private communication antennas shall be located
in the rear yard, except when it can be found that such antennas
will not be highly visible from a street, they may be located in a
nonrequired interior side yard.
(5) Ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed a dimension of 12 feet
by 12 feet or a diameter of 12 feet. In nonresidential districts, no
roof-, pole- or tower-mounted antenna shall exceed a dimension of
12 feet by 12 feet or a diameter of 12 feet. Ground-mounted
antennas shall not exceed a dimension of 16 feet by 16 feet or a
diameter of 16 feet.
(6) Solar energy panels, when located on the ground, shall observe all
applicable electrical codes and all applicable requirements
pertaining to an accessory building. When roof mounted, they shall
be mounted either flat against the roof surface or shall not project
more than four feet outward from the roof measured from the
surface of the roof where so affixed to the farthest outward
projection of the panel.
A. All motor vehicles shall be in operating condition and under current
license, unless kept within a fully enclosed building, except the Building
Department may grant a resident up to 30 days to procure a license.
B. Except where otherwise permitted in this chapter, the off-street parking
of a mobile home for periods exceeding 24 hours on lands not approved
for mobile homes or mobile home parks shall be expressly prohibited,
except that the Building Department may extend temporary permits
allowing the parking of a mobile home in a rear yard on private
property, not to exceed a period of two weeks.
C. All mobile homes owned by residents of the City of Roseville and stored
on their individual lots shall be stored only within the confines of the
rear yard or nonrequired interior side yard and shall further respect the
requirement of § 370-101 of this chapter, insofar as distances from
principal structures, lot lines and easements are concerned.
D. Any such mobile home so parked or stored shall not be connected to
sanitary facilities and shall not be occupied.
257. Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Signs.
§ 370-100 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-101
336:1078
E. Recreational equipment may be parked anywhere on a residential
premises, not to exceed 72 hours for loading and unloading.
F. All recreational equipment shall be stored in the rear yard or
nonrequired side yard only, subject to the applicable conditions of this
section regarding accessory buildings, with respect to height, yard
coverage and setbacks.
G. Recreational equipment parked or stored on residential premises shall
be kept in good repair and carry a current license plate and/or
registration.
H. At no time shall recreational equipment be used for living or
housekeeping purposes, nor may it be connected to water or sanitary
sewer facilities.
I. The outdoor storage of recreational equipment, as defined in this
chapter, on any residential lot or parcel shall be limited to only that
equipment owned by, licensed or registered to the occupant of the
residential lot or parcel on which the equipment is stored.
J. Except as otherwise permitted in this subsection, a person shall not
park, nor a vehicle's registered owner permit to be parked, any
commercial vehicle as defined in this chapter on any residentially zoned
property in the City for any purpose or length of time other than for
expeditious loading and delivery or pickup and unloading of materials,
goods, or merchandise, or for the purpose of carrying on a principal use
permitted on the property on which the vehicle is parked.
K. A commercial vehicle may be parked on residentially zoned property
when all of the following conditions are met.
(1) The vehicle is used solely as a commercial vehicle for business
purposes.
(2) The driver of the vehicle is an occupant of the residential property
where the vehicle is parked and is an employee of the business for
which the vehicle is used for commercial purposes.
(3) The vehicle is that occupant's principal means of transportation to
and from the business where he is employed.
(4) The vehicle is not a stake truck (with or without stakes in place), a
flatbed truck, a semi trailer-tractor, or semitrailer, dump truck, tow
truck (wrecker), or car hauler or trailer that is used for commercial
purposes.
(5) The vehicle does not:
(a) Exceed 10,500 pounds as it is parked in the driveway; nor
§ 370-101 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-101
336:1079
§ 370-102. Exterior site lighting. [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No.
1271; 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 1280]
(b) Exceed eight feet in height measured from the surface of the
driveway under the vehicle to the highest roofline of the
vehicle.
L. The owner of residentially zoned property shall not permit a
commercial vehicle to remain on such property in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
M. Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be parked on any singlefamily-
zoned property.
N. A commercial vehicle that is not in daily use, or which does not display a
current license, shall be housed in a garage.
O. In those instances where a commercial vehicle is not required to be
housed, the vehicle shall be restricted to a parking space on the
driveway of a single-family-zoned premises where its owner or driver
resides, and shall not be parked closer to the front property line than 10
feet.
P. Except as otherwise permitted in § 370-15B in this chapter, the outdoor
storage or keeping of any other materials or machinery shall be
prohibited.
A. The intent of this section is to encourage site lighting that will be
attractive to the eye while at the same time adequately illuminating a
site for safety and convenience. It is further the intent of this section to
discourage excessively bright and harsh site illumination that creates
undesirable halo effects on the property, diminishes the residential
environment of abutting and nearby dwellings and presents a potential
hazard to vehicle and pedestrian traffic on abutting streets and
sidewalks.
B. All exterior site lighting designed and intended to light private property
shall comply with the following applicable requirements.
(1) Exterior site lighting in nonresidential zoning districts:
(a) Overall exterior site illumination limitations.
[1] All outdoor lighting must be so designed and arranged so
as not to shine on adjacent properties or occupied
dwellings, or adversely impact vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on nearby streets, drives, walkways, or general
rights-of-way. Outdoor lighting originating on a site must
not exceed 0.5 footcandle at the lot line. Proposed light
fixtures must be down-directed and shielded where
necessary. The source of the illumination (luminaire) must
not be visible from adjacent properties and be
§ 370-101 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-102
336:1080
International Dark Sky Association compliant. Lights may
be required to be full cutoff where they may impact
residential uses.
[2] Outdoor lighting fixtures must not exceed a height of 30
feet in height or the height of the principal building on the
site, whichever is less. For development sites abutting
properties, lots used or zoned for one- and two-family
residential uses, lights must not exceed a height of 16 feet.
The Planning Commission may modify the height
restrictions in commercial and industrial districts, based
on consideration of the following: the position and height
of buildings, the character of the proposed use; and the
character of surrounding land use.
[3] Where outdoor lighting is required by this chapter, the
light intensity provided at ground level must be a
minimum of 0.3 footcandle anywhere in the area to be
illuminated. Light intensity must average a minimum of
0.5 footcandle over the entire area, measured five feet
above the surface.
(b) Pole requirements. Freestanding light poles:
[1] Shall be constructed of metal, concrete, wood laminates or
composite materials and shall be of an architectural
nature. Decorative streetlights and poles are required in
the Town Center Overlay District and shall be approved by
the Planning Commission prior to site plan approval.
(c) Architectural exterior lighting.
[1] Architectural exterior lighting that is designed and
intended only to enhance the architecture of a building or
to highlight a particular architectural feature of a building,
and to provide lighting for no other purpose, shall consist
of:
[a] Low-wattage luminaire designed to cast soft light only
on the subject.
[b] The luminaire, when directly visible from a fixture,
shall not be an irritant to pedestrians or to vehicle
traffic within the site or to traffic on adjacent streets,
or to residents on any abutting residential properties.
(d) Wiring requirements. All electrical service to any exterior light
source shall be placed underground and within the interior of
any canopy structure and shall meet all applicable electrical
wiring codes and ordinances.
(2) Exterior site lighting in the multiple-family residential districts.
§ 370-102 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-102
336:1081
(a) Freestanding light fixtures:
[1] May consist of a low-voltage incandescent luminaire
contained in a decorative light fixture attached to the top
of a low-profile yard type of light pole. All wiring to pole
fixtures shall be underground and shall comply with all
applicable electrical codes and ordinances.
(b) Wall- and roof-mounted fixtures.
[1] Carports in a multiple-family dwelling development may
be lighted so long as all such lighting is contained in
fixtures attached to the underside of the carport roof. The
fixtures shall be placed no closer to the front of the roof
structure than 1/2 the distance from the rear of the roof
structure to the front of the roof structure. Luminaires
shall not exceed 100 watts and may be housed in fixtures
with clear lenses.
[2] Wall-mounted fixtures shall consist of low-voltage
incandescent luminaires contained in decorative fixtures.
Wall-mounted fixtures may be placed next to the main
entrance to a dwelling unit or building entrance and next
to any rear entry.
(3) General lighting exemption:
(a) To request a waiver of up to 20% of the full lighting
requirements of this section, an applicant must submit
evidence to demonstrate that the waiver or exemption does not
result in any unnecessary hardship on surrounding properties,
business, and residences, and meets all of the criteria listed in
this section. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with
§ 370-140 of this chapter.
(b) The Planning Commission may approve such waiver or
exemption upon finding that such waiver or exemption does
not result in any unnecessary hardship on surrounding
properties, business, and residences, and meets all of the
criteria listed in this section.
(c) Although not necessary, an applicant may elect to apply for an
exemption in lighting requirements for projects located in
Business and Office Districts. This application is not applicable
for projects located in zoning districts other than the B-1, B-2,
B-3, and OS.
(d) In approving an exemption in lighting requirements authorized
by this Code, the Planning Commission shall consider and
apply the following criteria:
§ 370-102 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-102
336:1082
§ 370-103. Residential entranceway structures.
In all residential districts, so-called "entranceway structures," including,
but not limited to, walls, columns and gates marking entrances to singlefamily
subdivisions or multifamily housing projects, may be permitted and
may be located in a required yard, except as provided in § 370-104, Corner
clearance, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply with all
applicable codes of the municipality and shall be approved by the Building
Director (or his designee) and a permit issued.
§ 370-104. Corner clearance.
No wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of
three feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the
triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines
by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along
each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection: In the case of a private
driveway or public alley right-of-way, the distance along each line shall not
[1] The exemption in the lighting requirement is justified by
the reasonably anticipated usage by businesses of and
visitors to the project; and
[2] The exemption in the lighting requirement will not be
detrimental to the health, safety, convenience, or general
welfare of persons residing in or working in the vicinity;
and
[3] The pattern of land use and character of development in
the vicinity; and
[4] Such other criteria as the Planning Commission deems
appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case.
(4) Prohibition. The following is a list of prohibitions:
(a) Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising
purposes is prohibited between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
sunrise.
(b) Recreational facilities. No outdoor recreational facility, public
or private, shall be illuminated by nonconforming means after
11:00 p.m., except to conclude a specific recreational or
sporting event or any other activity conducted at a ball park,
outdoor amphitheater, arena, or similar facility in progress
prior to 11:00 p.m.
(c) Outdoor building or landscaping illumination. The unshielded
outdoor illumination of any building, landscaping, signing or
other purpose is prohibited.
(d) Mercury vapor fixtures.
§ 370-102 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-104
336:1083
be less than 15 feet, as depicted in the accompanying drawing, except a
freestanding pylon sign, supported by one, but not more than two, poles,
the diameter of which shall not exceed eight inches and which have at least
eight feet of unobstructed clearance from the ground to the bottom of the
sign, may be permitted.
RESTRICTED CLEAR CORNER VISION AREAS
§ 370-105. Frontage on public streets.
No lot or parcel of land shall be used for any purpose permitted by this
chapter unless said lot or parcel shall front directly upon a public street,
unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
§ 370-106. Access to major thoroughfares.
For uses making reference to this section, vehicular access shall be
provided only to an existing or planned major thoroughfare or freeway
service drive; provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted
to other than a major thoroughfare or freeway service drive, where such
access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street
between the driveway and the major thoroughfare or freeway service drive
is zoned for multiple-family use or any nonresidential uses, is developed
with permanent uses other than single-family residences or is an area
which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, will be used for other
than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall apply only if
the Commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate
that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety by reducing the
number of driveways to a thoroughfare.
§ 370-107. Exterior building wall materials guidelines.
The purpose of this section is to serve as a guideline for the establishment
of a harmonious exterior building wall appearance designed so as to create,
enhance and promote a uniform and quality appearing visual environment
in the City of Roseville.
A. To ensure that thoughtful and proper attention will be given to the
visual appearance of buildings, whenever in this chapter reference is
made to this section, all exterior building walls of all new building(s)
and any accessory building(s) shall consist of the same uniform finish
material(s) as the front facade of the main or principal building(s) when
the building(s) is:
§ 370-104 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-107
336:1084
(1) A residential or nonresidential use permitted in a residential
district; or
(2) A permitted use in the OS, B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, or I-2 Districts and will
have exterior walls exposed to view from any road, street or
expressway, or from any residential district.
B. Whenever the exterior building wall materials guidelines set forth in
this section apply, they shall be accompanied by a statement describing
how the selected exterior building wall materials and/or combination of
materials will be consistent with and will enhance the building's
appearance and will be in harmony with the building's on adjacent
parcels.
C. The exterior building walls of all such buildings coming under the
requirements of this section, shall be constructed of a combination of
one or more of the following materials:
(1) Masonry materials, including face brick, glazed brick, cut stone,
ceramic tile.
(2) Precast concrete in form pattern, color treated (not painted) with
earth-tone colors.
(3) Finished cementitious materials, including finished systems,
stucco.
(4) Metal materials, including flat sheets, standing seamed, ribbed
panels, stainless steel, porcelain clad.
(5) Glass products, including, clear, tinted, reflective, glass block.
(6) Architectural masonry block materials such as split face and fluted
block, when such materials do not make up more than 25% of a
building wall.
D. Materials other than those listed above, except cinder block, cement
block, tarred paper, tin, corrugated iron, any form of pressed board or
felt, or like or similar materials, may be permitted in place of, or in
combination with, the above permitted materials when approved by the
Building Department. The Building Department may approve
alternative materials only when it shall determine that such materials
shall:
(1) Be in harmony with the intent and purpose of this section and will
promote the uniform and quality appearing visual environment of
the City.
(2) Meet all applicable requirements of the Building Code.
E. Any permitted outdoor storage of materials or vehicles used in the
manufacture of products on the premises, or in the operation of a
business on the premises, shall be effectively screened from view in
§ 370-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-107
336:1085
§ 370-108. Signs.
Signs, as permitted, shall be subject to the standards of the Roseville Sign
Ordinance, being Chapter 264 in the Roseville Code of Ordinances, as
amended.
§ 370-109. Fences.
Fences, except architectural masonry screen walls, may be erected on any
parcel of land, subject to the standards of the Roseville Fence Ordinance,
being Chapter 134 in the Roseville Code of Ordinances, as amended.
§ 370-110. Use restrictions.
§ 370-111. Performance standards.
No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any use district set
forth in this chapter which does not conform to applicable performance
standards pertaining to the limiting of smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, chemical
propellants, glare, radioactivity, fire, explosive hazards, noise, vibration,
odors, and wastes as set forth and regulated by local, county, state or
federal laws.
§ 370-112. Wind energy systems. [Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No.
1228]
The purpose of this section is to provide a safe, effective, and efficient use
of wind energy turbines in order to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels in
producing electricity; to preserve and protect public health, safety, welfare,
and quality of life by minimizing the potential adverse impacts of a wind
energy turbine; and to establish standards and procedures by which the
siting, design, engineering, installation, operation, and maintenance of a
wind energy turbine shall be governed.
accordance with the requirements set forth in Article 22, in this
chapter.
A. No portion of a lot or parcel once used in complying with the provisions
of this chapter for yards, lot area per family, density (as for multiplefamily
development), or percentage of lot occupancy, in connection with
an existing or proposed building or structure, shall again be used as a
part of the lot or parcel required in connection with any other building
or structure existing or intended to exist at the same time.
B. Except where otherwise permitted in this chapter, in the R-Residential
Districts, only one single-family detached dwelling unit shall be
permitted per lot or parcel of record.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
§ 370-107 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-112
336:1086
LARGE WIND ENERGY TURBINE — A tower-, structure-, or similar
device–mounted wind energy system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of equipment which includes any base,
blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane,
wire, inverter, batteries, or other components used in the system.
MEDIUM WIND ENERGY TURBINE — A tower- or similar
device–mounted wind energy system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of equipment which includes any base,
blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane,
wire, inverter, batteries, or other components used in the system and
does not exceed 250 kilowatts.
MONOPOLE — Towers that are constructed of open steel truss work or
a single hollow tube of welded steel.
SHADOW FLICKER — Alternating changes in light intensity caused
by the moving blade of a wind energy system casting shadows on the
ground and stationary objects, such as a window at a dwelling.
SMALL WIND ENERGY TURBINE — A tower- or similar
device–mounted wind energy system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of equipment which includes any base,
blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane,
wire, inverter, batteries, or other components used in the system. It
does not exceed 30 kilowatts.
B. General regulations:
(1) Small wind energy systems shall be permitted as a special use in
residential zoning districts.
(2) Small and medium wind energy systems shall be permitted in
Office Service Zoning Districts as a special use.
(3) Small, medium and large wind energy systems shall be permitted in
Business and Industrial Zoning Districts as a special use.
(4) A public hearing is required for all wind energy turbines and/or
systems.
(5) Small, medium and large wind energy systems shall be permitted
as a special use and subject to the following:
(a) Height, type, design.
[1] Only monopole construction shall be permitted.
[2] The total height of a wind energy system tower or similar
device, including maximum extension of the top of the
blade, shall not exceed the maximum height for structures
or devices permitted in the zoning district.
[3] Wind energy systems shall be painted a nonreflective,
nonobtrusive color, such as grey, white, or off-white.
§ 370-112 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-112
336:1087
[4] Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent required by the FAA.
[5] No form of advertising shall be allowed on any part of the
wind energy systems, except for reasonable identification
of the manufacturer or operator of a large wind energy
facility.
(b) Setbacks. A wind energy system tower or similar device shall
be set back a distance equal to its total height from:
[1] Any public road right-of-way, unless written permission is
granted by the governmental entity having jurisdiction
over the road.
[2] Any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is
granted by the affected utility.
[3] All property lines, unless written permission is granted
from the affected landowner or neighbor.
[4] Support cables, if provided, shall be anchored to the
ground no closer than 10 feet to any property line.
(c) Access.
[1] All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall
be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
[2] The tower or similar device shall be designed and installed
so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder readily
accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight feet
above the ground.
(d) Speed controls. All systems shall be equipped with manual and
automatic over speed controls.
(e) Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with a wind
energy system, other than those necessary to connect the wind
generator to the tower or similar device wiring, the tower
wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires,
shall be located underground.
(f) Signal interference. No wind energy facility shall be located in
any location where its proximity to existing fixed broadcast,
retransmission, or reception antennas for radio, television, or
wireless phone or other personal communication systems
would produce electromagnetic interference with signal
transmission or reception.
(g) Noise.
[1] Audible noise or the sound pressure level from the
operation of the wind energy system shall not exceed a
§ 370-112 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-112
336:1088
rating of 50 dBA, or the ambient sound pressure level plus
5 dBA, whichever is greater, for more than 10% of any
hour, measured at the property line of the subject property.
[2] Proof from the manufacturer that the system is capable of
meeting these noise requirements shall be provided at the
time a permit is requested.
(h) Shadow flicker.
[1] At the time a permit is requested, the applicant shall
conduct a written analysis of potential shadow flicker
regarding structures or devices within 300 feet of the wind
energy system.
[2] The analysis shall identify the location of shadow flicker
that may be caused by the wind energy system and the
expected durations of the flicker at these locations from
sunrise to sunset over the course of a year.
[3] The analysis shall identify problem areas where shadow
flicker may affect the occupants of the structures or
devices and describe measures that shall be taken to
eliminate or mitigate the problems at the time a permit is
requested.
(i) Abandonment.
[1] A wind energy system that is out of service for a
continuous twelve-month period will be deemed to have
been abandoned.
[2] If the wind energy system is determined to be abandoned,
the owner shall remove the wind generator and tower at
the owner's sole expense within three months of receipt of
a notice of abandonment.
(j) Code compliance. Wind energy systems, including towers,
shall comply with all of the applicable building codes.
(k) Permit requirements and procedures.
[1] A building permit shall be required.
[2] An owner shall submit an application to the Building
Official for a building permit for a wind energy system.
[3] The Building Official shall issue a permit or deny the
application within 30 days of submittal of the application.
(l) Inspection. Large and medium wind energy systems shall have
a biannual inspection of structural stability, at the cost of the
owner/operator of the facility, with a report filed with the City
Clerk.
§ 370-112 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-112
336:1089
§ 370-113. Gratiot Avenue Corridor Overlay Zone. [Added
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 1230]
(m) Penalties.
[1] Any wind generation facility, turbine, or appurtenant
facility hereinafter significantly erected, moved or
structurally altered in violation of the provisions of this
chapter by any person, firm, association, corporation or
their agent shall be deemed an unlawful structure or
device.
[2] Any wind generation facility that does not meet the
requirements of this chapter shall provide ground for
revocation of the special use permit, thereby deeming the
facility an unlawful structure or device.
[3] This section does not preclude the City of Roseville from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a
violation of this section.
[4] Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable by jail for a period not to exceed
93 days and/or a fine of $500.
WIND TURBINE COMPONENTS
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of the Gratiot Avenue Corridor Overlay Zone is to
improve traffic operations; reduce potential for crashes; improve
pedestrian and transit environments; and preserve the vehicular
carrying capacity of Gratiot Avenue through regulations on the
number, spacing, placement and design of access points. Published
reports and recommendations by the Michigan Department of
Transportation (MDOT) show a relationship between the number of
access points and the number of crashes.
(2) Recognizing the existing built character and downtown land use
characteristics in the City of Roseville, this chapter intends to apply
the MDOT access management standards where practical, but to
allow flexibility in their application, given the unique needs of this
more urbanized area. Development along Gratiot Avenue contains
an interconnected grid street pattern and urban building form that
§ 370-112 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-113
336:1090
is highly conducive to downtown activity. This section intends to
complement efforts to make Gratiot Avenue through Roseville more
walkable by improving the transit and nonmotorized environments
by limiting the amount of direct access to Gratiot Avenue and
thus the number of potential vehicle-to-pedestrian crashes. The
segment of Gratiot Avenue within Roseville is characterized by a
median road design that naturally restricts turning movements to a
single direction, which present unique traffic operations; therefore,
this section places more emphasis on the design and spacing of
driveways from signalized intersections and median crossovers.
B. Applicability. This overlay zone shall apply to all land with frontage
along Gratiot Avenue. The following applications must also comply with
the standards in this section.
(1) New or enlarged building or structure: any new principal building
or structure, or the enlargement of any principal building or
structure by more than 25%.
(2) Land division, subdivision or site condominium: any land division or
subdivision or site condominium development, including
residential developments.
(3) Change in use or intensity of use: any intensity of use or any
increase in vehicle trips generated.
C. Access management standards. The following regulations of this
section shall be considered by the Planning Commission:
(1) Compliance with corridor plan. Access shall generally be provided
as shown in the Gratiot Avenue Corridor Improvement Plan.
(2) Number of access points. The number of resulting access points
shall be the fewest necessary to provide reasonable access to the
site. Each lot shall be permitted one access point, which may
consist of an individual driveway, a shared access with an adjacent
use, or access via a service drive.
(3) Additional access points. Additional access points may be
permitted by the Planning Commission upon finding that all other
standards are met, and/or if a traffic impact study is submitted that
justifies a need for additional access due to safety reasons or where
a poor level of service will result from fewer access points.
(4) Spacing and offset from intersections. Access points shall be either
directly aligned or spaced/offset as far from intersections as
practical, especially signalized intersections. A minimum spacing
or offset of 150 feet is preferred.
(5) Consideration of median crossovers. Access points along median
sections of Gratiot Avenue shall be located in consideration of
median crossovers. The City supports MDOT policies to limit the
§ 370-113 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-113
336:1091
number of median crossovers to maintain traffic flow and reduce
the potential for accidents. Access points shall directly align with
or be offset a sufficient distance from median crossovers to allow
for weaving across travel lanes and storage within the median. A
minimum offset of 250 feet is preferred.
(6) Spacing of access points on same side of road. Access points shall
provide the following spacing from other access points along the
same side of the public street (measured from center line to center
line as shown on the figure), based on the posted speed limit along
the abutting road segment according to the following table, or
where full compliance cannot be achieved, access shall be spaced
as far apart as practical.
Posted Speed limit
(mph)
Along Gratiot
Avenue*
(feet)
Along Other Roads
(feet)
35 or less* 245 150
40 300 185
45 350 230
NOTES:
* Unless greater spacing is required by MDOT or required to
meet other standards herein.
(7) Consideration of adjacent sites. Where the subject site adjoins land
that may be developed or redeveloped in the future, the access
shall be located to ensure the adjacent site(s) can also meet the
access location standards in the future.
§ 370-113 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-113
336:1092
(8) Shared driveways. Where direct access consistent with the above
regulations cannot be achieved, access should be provided via a
shared driveway or service drive. Where implemented, shared
access or service driveways should be accompanied by an executed
access agreement signed by all affected property owners.
(9) Access design. Where practical, given right-of-way constraints,
access points shall be designed with radii, tapers and other
geometrics as determined by MDOT that are required to minimize
the impacts of inbound right turns on traffic flow.
D. Review procedure. Applications shall be processed according to Article
XXI, Site Plan Review, and § 370-139, Certificates of occupancy, as
appropriate. The Building Official may require Planning Commission
review as part of any zoning compliance certificate requests if it is
determined that such request does not adhere to the standards of this
section.
(1) Submittal information. Along with any other required information,
developments subject to review shall submit:
(a) Detailed information showing existing access points on
adjacent sites; proposed access points; changes to existing
access; and any information requested by the City that is
needed to review site access.
(b) The Planning Commission may require submittal of a traffic
impact report, prepared by a qualified traffic engineer, to verify
the need for additional access points or to justify a
modification.
(c) Where it is determined that certain site plan submittal
requirements are not necessary to the review and
understanding of the site, the Planning Commission may waive
the site plan requirements and allow submittal of a scaled
drawing that provides sufficient detail to review site access.
(2) Modification of plan standards. The Planning Commission may
waive certain requirements of this section upon consideration of
the following:
(a) The proposed modification is consistent with the general intent
of the standards of this overlay zone and the recommendations
of the Gratiot Avenue Corridor Improvement Plan and
published MDOT guidelines.
(b) MDOT staff endorse the proposed access design.
(c) Driveway geometrics have been improved to the extent
practical to reduce impacts on through traffic flow.
(d) The modification is for an access point that has, or is expected
to have, very low traffic volumes (less than 50 inbound and
§ 370-113 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-113
336:1093
§ 370-114. Conditional rezoning. [Added 4-12-2011 by Ord. No.
1242]
It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the
best interests of the City, as well as advantageous to property owners
seeking a change in zoning boundaries, if certain conditions could be
proposed by property owners as part of a request for rezoning. It is the
intent of this section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of
Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006 (MCLA
§ 125.3405), by which an owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose
conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the
rezoning request.
outbound trips per day) and is not expected to significantly
impact safe traffic operations.
(e) Shared access has been provided or the applicant has
demonstrated it is not reasonable.
(f) Such modification is the minimum necessary to provide
reasonable access, will not impair public safety or prevent the
logical development or redevelopment of adjacent sites and is
not simply for convenience of the development.
A. Application and offer of conditions.
(1) An owner of land may voluntarily offer, in writing, conditions
relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning
is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the
application for rezoning is filed, or may be made at a later time
during the rezoning process.
(2) The required application and process for considering a rezoning
request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering
rezoning requests made without any offer of conditions, except as
modified by the requirements of this section.
(3) The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational
relationship to the property for which rezoning is requested.
(4) Any use of development proposed as part of an offer of conditions
that would require a special land use permit under the terms of the
ordinance may only be commenced if a special land use permit for
such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions
that require variance under the terms of this chapter may only be
commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any use or development proposed as part
of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under
§ 370-113 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114
336:1094
the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if site plan
approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(6) The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of
rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or additional
conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner. An owner may
withdraw all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final
rezoning action, provided that if such withdrawal occurs
subsequent to the Planning Commission's public hearing on the
original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be
referred to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing with
appropriate notice, new recommendation, and fees.
B. Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission, after public
hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning, may recommend
approval, approval with recommended changes or denial of the
rezoning; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the
offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the
owner.
C. City Council review. After receipt of the Planning Commission's
recommendations, the City Council shall deliberate upon the requested
rezoning and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request.
The deliberations shall include, but not be limited to, a consideration of
the factors for rezoning of this chapter. Should the City Council
consider amendments to the proposed conditional rezoning advisable
and if such a contemplated amendments to the offer of conditions are
acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner, then the City Council
shall, in accordance with Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling
Act (MCLA § 125.3405), refer such amendments to the Planning
Commission for a report thereon within a time specified by the City
Council and proceed thereafter in accordance with said statute to deny
or approve the conditional rezoning with or without amendments.
D. Approval.
(1) If the City Council finds the rezoning request and offer of
conditions acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated
into a formal written statement of conditions acceptable to the
owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this section. The
statement of conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or
otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by the
City Council to accomplish the requested zoning.
(2) The statement of conditions shall:
(a) Be in a form recordable with the Register of Deeds of the
county or, in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable
affidavit or memorandum prepared and signed by the owner
giving notice of the statement of conditions in a manner
acceptable to the City Council.
§ 370-114 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114
336:1095
(b) Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains.
(c) Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of
conditions runs with the land and is binding upon successor
owners of the land.
(d) Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or
other documents submitted or approved by the petitioner that
are necessary to illustrate the implementation of the statement
of conditions. If any such documents are incorporated by
reference, the reference shall specify where the document may
be examined.
(e) Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of
conditions or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof
may be recorded by the City with the Register of Deeds of the
county.
(f) Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the
subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that
they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained
within the statement of conditions.
(3) Upon rezoning taking effect, the Zoning Map shall be amended to
reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that
the land was rezoned with a statement of conditions. The City Clerk
shall maintain a listing of all lands rezoned with a statement of
conditions.
(4) The approved statement of conditions or an affidavit or
memorandum giving notice thereof shall be filed by the City with
the Register of Deeds of the county. The City Council shall have
authority to waive this requirement if it determines that, given the
nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within which the
conditions are to be satisfied, the recording of such a document
would be of no material benefit to the City or to any subsequent
owner of the land.
(5) Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned
shall conform thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use
and development within the new zoning district as modified by any
more restrictive provisions contained in the statement of
conditions.
E. Compliance with conditions.
(1) Any person who establishes a development or commences a use
upon land that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously
operate and maintain the development or use in compliance with
all of the conditions set forth in the statement of conditions. Any
failure to comply with a condition contained within the statement of
conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be
§ 370-114 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114
336:1096
punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be
deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as
provided by law.
(2) No permit or approval shall be granted under this chapter for any
use or development that is contrary to an applicable statement of
conditions.
F. Time period for establishing development or use. Unless another time
period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the subject land, the
approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and
other required permits must be commenced upon the land within 18
months after the rezoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently
to completion. This time limitation may, upon written request, be
extended by the City Council if:
(1) It is demonstrated to the City Council's reasonable satisfaction that
there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will
commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently
thereafter to completion; and
(2) The City Council finds that there has not been a change in
circumstances that would render the current zoning with
statement of conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in
the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning
policy.
G. Reversion of zoning. If approved development and/or use of the rezoned
land do not occur within the time frame specified under Subsection F
above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as
set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCLA § 125.3405). The
reversion process shall be initiated by the City Council requesting that
the Planning Commission proceed with consideration of rezoning of the
land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering
and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same as
applies to all other rezoning requests.
H. Subsequent rezoning of land. When land that is rezoned with a
statement of conditions is thereafter rezoned to a different zoning
classification or to the same zoning classification but with a different or
no statement of conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning
pursuant to Subsection G above or otherwise, the statement of
conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to
be in effect. The City Clerk shall record with the Register of Deeds of
the county that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect.
I. Amendment of conditions. During the time period for commencement of
an approved development or use specified pursuant to Subsection F
above or during any extension thereof granted by the City Council, the
City shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement of
conditions.
§ 370-114 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114
336:1097
§ 370-114.1. Complete streets improvements. [Added 1-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 1265]
J. City's right to rezone. Nothing in the statement of conditions nor in the
provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the City from
rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a statement of
conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be
conducted in compliance with this chapter and the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act (MCLA § 125.3405).
K. Failure to offer conditions. The City shall not require an owner to offer
conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of
conditions shall not affect an owner's rights under this chapter.
A. The City of Roseville shall plan, design, construct, operate and maintain
street improvements to provide reasonable and appropriate
accommodation for all potential users of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with the City of Roseville Non-Motorized Transportation
Plan and as funding priorities permit. In furtherance of that policy:
(1) The City Planning Commission will draft a Non-Motorized
Transportation Plan: Complete Streets for Roseville. This
amendment to the City’s Master Plan will set forth long-range plans
for providing complete streets in the City.
(2) The Non-Motorized Transportation Plan shall be reviewed at least
every five years or at the same time as the Master Plan, whichever
is more frequent.
(3) The City will draft a Non-Motorized Transportation Improvements
Program (NMTIP), and after appropriate public review and
consideration, City Council will approve that program and update it
on an annual basis.
(4) The Non-Motorized Transportation Plan will include, at a minimum,
accommodations for accessibility, sidewalks, curb ramps and cuts,
trails and pathways, signage, bicycle routes, bike lanes, transit
facilities and shall incorporate principles of complete streets and
maximize walkable and bikeable streets within the City of
Roseville.
(5) Infrastructure improvements made under the NMTIP will be
designed, constructed, and operated in substantial conformance to
the latest guidelines promulgated by the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials, Institute of
Transportation Engineers, Michigan Department of
Transportation, Road Commission for Macomb County, and the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
(6) It will be the goal of the City to reasonably fund the implementation
of the Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, which shall include
§ 370-114 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.1
336:1098
§ 370-114.2. Town Center Overlay District. [Added 5-13-2014 by
Ord. No. 1266]
expending State Act 51 funds received by the City annually in
accordance with Public Act 135 of 2010, as amended.
B. Exceptions. Infrastructure improvements specifically intended for
pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders need not be planned nor made
where the City Administrator recommends and City Council approves
exceptions. Such exceptions should generally be considered where:
(1) Their establishment will be contrary to the public health and safety;
(2) The cost would result in an unacceptable diminishing of other City
services;
(3) Bicycles and/or pedestrians are prohibited by law;
(4) There is no identifiable long-term need;
(5) Transit operation is not present or likely to occur in the foreseeable
future;
(6) The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or
potential use;
(7) The project segment length would not result in a meaningful
addition to the nonmotorized network;
(8) There is no identified long-term need; and/or
(9) The public works project in question is due to an emergency that
requires near-term action.
A. Purpose.
(1) The Town Center Overlay District is intended to permit the
redevelopment of specifically defined sites within the area
historically identified as Utica Junction, which is generally bounded
by the commercial frontage on Utica Road from Gratiot Avenue on
the south to Birmingham Street to the north.
(2) This district is intended to allow for the development of a fully
integrated, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented town center area, as
designated on the Zoning Map and Master Plan. The intent of the
district is to minimize traffic congestion, infrastructure costs and
environmental degradation by promoting a compact, mixed-use,
pedestrian-friendly community following smart growth principles.
Provisions for the town center district support traditional
neighborhood design principles, which are historically based on
urban development from the early colonial times to the 1940s,
including, but not limited to:
§ 370-114.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1099
(a) Residential neighborhoods, which are interconnected to all
development by roadways and pedestrianways, with an
emphasis on making the entire area a more walkable
community.
(b) Housing types and uses that are mixed and developed in close
proximity to one another.
(c) Civic buildings and civic squares, which provide places of
assembly for social activities, in prominent locations that act as
landmarks, symbols and focal points for community identity.
(d) Recreation and open space, with neighborhood greens,
landscaped streets, woven into roadway and block patterns for
the purpose of providing adequate space for social activity,
parks and visual enjoyment.
(e) The location of dwellings, shops and workplaces in close
proximity to each other, the scale of which accommodates and
promotes pedestrian travel within the community.
B. Schedule of uses. Use and development of land and buildings shall only
be for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this
section. Land and/or buildings in the district indicated at the top of
Table 1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
P: Permitted Use: Land and buildings in this district may be used for
the purposes listed by right.
SLU: Special Land Use: Land and/or buildings in this district may be
used for this purpose by obtaining special land use approval when
all applicable standards cited in Article XXIII, special land use review
requirements and procedures and specific standards are met.
Table 1
Schedule of Uses
Use Utica TCD
Residential
Townhouses P
Multiple-family dwellings P
Senior apartments and senior
independent living P
Live-work units P
Dwellings within mixed-use
buildings P
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1100
Table 1
Schedule of Uses
Use Utica TCD
Dwellings and workshop space
above garages, provided use of
workshop is limited to hobby or
permitted home occupation
P
Home occupations P
Retail businesses
Retail businesses which supply
commodities on the premises,
such as but not limited to
groceries, meats, dairy products,
baked goods or other foods,
drugs, dry goods, clothing and
notions or hardware. (Uses up to
25,000 square feet net floor area.)
P
Retail businesses which supply
commodities on the premises,
such as but not limited to
groceries, meats, dairy products,
baked goods or other foods,
drugs, dry goods, clothing and
notions or hardware. (Uses 25,000
square feet of net floor area or
more.)
SLU
Open-air business, outdoor display
and sales accessory to a permitted
retail business, such as nurseries
and home improvement items
SLU
Restaurants and bars
Standard sit-down restaurants and
taverns without drive-through
service
SLU
Restaurants and taverns with
outdoor seating SLU
Restaurants with open front
windows SLU
Carry-out restaurants SLU
Cocktail lounge/night club (not
including adult regulated) SLU
Banquet halls SLU
Service uses
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1101
Table 1
Schedule of Uses
Use Utica TCD
Service establishment of an office,
showroom or workshop nature of
an electrician, decorator,
dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter,
upholsterer or an establishment
doing home appliance/electronic
repair, photographic reproduction,
and similar service establishments
that require a retail adjunct
P
Dry cleaning establishments or
pick-up stations dealing directly
with the consumer. Central dry
cleaning plants serving more than
one retail outlet shall be
prohibited.
P
Hotels P
Bed-and-breakfast inns P
Personal service establishment,
including barber shops, beauty
shops and health salons
P
Pet grooming and training with no
boarding of animals SLU
Office, financial, medical and human care uses
Offices for executive,
administrative, professional,
accounting, brokerage, insurance,
writing, clerical, drafting and
sales uses
P
Banks, credit unions, savings and
loan associations without drivethrough
facilities
P
Business services such as mailing,
copying, data processing and
retail office supplies
P
Day-care centers for children SLU
Adult day-care homes SLU
Veterinary clinics, not including
animal boarding SLU
Institutional, governmental and quasi-public
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1102
Table 1
Schedule of Uses
Use Utica TCD
Civic buildings, libraries, parks
and civic squares, which provide
places of assembly for social
activities, in prominent locations
that act as landmarks, symbols
and focal points for community
identity
P
Governmental offices or other
governmental uses, post offices,
public utility offices, exchanges
and transformer stations
P
Recreational uses
Amusement arcades which
provide space for patrons to
engage in playing of mechanical
amusement devices or similar
activities
SLU
Bowling alleys, billiard halls,
indoor archery ranges, indoor
tennis courts, indoor soccer
facilities, indoor skating rinks or
similar forms of indoor
commercial recreation up to
30,000 square feet gross floor
area
P
Health clubs and related uses,
including gyms, martial arts
instruction, gymnasiums up to
30,000 square feet gross floor
area
SLU
Public or private noncommercial
recreational areas, institutional or
community recreation centers and
swimming pool clubs
P
Theaters, assembly halls, concert
halls or similar places of assembly
with seating capacity up to 750
people or parking for not more
than 200 vehicles
P
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1103
C. Requirements applicable to all uses. All uses permitted by right or by
special land use approval shall be required to meet the following
requirements:
(1) Dealing directly with consumers. All permitted retail or service
establishments shall deal directly with consumers. All goods
produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises
where produced.
(2) Conducted within enclosed buildings. All business, servicing or
processing, except for off-street parking, loading and approved
open air uses, shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings.
D. Standards applicable to specific uses. Uses allowed in the Town Center
Overly District shall be subject to meeting the following specific
requirements applicable to that use:
(1) Dwellings within mixed-use buildings. Dwellings within mixed-use
buildings that also contain space for commercial or office shall be
subject to the following conditions:
(a) No dwelling units shall occupy any portion of a commercial or
office building at ground level or below ground level. A
commercial or office business may occupy any number of the
total floors.
(b) In those instances where a residential use is proposed to
occupy the same floor as an office or commercial business, the
Planning Commission shall review and approve the mixed-use
floor based on findings related to the compatibility of the
residential use and the office or commercial business. These
findings may include, but are not limited to:
[1] Compatible hours of operation;
[2] Noise or odors of the operation or occupancy that would
be detrimental to the office or commercial business
operation, or vice versa;
[3] Excessive foot traffic.
(c) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of not less
than 600 square feet.
(d) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
XX and shall be located in areas within 1,000 feet of the
dwelling unit for which parking is provided.
(2) Open-air business. Open-air business uses shall be subject to the
following:
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1104
(a) The outdoor display and sales shall be accessory to a principal
permitted retail use with a building on the site.
(b) All outdoor display and sales areas shall be paved with a
permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded
and drained to dispose of stormwater without negatively
impacting adjacent property.
(c) Any approved outdoor sales or display within a parking lot
shall meet the required parking lot setback; provided the
Planning Commission may require additional landscaping,
screening or ornamental fencing.
(d) Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged
materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent
dust or blowing of materials.
(3) Restaurants. Restaurants shall be designed to minimize any impact
from noise and odors on nearby residential uses. This may include
limiting hours of operation, noise insulation, enclosed storage of
waste receptacles and ventilation filters. Outdoor restaurants and
cafes shall also be subject to the requirements of Subsection D(4)
of this section.
(4) Outdoor restaurants and cafes. Outdoor restaurants and cafes shall
be subject to the following requirements, in addition to Subsection
D(3) of this section:
(a) An outdoor restaurant or cafe may be set up and used during
the months of April through October.
(b) A site drawing showing a detailed plan of the outdoor
restaurant or cafe shall be administratively approved by the
City. The City will review the site plan in order to ensure the
following traffic and pedestrian safety measures:
[1] Any sidewalk or open space used for the outdoor
restaurant or cafe is immediately adjacent to the applicant
restaurant, provided that the cafe may be separated from
the restaurant by the main pedestrian walkway along the
public sidewalk.
[2] The use of a sidewalk or open space for the outdoor
restaurant or cafe allows a minimum pedestrian walkway
of five feet.
[3] Any tables, chairs, umbrellas or other equipment shall not
extend into or over the five-foot-wide pedestrian walkway,
and there shall be no barriers to pedestrian visibility. The
number, size and location of tables, chairs and equipment
shall be administratively approved by the City.
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1105
[4] If alcohol is to be served in conjunction with the proposed
outdoor restaurant or cafe, barriers designating the
service area, as required by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission, will be utilized. If no alcohol is to be served, a
barrier approved by the City will be utilized between the
service area and the pedestrian right-of-way.
(c) The outdoor restaurant or cafe must be part of a licensed fullservice
restaurant and it must meet all of the requirements of,
and secure all of the necessary permits from, the Macomb
County Health Department and the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission.
(d) Liability insurance and property damage coverage, naming the
City of Roseville as an insured party, in an amount approved by
the city, must be provided before an outdoor restaurant or cafe
may be set up.
(e) Final approval by the appropriate City department is required
for any seating placed within the public right-of-way.
(5) Day-care centers. In addition to the requirements noted in Article
XI, § 370-22(C)(1), day-care centers for children shall be subject to
the following:
(a) The facility shall have received a state license to operate prior
to seeking a special use permit under this title. A copy of the
license must be filed with the Building Department as a
condition of special land use approval.
(b) Not less than 400 square feet of outdoor play area per child (as
authorized by the license issued to the applicant by the
Department of Human Services), shall be provided on the site.
(c) The outdoor play area shall not be located in the front yard.
(d) Screening and fencing of the outdoor play area shall be
provided as required by the Planning Commission.
(e) Parking shall be provided to allow for direct dropoff and pickup
of children without requiring children to cross streets.
(6) Adult foster care family homes. Day-care homes for elderly adults
shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) No more than six persons, other than full-time occupants of the
dwelling, may be cared for in any one dwelling.
(b) Certification shall be provided from the Michigan Association
of Day-Care Providers to ensure safety and quality of care.
(c) Day-care facilities shall not provide nursing or medical care.
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1106
(7) Amusement arcades. Amusement arcades which provide space for
patrons to engage in playing of electronic and mechanical
amusement devices or similar activities shall be subject to the
following:
(a) Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to
county primary streets and shall have the entrance to both the
business and parking area for such establishment on the
county primary street. Access from a side or residential street
shall be prohibited.
(8) Table 2 delineates the height, bulk, and setback requirements
pertaining to the type of building. Notes to the schedule of
regulations follow.
Table 2
Schedule of Town Center Overlay District Regulations
Mixed-Use, Apartment and
Nonresidential Buildings
Lot area There is no required minimum
lot area.
Lot width There is no required minimum
lot width.
Residential density
Apartment (residential only) 25
units per acre maximum.
Dwellings above the first floor in
commercial/mixed-use
buildings: 30 units per acre
maximum.
Front yard and building
frontage requirements
Zero front yard setback; fivefoot
maximum front yard. The
building facade shall be built to
within 10 feet of the front lot
line for a minimum of 60% of
the street frontage length. (a, b,
c)
Side yard
A zero side setback may be
permitted where a fire wall is
provided along the side lot line.
Where a fire wall is not
provided, buildings shall be
spaced a minimum of 10 feet.
Rear yard 20-foot minimum rear yard
setback
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1107
Table 2
Schedule of Town Center Overlay District Regulations
Mixed-Use, Apartment and
Nonresidential Buildings
Building height
20-foot minimum building
height; 40-foot/4 stories
maximum building height The
first story shall be a minimum of
14 feet in height.
Notes:
(a) Mixed-use, apartment and nonresidential buildings
front yard building setback exceptions. All mixed-use,
apartment and nonresidential buildings shall have 60%
of the length of the ground level street-facing building
facade built within five feet of the front lot line.
Exceptions are permitted to allow a greater amount of
the building to be set back when the front yard area,
or forecourt, is used for one or more purposes listed
below:
[1] Widening the sidewalk along the frontage of the
building;
[2] Providing a public gathering area or plaza that
offers seating, landscape enhancements, public
information and displays, fountains, or other
pedestrian amenities;
[3] Accommodating an inset entranceway to the
building;
[4] Providing outdoor seating for the proposed use;
[5] The building is used for public or quasi-public/
institutional purposes with a plaza or open space
area provided in the front yard;
[6] Driveway or pedestrian access to parking at the
rear of the building;
[7] Side yard parking along no more than 40% of the
frontage subject to the requirements of Subsection
B of this section;
[8] Where older residential structures have been
converted to a nonresidential or mixed use and are
to be retained.
(b) Parking. Parking lots shall meet the following
requirements:
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1108
[1] Parking is permitted only in side and rear yards.
When parking is located in a side yard (behind the
front building line) and has frontage on a public
right-of-way, no more than 40% of the total site's
frontage shall be occupied by parking. Parking in
the side yard shall be screened by a three-foot-tall
brick screen wall between the sidewalk and the
parking lot. The planning commission may permit
a hedge row or ornamental wrought iron fence
instead of a brick wall.
[2] Where a parking deck is provided or parking is
located on the ground level below a building, at
least 60% of the site's frontage shall be occupied
by usable building space to a depth of at least 20
feet.
[3] Parking lot design shall conform to the
requirements of § 370-77, Off-street parking space
layout standards. Because the regulations of this
section are intended to encourage pedestriantransit-
friendly design and compact mixed-use
development that requires less reliance on
automobiles, the amount of parking required by
§ 370-76 may be reduced by 30%.
[4] Where parking is visible from a street, it shall
be screened by a three-foot-tall brick screen wall
located between the parking lot and the sidewalk.
The planning commission may permit a hedge row
or ornamental wrought iron or similar ornamental
fence instead of a brick wall. Where a parking lot
for a nonresidential use is adjacent to a residential
use, a six-foot-tall brick screen wall shall be
provided between the parking lot, including drives,
and the residential use instead of the greenbelt
required by Article XX. Where the commercial
parking lot is separated from the residential use
by an alley, then the screen wall may be reduced
to three feet in height; provided, however, the
planning commission may also require a six-foottall
brick wall on the residential side of the alley.
Parking lot landscaping shall be provided as
required by § 370-93, except the area of landscape
islands and number of parking lot trees may be
reduced to one-half the normal requirement for
parking that is located in the rear yard.
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1109
(c) Civic uses. Sites developed with civic uses such as
schools, churches, libraries, government offices and
parks require specific architectural treatment and
design that is unique from other uses. The planning
commission may permit modifications to the
dimensional and building height requirements as part
of the site plan review. In considering the modifications,
the planning commission shall determine that the
design of the building, location of the building and
parking, and the relationship of the site design to the
streetscape and adjacent buildings are in keeping with
the intended character of the Roseville Town Center
District.
E. Commercial architectural requirements. Nonresidential buildings and
mixed-use buildings (with residential in upper floors) shall meet the
following architectural design requirements:
(1) Building types permitted. Nonresidential and mixed-use buildings
shall be designed with traditional styles of architecture
characteristic of a Midwestern small town. Buildings shall front
onto the sidewalk with windows, doors, and architectural detailing
customary of traditional storefronts, and contain varying materials
and appearances.
(2) Front facade requirements. Walls that face a public street shall
include windows and architectural features customarily found on
the front of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge
detailing or decorative finish materials.
(a) Blank walls shall not face a public street;
(b) Entrances.
[1] All buildings shall have a main entrance that is located on
at least one street front.
[2] The entrance to the sidewalk shall be usable, and all retail
and service uses shall maintain a customer entrance to the
sidewalk.
[3] Entrances for upper story offices or residential units shall
be to the sidewalk.
[4] Main entrances shall have design details that enhance the
appearance and prominence of the entrance so that it is
recognizable from the street and parking areas.
[5] For buildings longer than 100 feet, there shall be a
minimum of one usable entrance every full 50 feet of
frontage along the front public sidewalk and shall provide
architectural variation to visually break the building up.
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1110
[6] For office service uses, the entrance must be on the first
floor of the building.
(3) Corner buildings. Buildings situated at a corner shall possess a
level of architectural design that incorporates accents and details
that accentuate its prominent location. This can be accomplished
through height projections incorporated into a design feature such
as additional height, a building peak, tower, or similar accent with
the highest point located at the intersecting corner. Alternatively, a
pedestrian plaza may be provided at the corner of the intersecting
streets. A main entrance must be on a street-facing wall and either
at the corner or within 25 feet of the corner.
(4) Building materials. The following exterior finish materials are
required on the front facade and any facade facing a street or
parking area. These requirements do not include areas devoted to
windows and doors.
(a) All walls exposed to public view from the street or parking area
shall be constructed of not less than sixty-percent brick or
stone. Panel brick and tilt-up brick textured paneling shall not
be permitted.
(b) The remaining facade may include wood or fiber cement
siding. Exterior finish insulation systems (EFIS) may be used
for architectural detailing above the first floor. Vinyl siding may
be used on walls above the height of eight feet.
(c) Buildings that have upper stories shall be designed to create a
distinct and separated ground floor area through the use of
accent such as a cornice, change in material or textures, or an
awning or canopy between the first and second stories.
(5) Windows and doors.
(a) Storefront/ground floor. Storefronts shall have windows,
doorways and signage which are integrally designed and
painted. No less than 70% of the storefront/ground floor facade
shall be clear glass panels and doorway. Glass areas on
storefronts shall be clear or lightly tinted. Mirrored glass is
prohibited. Required window areas shall be either windows
that allow views into retail space, working areas or lobbies,
pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall.
Windows shall not be blocked with opaque materials or the
back of shelving units or signs. The bottom of the window must
be no more than three feet above the adjacent exterior grade.
(b) Entranceway. The front entranceway shall be inset a minimum
of three feet but not less than six inches greater than the
entrance door swing from the front building wall.
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1111
(c) Upper story. Openings above the first story shall be a maximum
of 50% of the total facade area. Windows shall be vertical in
proportion.
(6) Roof design.
(a) Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission,
buildings should have a flat roof appearance from the street
with a decorative cornice that is designed proportionate to the
size of the building and length of the wall.
(b) The planning commission may permit a pitched roof.
(c) Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets.
(d) All rooftop-mounted equipment shall be screened from view on
all sides of the building.
(e) Parapets and other screening treatment shall use high-quality
building materials and shall blend with the design of the
building in terms of color, materials, scale and height.
(7) Awnings. Storefronts may be supplemented by awnings, which give
shade and shelter or add color and visual interest to the entry or
display window of the storefront, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(a) Awnings may project over the public sidewalk with a minimum
eight-foot clearance provided from the sidewalk, but must be a
minimum of five feet from the street curb.
(b) Awnings shall be positioned immediately above the ground
floor window area of the facade and have a straight shed that
projects from the building at a straight angle with open sides.
(c) Awnings shall be constructed of a durable material such as
canvas or other similar material approved by the Building
Official that will not fade or tear easily. Plasticized, vinyl, rigid,
cubed or curved awnings or mansard-style canopies are
prohibited.
(d) Awnings shall not be internally illuminated, and any signs may
only be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and
directed downward.
(e) Awnings must be installed in accordance with building code
requirements.
(8) Converted dwellings. Where buildings that were originally
constructed for one-family residential purposes have been
converted to nonresidential uses, the building design requirements
of this subsection may be modified by the City where consistent
with the historic character of the building. Such modifications may
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1112
include allowing the use of siding in lieu of masonry materials and
residential fenestration (windows) in lieu of the requirement for
storefront windows on the first floor. The building shall be brought
into compliance with the building code.
F. Residential architectural requirements. Townhouses shall meet the
following architectural design requirements:
(1) Building design. Residential buildings shall utilize high-quality
traditional architecture, such as but not limited to: Arts and Crafts,
Colonial, Gothic Revival, Italianate, Tudor, Victorian and other
traditional styles characteristic of the Midwestern United States.
(2) Building elevations. As part of a subdivision, condominium or
multiple-family site plan application, typical elevations shall be
approved by the planning commission as part of the development's
design guidelines or pattern book.
(3) Front facade. All residential units shall provide a pedestrian door
facing the front lot line.
(a) All dwellings shall include a front porch with steps. The porch
shall have a minimum depth of six feet and a minimum area of
72 square feet. A stoop or porch (plus steps) shall not extend
any nearer than three feet to the sidewalk in front of the lot.
(b) The first floor elevation shall be no less than 24 inches above
the exterior sidewalk elevation in front of the building. Ramps
for accessibility are permitted to encroach into the front yard
setback.
(c) The front facade of all residential units shall be at least fifteenpercent
windows or doors.
(4) Building material. All buildings shall utilize high-quality building
materials that are in keeping with traditional architectural styles.
Permitted wall materials include brick, stone, wood, and fiber
cement siding. Vinyl siding may be permitted only above the first
floor.
(5) Accessory buildings. Detached garages shall be located in the rear
yard and may be accessed by a rear alley or in one-family dwellings
by a driveway that runs from the front yard to the rear along the
side of the dwelling. Detached garages and other accessory
buildings located in the rear yard shall be set back a minimum of
three feet from the rear and side lot lines and 10 feet from the main
building. Accessory buildings and structures shall be subject to the
regulations of § 370-100; except accessory buildings may be up to
two stories and 20 feet in height. If an accessory apartment is
proposed within an accessory building, a permit shall be required
from the City for the installation of a bathroom or kitchen.
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1113
(6) Attached garages. Attached garages may only be permitted on the
rear side of the building where the garage is accessed from a rear
alley.
G. Modifications to architectural requirements. The planning commission
may approve deviations to the architectural requirements to allow for
creativity and flexibility in development and design. Each deviation
shall require a finding that the design standard sought to be deviated
from would, if no deviation was permitted, prohibit an enhancement
that would be in the public interest. A front elevation drawing of the
proposed building shall be provided superimposed on a color drawing
or photograph of the entire block and adjacent blocks in both directions
showing the relation of the proposed building design to other buildings
along the street, which shall be utilized to evaluate the proposed
building design based upon all of the following criteria:
(1) Innovations in architectural design may be permitted, provided the
building design shall be in keeping with the desired character of
the town center area, as articulated in the City of Roseville Master
Plan and the City of Roseville Utica Town Center design guidelines.
(2) The building shall be oriented towards the front sidewalk and
maintain or enhance the continuity of the pedestrian-oriented
environment. A modification shall not result in an increased
dominance of vehicular parking or garage doors along the front of
the building.
(3) The roof design shall not be out of character with other buildings
along the block and shall be within the minimum and maximum
height requirements of the district.
(4) The exterior finish materials shall be of equal or better quality and
durability as those permitted herein, with the intent to allow for
new technologies in building material while maintaining the
desired character of the town center area.
(5) Ground floor windows shall be provided along the front sidewalk to
maintain the pedestrian orientation of the streetscape, and upper
story windows shall not be incompatible with the rhythm and
proportions of windows on other buildings along the block.
H. Streetscape design requirements.
(1) Street design standards. All streets shall be constructed to meet
the requirements of the City of Roseville, including the City
engineering design standards and the Utica Town Central design
guidelines, except as provided for in this section.
(a) Streets shall meet City requirements for roadway width,
except bump-outs may be permitted at intersections,
crosswalks and at intermediate points along long blocks to
enhance pedestrian safety.
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1114
(2) Traffic calming. The use of traffic-calming devices such as raised
intersections, lateral shifts, and traffic circles are encouraged as
alternatives to conventional traffic control measures. Whenever a
conflict exists between design priority for pedestrian usage and
vehicular level of service, the conflict shall be resolved in favor of
the pedestrian; provided the design results in the safest possible
design for both vehicles and pedestrians.
(3) Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks along the frontage of nonresidential buildings shall
be a minimum of fourteen-foot-wide concrete or brick pavers
and provided consistently on both sides of the street. The
planning commission may allow the sidewalk width to be
reduced to not less than eight feet for frontages that will not be
occupied by uses having sidewalk cafes.
(b) Sidewalks along the frontage of residential buildings shall be a
minimum of five-foot-wide concrete and provided on both sides
of the street.
(c) Sidewalks shall be seven feet wide where abutting a parking
space or a road curb.
(4) Street trees. One canopy tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of
frontage, planted within planters, tree grates within the sidewalk,
or within a five-foot-wide green planting strip located between the
curb and sidewalk.
(5) Street lights. Pedestrian-level street lighting of a decorative nature
shall be installed along all sidewalks and parking areas and shall be
designed to promote the traditional neighborhood character of the
area.
(a) Light fixtures shall meet the specification in § 370-102 and in
this section. Whenever a conflict exists between § 370-102 and
370-114.2, the conflict shall be resolved in favor of
§ 370-114.2.
(b) Pedestrian-level lighting fixtures shall not exceed 16 feet in
height and shall be placed along the sidewalks and parking
areas in accordance with the City engineering standards.
Eighteen-foot-tall, double-arm light fixtures may be permitted
adjacent to intersections.
(c) Street lighting for vehicular traffic, in addition to, or in
combination with, pedestrian-level lighting may be required. In
the event that vehicular traffic street lighting is required, such
lighting shall be installed in accordance with the City
engineering standards.
§ 370-114.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-114.2
336:1115
(d) Building wall and freestanding exterior lighting shall be
directed downward in order to reduce the glare onto adjacent
properties and streets.
§ 370-114.2 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-114.2
336:1116
ARTICLE XXIV
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 370-115. Creation and membership.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) which shall
perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Article VI of Act
110, being the Uniform Zoning Act of 2006,258 and in such a way that
the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured,
and substantial justice done. The ZBA shall consist of the members of the
Roseville City Council. The City Council, sitting as the ZBA, shall annually
select its own chair, vice chair, and secretary.
§ 370-116. Meetings.
All meetings of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the chair and at such
times as the Board may determine. The business, which the Board may
perform, shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with
Act 110; public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall be
given in the manner required by said Act. The Board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records
of its hearings and other official action. Four members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. The ZBA shall have
the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer
oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other
evidence pertinent to the matters before it.
§ 370-117. Appeal.
An appeal may be taken to the ZBA by any person, firm or corporation, or
by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the
Building Department or the Planning Commission. A request to be heard
by the Board of Appeals shall be filed within 21 days from the date of the
event for which the appeal is being taken. The appeal shall be filed with
the Building Director and with the ZBA. A notice of appeal shall specify
the reason or grounds for the appeal. The Building Director shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies to the ZBA, after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not
be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted
by a court of record. The ZBA shall select a reasonable time and place for
the hearing of the appeal and shall give due notice thereof to the parties
and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any
258. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 370-115 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-117
336:1117
person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney.
§ 370-118. Fees.
The City Council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend, by
resolution, a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for
appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals. At the time the notice of appeal is
filed, said fee shall be paid to the secretary of the ZBA, which the secretary
shall forthwith pay over to the City Treasurer to the credit of the general
revenue fund of the City of Roseville.
§ 370-119. Jurisdiction.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or
change the zoning district classification of any property or to permit a
use not otherwise permitted in the district, nor to make any change in
the terms of this chapter, but does have power to act on those matters
where this chapter provides for an administrative review,
interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a
variance as defined in this section and laws of the State of Michigan.
Said power includes:
(1) Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order,
requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the Building
Director or any other administrative official in carrying out or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter.
(2) Variance. To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict
application of the provisions of this chapter where, by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific
piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter or by
reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict
application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship
upon, the owner of such property, provided such relief may be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this
chapter. In granting a variance, the ZBA may attach thereto such
conditions regarding the location, character and other features of
the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the
purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the Board shall
state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance.
(3) Exceptions and special approvals. To hear and decide, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for
exceptions, for interpretations of the Zoning Map, and for decisions
on special approval situations on which this chapter specifically
authorizes the Board to pass. Any exception or special approval
§ 370-117 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-119
336:1118
§ 370-120. Orders.
In exercising the above powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
shall be subject to such conditions as the Board may require to
preserve and promote the character of the zone district in question
and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter, including the
following:
(a) Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the
Zoning Map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made
part of this chapter, where street layout actually on the ground
varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid.
(b) Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for
public utility purposes, upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
(c) Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or
loading space requirements where, in the particular instance,
such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and
intent of such requirements.
(d) Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as
may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a
lot which is of such shape, or so located with relation to
surrounding development or physical characteristics, that it
cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without such
modification.
B. In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this
chapter, the Board shall, before making any variations from this chapter
in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not
impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or
unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the
danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish
or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in
any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or
welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Roseville. The concurring vote
of five members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirements, decision or determination of a Building Director, or to
decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized
by this chapter to render a decision. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to give or grant to the Board the power or authority to alter
or change this chapter or the Zoning Map, such power and authority
being reserved for the City Council of the City of Roseville in the
manner provided by law.
§ 370-119 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-120
336:1119
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have
all the powers of the Building Director from whom the-appeal is taken.
§ 370-121. Notice.
The ZBA shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after
a public hearing conducted by the Board. It shall, either by general rule or
in specific cases, determine the interested parties who, in the opinion of the
Board, may be affected by any matter brought before it, which, in all cases,
shall include those persons to whom any real property within 300 feet of the
premises in question shall be assessed, according to the latest assessment
roll of the City of Roseville, and to the occupants of all single- and twofamily
dwellings within 300 feet of said premises in question. Such notice
may be delivered either personally or by mail, addressed to said respective
owners as disclosed by the assessment roll and to the tenants at the address
given for the property in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is
not known, the term "occupant" may be used. The Board may require any
party applying to the Board for relief to give such notice to other interested
parties as the Board shall describe.
§ 370-122. Miscellaneous.
A. No order to the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting the erection of a
building shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months, unless a
building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such
period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
B. No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting a use of a building
or premises shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months unless
such use is established within such period; provided, however, that
where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration
of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building
permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and
such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in
accordance with the terms of such permit.
C. The reason(s) utilized as a basis for making any decision shall be stated
in the minutes of the ZBA. If a variance, which is granted, is not utilized
within 12 months of its granting, the variance shall be considered null
and void and an application must be filed again if it is desired at a future
date. A variance, which is legally utilized and maintained, shall run with
the property, and any subsequent owners may legally continue the
variance under its original or amended terms.
D. The ZBA may require such conditions and the posting of necessary
bonds or other financial guarantees acceptable to the City Council to
control compliance with specified conditions.
§ 370-120 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-122
336:1120
ARTICLE XXV
General Exceptions
§ 370-123. Applicability.
The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the following
interpretations and exceptions.
§ 370-124. Essential services.
Essential services serving the City of Roseville shall be permitted as
authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the municipality.
Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and towers to be
erected to service primarily those areas beyond the municipality shall
receive the review and recommendation of the Roseville Planning
Commission to the City Council, and the review and approval, after public
hearing, of the City Council. Such a review by the City Council shall
consider abutting property and uses as they relate to easements, rights-ofway,
overhead lines, poles and towers, and further shall consider injurious
effects on property abutting or adjacent thereto and on the orderly
appearance of the City.
§ 370-125. Voting place.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with
the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a
municipal or other public election.
§ 370-126. Height limit.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to farm buildings,
chimneys, church spires, flag poles, public monuments or commercial
wireless transmission towers; provided, however, that the Board of Appeals
may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure
requires authorization as a conditional use, and provided further the height
of any such structure shall not be greater than an equal horizontal distance
to any property line.
§ 370-127. Lot area.
Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of this chapter may
be used for any principal use permitted in the district in which such lot is
located, other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements
are specified in this chapter, whether or not such lot complies with the lot
area requirements, or requirements of this chapter. Such use may be made,
provided that all requirements other than lot area requirements prescribed
in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than one
dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit, and except as
provided for in Article XVIII, § 370-62, in this chapter.
§ 370-123 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-128
336:1121
§ 370-128. Lots adjoining alleys.
In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley or lane, for the purpose
of applying lot area requirements of this chapter, 1/2 the width of such alley
abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot.
§ 370-129. Yard regulations.
When yard requirements cannot reasonably be complied with, as in the
case of planned developments in the multiple-family district, or where their
application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or
due to architectural or site arrangements, such regulations may be modified
or determined by the Board of Appeals.
§ 370-130. Multiple dwelling side yard.
For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family, a row house, or a
multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
When more than one structure is involved on one zoning lot, the above
requirement shall not negate the formula contained in § 370-61, pertaining
to the distance spacing for multiple dwellings.
§ 370-131. Porches.
An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into
a required front yard for a distance not exceeding 10 feet, but this shall not
be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies, except that for purposes
of this chapter, fixed canopies shall not include canopies constructed of
canvas, plastic, fiberglass or similar material, together with the necessary
upright supports, which are clearly designed and intended as a covering to
permit use of such porch or terrace during the summer months.
§ 370-132. Projections into yards.
Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or
project into a required side yard not more than 18 inches and may extend
or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than six feet.
§ 370-133. Access through yards.
For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed in the required
front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards. These drives shall
not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further,
any walk, terrace or other pavement serving a like function, and not in
excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, not be considered to be a structure and shall be
permitted in a required yard.
§ 370-128 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-133
336:1122
ARTICLE XXVI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 370-134. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Department.
§ 370-135. Duties of Building Official.
§ 370-136. Plot plan.
A Building Official shall require that all applications for building permits
shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, including a plot plan, in
triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following:
A. A Building Official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and
occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It
shall be unlawful for a Building Official to approve any plans or issue
any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or
construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them
to conform to this chapter.
B. A Building Official shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the
effective date of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of § 370-99 in this chapter.
C. Under no circumstances is a Building Official permitted to make
changes to this chapter or to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying
out his duties as a Building Official.
D. A Building Official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions
imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant despite
violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements, which
may occur upon the granting of said permit.
A. The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot.
B. The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be
erected, altered, or moved and of any building or other structure
already on the lot.
C. The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon
it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the
building is intended to accommodate.
D. Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be
essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are
being observed.
§ 370-134 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-137
336:1123
§ 370-137. Permits.
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit:
§ 370-138. Temporary use permits.
A. Permits not to be issued: No building permit shall be issued for the
erection, alteration or use of any building or structure, or part thereof,
or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions
of this chapter.
B. Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter
be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a
different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained
for the new or different use.
C. Permits for new use of buildings: No building or structure, or part
thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or
type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or
different use.
D. Permits required: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless or until a building
permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered"
and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways,
type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or
ventilation, means of ingress and egress, or other changes affecting or
regulated by the City of Roseville Building Code, Housing Law, or this
chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the
aforesaid features.
A. For existing nonresidential uses licensed to do business in the City of
Roseville and for new uses that are not yet licensed, permits
authorizing temporary special events may be issued for:
(1) New uses, not yet licensed, which shall also be subject to Chapter
187.
(2) Tent sales, outdoor sales not otherwise regulated under City codes
or provided the following conditions are met.
B. Zoning districts where permitted. Temporary special land uses for tent
sales, outdoor sales shall be permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 or I-2
Districts.
C. Application fee; submission of plot plan:
(1) Every person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a temporary
special use permit as required by this chapter shall file a written
application with the Building Department on a form approved by
the Department, together with an application fee as is hereafter
provided by resolution of the Roseville City Council.
§ 370-137 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-138
336:1124
(2) The application for a temporary special land use permit shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications, including a plot plan, in
triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following:
(a) The shape, location and dimensions of the lot, including the
shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures
already on the lot, off-street parking layout, and the location of
any designated fire lanes.
(b) The materials to be utilized in and the shape, size and location
of all buildings and structures to be erected or moved onto the
lot, including all tents, tables, stands or display racks.
(c) The anticipated automobile traffic flow to and from the lot and
any adjacent thoroughfares, loss of off-street parking spaces, if
any, as well as the anticipated flow of pedestrian traffic upon
lot sidewalks.
D. Time limitations. A temporary special use permit for a tent or outdoor
sale shall by its terms be effective for no longer than five days. No more
than three temporary special use permits for tent sales or outdoor sales
shall be issued for a given location within a single calendar year.
Temporary special use permits for tent sales or outdoor sales shall not
be issued for any given location for consecutive time periods.
E. Regulations. A temporary special use permit shall only be granted if the
Building Department determines that the proposed use, including the
erection of any temporary building or structure, will comply with the
following:
(1) Provide adequate light and ventilation between buildings and
structures.
(2) Provide adequate automobile and pedestrian traffic flow.
(3) Provide adequate off-street parking.
(4) Provide adequate lot access for fire protection purposes.
(5) Not adversely affect the stability and integrity of the zoning plan
prescribed by this chapter or otherwise interfere with the
protection of public health, safety and general welfare.
(6) Not be incompatible with or otherwise adversely affect the physical
character of the community and, in particular, the surrounding area
within a distance of 500 feet.
(7) The temporary special use shall comply with all applicable zoning
regulations for the district in which the temporary special use is to
be located, including all requirements pertaining to lot size, height
setback, open space ratio, maximum percentage of covered lot
area, and off-street parking capacity.
§ 370-138 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-138
336:1125
(8) No temporary special use shall be permitted in an off-street parking
lot if it reduces the parking by greater than 15%.
(9) All temporary buildings and structures shall be constructed, used,
occupied and maintained so as to be in compliance with the
provisions of the building code and all other applicable ordinances
of the City of Roseville.
(10) Permit in any residential district the temporary location of a premanufactured
building in new subdivisions, irrespective of the
requirements of § 370-15A of this chapter for periods not to exceed
90 days, provided:
(a) The use shall be only for offices for the specific purpose of
selling lots or new homes to be erected in the subdivision.
(b) All applicable building height, bulk and area requirements of
the district are met.
(c) The structure shall be removed from the subdivision upon
completion of the first permanently built model home intended
for display, but in no case shall the pre-manufactured dwelling
remain beyond the time limitation specified above.
(11) Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two
years in undeveloped sections of the City, and for periods not to
exceed six months in developed sections, provided the conditions
set forth in § 370-138E in this article are met.
(12) Permit, upon proper application, the following character of
temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to
exceed 12 months with the granting of twelve-month extensions
being permissible: uses which do not require the erection of any
capital improvement of a structural nature, provided the conditions
set forth in § 370-138E in this article are met.
(13) A Building Official, in granting permits for the above temporary
uses, shall do so under the following conditions:
(a) The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a
change in the basic uses permitted, neither in the district nor
on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted.
(b) The granting of the temporary use shall be granted, in writing,
stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development
permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the
termination of said temporary permit.
(14) All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other
requirements of the district shall be met.
(15) In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvements, a
Building Official shall determine that they are either demountable
§ 370-138 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-138
336:1126
§ 370-139. Certificates of occupancy.
No land, building, or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use unless
and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The
following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate:
structures related to the permitted use of land; recreation
developments, such as, but not limited to golf driving ranges and
outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require
foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections.
(16) Permit a residence in a nonresidential structure, where not
otherwise permitted, providing the use is for the proprietor, a
watchman or other security purposes. A residence permitted under
this provision shall not be made available for general occupancy.
(17) Special temporary uses not meeting the above applicable
requirements may appeal to the Board of Appeals for relief from
the strict application of these standards.
A. Certificate not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued
for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land,
which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter.
B. Certificates required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which
is hereafter erected, or altered, shall be occupied or used, or the same
caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued for such building or structure.
C. Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as required by
the building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or
for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures,
shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this
chapter.
D. Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be
issued for existing buildings, structures, or uses thereof, or existing
uses of land, if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings,
structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
E. Record of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on
file in the office of the Building Department, and copies shall be
furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the property involved.
F. Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures
accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of
occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the
dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same
time as such dwellings.
§ 370-138 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-139
336:1127
G. Application for certificates.
(1) Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made, in writing,
to the Roseville Building Department on forms furnished by the
Department, and such certificates shall be issued within five
business days after receipt of such application if it is found that the
building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land, is in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall
be notified of such refusal and cause thereof within the aforesaid
five-business-day period.
H. Temporary certificates of occupancy. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued if the property owner is entitled to a
temporary certificate of occupancy under the Roseville Construction
Code, provided there is compliance with the additional requirements of
this subsection. Any temporary certificate of occupancy issued shall
specify a reasonable time for site improvements. Failure to comply with
the time limit set forth shall be considered a violation of the time limit
placed on the temporary certificate of occupancy for purposes of
enforcing this chapter and requiring completion of site improvements.
For purposes of this subsection, the term "City Engineer" shall include
any private engineering firm that the City of Roseville contracts with to
perform the described engineering functions.
I. Duration of temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate
of occupancy shall not be effective for more than six months.
Thereafter, occupancy may only be authorized under a final certificate
of occupancy.
J. Unfinished site improvements. All unfinished site improvements which
are included on an approved site plan, or which are otherwise required
by this chapter, shall be constructed, installed or placed on the
property, and be approved by the City Engineer by letter to the Building
Department within six months of obtaining a temporary certificate of
occupancy. Failure to finish and obtain approval of said improvements
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, giving rise to the penalties
provided for herein, and constitute a basis for relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
K. Cash, letters of credit and bonds.
(1) Whenever any applicant seeks occupancy of premises prior to the
completion of all construction of every nature in accordance with
an approved site plan and the requirements of the City's
ordinances, or when the applicant occupies the premises at the
time of application for a building permit and continued occupancy
is contemplated during the time of construction, the applicant shall
deposit cash, a certified check, an irrevocable bank letter of credit,
or a corporate surety bond forfeitable to the City of Roseville in an
amount equal to 150% of the estimated cost of the remaining
§ 370-139 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-139
336:1128
§ 370-140. Public hearing.
Whenever any section of this chapter refers to Article XXVI, § 370-140,
notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with the requirements
of Public Act 110 of 2006,259 and as outlined in Subsection A below:
improvements pursuant to such site plan and the requirements
of this chapter. The estimate of said cost shall be solely in the
discretion of the City Engineer. As used in this subsection,
"improvements" means those features and actions associated with
a project which are considered necessary by the body or official
granting zoning approval to protect natural resources, or the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City and future
users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area,
including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and
drainage.
(2) Such cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit
or bond shall run to the City and shall be forfeitable by its terms
and conditions, automatically, 15 days after notice to the applicant
that the requirements of the site plan or this chapter have not been
met according to the terms of the temporary certificate or a time
specified in the building permit. Such cash deposit, certified check,
irrevocable bank letter of credit, or bond shall be considered
posted with the condition that upon passage of said 15 days after
such notice, in writing, by first-class mail at the last known address
of the applicant, such amount shall automatically be transferred to
the City of Roseville, or otherwise enforceable by the City by any
means available. Thereafter, the City shall be authorized to go onto
the property and complete the construction in accordance with the
site plan requirements with the funds available. The City may
retain 20% of the cost of such completion as the City construction
administrative expense and refund any balance to the applicant. No
part of an irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond shall be
released until all of the work is complete. In the case of a deposit of
cash or a certified check, portions of said amount may be rebated
as work progresses, at reasonable intervals, provided that at all
times the amount on deposit shall equal the cost of the work to be
completed.
L. Final certificate of occupancy – minor exterior improvements not
completed. A final certificate of occupancy may be issued if the
property owner is entitled to a final certificate of occupancy under the
State Construction Code and a City of Roseville Building Official finds
that there are minor exterior site plan requirements that remain to be
finished, provided there is compliance with the additional requirements
of this section.
259. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 370-139 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-140
336:1129
§ 370-141. Commission established.
The Roseville Planning Commission, as established in Chapter 45 of the
Roseville Code of Ordinances, is hereby designated as the commission
specified in Article 1114 of Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended,
and shall perform the zoning duties of said commission as provided in the
statute in connection with any amendment of this chapter.
§ 370-142. Planning Commission approval.
A. Notice that a request for a use permitted subject to special conditions
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and
shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for
which approval is being considered, to all persons whose real property
is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question,
and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. The notice shall
be given not less than 15 days before the application will be considered;
if the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be
used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than
one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more
than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one occupant of
each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single
structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct
spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or
owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the
primary entrance to the structure. The notice shall:
(1) Describe the nature of the requested use permitted subject to
special conditions.
(2) Indicate the property that is the subject of the use request.
(3) State when and where the use request will be considered.
(4) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
(5) Indicate that a property owner may request a public hearing on the
use or the occupant of a structure located within 300 feet of the
boundary of the property being considered for a use permitted
subject to special conditions.
B. The Planning Commission may deny, approve, or approve with
conditions requests for special uses. The decision on such uses shall be
incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the use under
consideration. The decision shall specify the basis for the decision, and
any conditions imposed.
A. In cases where the Planning Commission is empowered to approve a
certain use of premises under the provisions of this chapter, the
§ 370-140 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-142
336:1130
§ 370-143. Changes and amendments.
The Roseville City Council may from time to time, on recommendation from
the Planning Commission or on petition, amend, supplement or change the
district boundaries or the regulations herein, or subsequently established
herein pursuant to the authority and procedure established in Act 110 of
the Public Acts of 2006,260 as amended.
§ 370-144. Repeal of prior ordinance.
The zoning ordinance adopted by the City of Roseville, known as Ordinance
No. 1009, and all amendments thereto, is hereby repealed. The repeal
of the above ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair
any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or acquired
or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time
enforced, prosecuted or inflicted.
§ 370-145. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair
or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the
above described zoning ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant
applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as
may be reasonably required by said Commission for the proper
consideration of the matter.
B. The Planning Commission shall investigate the circumstances of each
such case and shall notify such parties who may, in its opinion, be
affected thereby of the time and place of any hearing which may be held
relative thereto as required under its rules of procedure.
C. The Planning Commission may impose such conditions or limitations in
granting approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the
spirit and purpose of this chapter.
D. Except where otherwise set forth in this chapter, any approval given by
the Planning Commission, under which premises are not used or work
is not started within 12 consecutive months or when such use or work
has been abandoned for a period of 12 consecutive months, shall lapse
and cease to be in effect,
E. The Planning Commission shall not have the power to change the
zoning classification of any property, nor to grant exceptions or
variances from any terms or requirements of this chapter.
260. Editor's Note: See § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 370-142 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-145
336:1131
to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however,
that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by
existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
§ 370-146. Vested rights.
Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise
to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use,
district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein, and they
are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 370-147. Violations and penalties.
A. Violations.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of not more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution, or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days for each offense,
or both, as determined by the court.
(2) Violations of this chapter may also be enforced, enjoined or
prohibited through action filed in the Circuit Court of the County of
Macomb in law and in equity.
B. Public nuisances. Any building or structure that is erected, altered or
converted, or any use of premises of land that is begun or changed
subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any
of the provisions thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per
se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Fines, imprisonment. The owner of any building, structure or premises,
or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall
exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the
commission of such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment
herein provided.
D. Each day a separate offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or
continues.
E. Rights and remedies are cumulative. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 370-145 ROSEVILLE CODE § 370-147
336:1132
Appendix
Chapter A380
CABLE TELEVISION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Public utility franchises — See Ch. 14.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gas service franchise — See Ch. A376.
§ 370-147 CABLE TELEVISION § 370-147
A380:1133

ARTICLE I
Rate Regulation
[Adopted 2-22-1993 as Ord. No. 1047 (Ch. 95 of the 1984 Code)]
§ A380-1. Title.
This ordinance may be known and referred to as the "City of Roseville Cable
Television Rate Regulation Ordinance."
§ A380-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate rates of cable television,
basic service and associated equipment through the adoption of regulations
consistent with the provisions of the Federal Communications Act of 1934,
as amended, including the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, Public Law 102-385, and the Federal
Communications Commission's rules and/or regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto; and to provide procedures applicable to rate regulation
which offer a reasonable opportunity for comment by interested parties.
§ A380-3. Definitions.
A. The following words and terms used in this ordinance are defined as
follows:
ACT — The Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
specifically including the amendments contained in the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Public Law 102-385.
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — All equipment and services subject to
regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923. Said equipment and services
are those used by the subscriber to receive basic service cable
programming, regardless of whether such equipment and services are
also used to receive other tiers of regulated programming service
and/or unregulated tiers of programming service(s). "Associated
equipment" includes but is not limited to:
BASIC SERVICE — The level or tier of cable television programming
which includes, at a minimum, all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service
area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately
received by the cable system), a public, educational and/or
governmental programming required by the Franchising Authority to
(1) Converter boxes.
(2) Remote control units.
(3) Connections for additional television receivers.
(4) Other cable home wiring.
§ A380-1 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-3
A380:1135
§ A380-4. Adoption of FCC rules and/or regulations.
be carried as a basic service, and any additional video programming
signals added to the basic service by the regulated cable operator.
CHAPTER — This Cable Television Basic Service Regulations
Ordinance.
CITY — The City of Roseville, Macomb County, Michigan.
EXISTING RATES — The rates for basic service and associated
equipment charged by a regulated cable operator on the initial date of
regulation by the Franchising Authority.
FCC — The United States Federal Communications Commission.
FCC RULES AND/OR REGULATIONS — Any and all rules and/or
regulations which the FCC promulgates and/or adopts pursuant to the
Act.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The City of Roseville Council.
RATE INCREASE — An increase in rates for basic service and/or
associated equipment, including, among others, increases in rates that
are the result in reductions in programming provided under the basic
service.
REGULATED CABLE OPERATOR — Any operator of a cable television
system that is subject to regulation by a certified Franchising Authority.
B. Undefined words or terms. Any word or term which is not specifically
defined in Subsection A of this section shall be given its normal,
ordinary meaning, provided that any word or term which is used in this
ordinance and which is not specifically defined in Subsection A of this
ordinance but is defined in the FCC rules and/or regulations shall have
the meaning given to such word or term in the FCC rules and/or
regulations.
A. The city, by this reference, hereby adopts all rules and regulations
regarding basic service rates and associated equipment rates which the
FCC promulgates pursuant to the Act and makes said rules and
regulations part of this ordinance.
B. The city has submitted an application to the FCC for certification as a
Cable Franchising Authority pursuant to the Act. Upon certification as a
Cable Franchising Authority, the city shall regulate the basic service
rates and associated equipment rates in compliance with the Act, the
FCC rules and/or regulations and this ordinance.
C. Upon receiving its certification, the Franchising Authority shall send
written notice of its certification and notice that it has adopted the
required regulations, return receipt requested, to all regulated cable
operators within the city. The date upon which the Franchising
Authority gives this notice is the initial date of regulation.
§ A380-3 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-5
A380:1136
§ A380-5. Designation of Cable Franchising Authority.
Effective upon certification of the city as a Cable Franchising Authority, the
City Council is hereby designated as the Cable Franchising Authority for the
city and shall execute the powers, duties and responsibilities given to the
Cable Franchising Authority in this ordinance, the Act and the FCC rules
and/or regulations.
§ A380-6. Compliance by regulated cable operators.
§ A380-7. Submission of existing rate schedule.
§ A380-8. Review of existing rates by Franchising Authority; time
limit for approval.
A. A regulated cable operator shall comply with all duties and obligations
imposed upon the regulated cable operator by the Act, FCC rules and/or
regulations and this ordinance.
B. A regulated cable operator has the burden of proving that its submitted
existing rates or a proposed rate increase complies with the Act and
FCC rules and/or regulations, including, without limitation, 47 U.S.C.
§ 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923.
A. Within 30 days of receiving the notice identified in § A380-4C of this
ordinance, a regulated cable operator shall submit an original and 10
copies of a written schedule of the regulated cable operator's existing
rates to the Franchising Authority. Said schedules shall be addressed in
care of the City Clerk.
B. The schedule(s) identified in Subsection A of this section shall contain a
detailed statement explaining whether the regulated cable operator's
existing rates comply with existing FCC rules and/or regulations for
basic service rates and associated equipment rates.
C. Upon receipt of existing basic service rate and associated equipment
rate schedule(s), the City Clerk shall provide the schedule(s) to the
Franchising Authority within seven days.
A. Unless the time for conducting the public hearing and entering a
decision is extended by the issuance of a tolling order by the
Franchising Authority pursuant to § A380-11 of this ordinance, the
Franchising Authority shall hold a public hearing on the existing rate
schedule(s) which the regulated cable operator submitted to the
Franchising Authority and enter a decision on said submitted
schedule(s) within 30 days of the date the City Clerk received the
schedule(s). If the time for conducting the public hearing is extended
pursuant to § A380-13 of this ordinance, a public hearing should be held
and decision rendered before the extended time period expires.
B. The existing rates identified in the submitted schedule(s) of rates shall
go into effect 30 days from the date of the City Clerk's receipt of the
§ A380-5 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-8
A380:1137
§ A380-9. Regulation of rate increase.
§ A380-10. Review of proposed rate increase by Franchising
Authority; time limit for approval.
schedule(s) unless the Franchising Authority disapproves the rate or
extends the time period for conducting the review of existing rates
pursuant to § A380-11 of this ordinance.
C. If the Franchising Authority fails to act on the submitted existing rates
by the end of the respective tolling period then the rates will remain in
effect. If the Franchising Authority subsequently disapproves any
portion of said rates, refunds may not be ordered unless a brief written
order is issued by the Franchising Authority before the end of the
respective tolling period directing the regulated cable operator to keep
an accurate accounting of all its customers and the amounts paid by
each as a result of said rates.
A. The regulated cable operator cannot institute a rate increase charged
to its subscribers unless the regulated cable operator complies with the
Act, FCC rules and/or regulations and this ordinance.
B. A regulated cable operator which proposes a rate increase must submit
at least 10 copies of the proposed rate increases request to the
Franchising Authority in care of the City Clerk.
A. Unless the time for conducting the public hearing and entering a
decision is extended by the issuance of a tolling order by the
Franchising Authority pursuant to § A380-11 of this ordinance, the
Franchising Authority shall conduct a public hearing and render a
decision upon the regulated cable operator's proposed rate increase
request within 30 days of the City Clerk's receipt of a proposed rate
increase request. If the time for holding the public hearing is extended
pursuant to § A380-11 of this ordinance, the public hearing should be
held and decisions rendered before the extended time period expires.
B. A proposed rate increase requested by a regulated cable operator will
become effective after 30 days have elapsed from the date the City
Clerk received the proposed rate increase request unless the
Franchising Authority disapproves the proposed rate increase or
extends the time period for conducting the review of the proposed rate
increase pursuant to § A380-11 of this ordinance.
C. If the Franchising Authority allows rate increases to go into effect at the
end the respective tolling period through inaction and then
subsequently disapproves any portion of such rates, then refunds may
not be ordered unless a brief written order is issued by the Franchising
Authority before the end of the respective tolling period, directing the
regulated cable operator to keep an accurate accounting of all its
customers and the amounts paid by each as a result of said rates.
§ A380-8 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-11
A380:1138
§ A380-11. Tolling orders.
§ A380-12. Public hearings on rates.
§ A380-13. Public hearing notice.
A. If the Franchising Authority is unable to determine, based upon the
material submitted by the regulated cable operator, that the existing
rates or proposed rate increase(s) are reasonable or if the regulated
cable operator has submitted a cost of service showing, then the
Franchising Authority may toll the thirty-day deadline for an additional
90 days in cases not involving cost of service showings or for an
additional 150 days in cases involving cost of service showings.
B. In order for the Franchising Authority to toll the thirty-day period
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, the Franchising Authority
must issue an order explaining that additional time and/or information
is necessary in order for the Franchising Authority to act upon the
existing rates or the proposed rate increase. Said order must be in
writing, by resolution adopted within said thirty-day period.
C. The Franchising Authority shall send a copy of the tolling order to the
regulated cable operator by first-class mail within seven days after the
effective date of the decision.
A. During the public hearing on the review of a regulated cable operator's
existing rates or on review of a proposed rate increase, the Franchising
Authority shall provide the regulated cable operator and all other
interested persons with the opportunity to comment on the rates either
in person, in writing or by agent.
B. The Franchising Authority may conduct as many public hearings as
necessary to carry out the provisions of the Act, FCC rules and/or
regulations and this ordinance.
C. If the Franchising Authority deems it necessary, either prior to or
following a public hearing, the Franchising Authority may direct the
preparation of a written report for the Franchising Authority. This
report may contain a recommendation to the Franchising Authority for
its decision on the review of the existing rate schedule(s) or proposed
rate request submitted by a regulated cable operator; comments or
objections to the schedule or request which the Franchising Authority
received from the regulated cable operator; any additional information
received from the regulated cable operator; information which the
Franchising Authority received from a consultant, its staff or its
attorney; and other information which it deems appropriate.
D. The Franchising Authority shall send, by first-class mail, a copy of any
report to the regulated cable operator prior to the Franchising
Authority's consideration of the report at a public hearing.
§ A380-11 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-13
A380:1139
§ A380-14. Franchising Authority decisions on rates.
The Franchising Authority shall issue a written order supported by its
reasons, by resolution which:
§ A380-15. Refund hearing.
A. The Franchising Authority shall send a written notice of the date, time
and location of the public hearing to the regulated cable operator which
submitted the existing rates or proposed rate increase for review no
less than seven days before the date of the public hearing. Said notice is
to be sent to the regulated cable operator by first-class mail.
B. The Franchising Authority shall cause to be published, in a qualified
newspaper of general circulation within the city, a notice of the public
hearing on the existing rate schedule(s) or proposed rate increase
request no less than seven days before the public hearing. Said notice
shall:
(1) State that a regulated cable operator has submitted the existing
rate schedule(s) or proposed rate increase request to the
Franchising Authority for review pursuant to this ordinance.
(2) State the location and times at which the public may examine the
submitted schedule(s) of existing rates or proposed rate increase
request.
(3) State the date, time and location at which the Franchising
Authority will conduct the public hearing.
(4) State that all interested persons shall have an opportunity to
comment on the rates at the public hearing, and/or to submit
written comments on or before the date of the public hearing to the
Franchising Authority.
A. Approves the regulated cable operator's existing rate or proposed rate
increase; or
B. Disapproves the regulated cable operator's existing rate or proposed
rate increase; or
C. Approves, in part, and disapproves, in part, the regulated cable
operator's existing rate or proposed rate increase; and/or
D. Orders a rate reduction; and/or
E. Prescribes a reasonable rate; and/or
F. Determines that a refund hearing should be held pursuant to § A380-15
of this ordinance; and/or
G. Orders any further appropriate relief permitted by this ordinance, the
Act or the FCC rules and/or regulations.
§ A380-13 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-15
A380:1140
§ A380-16. Decisions on refund hearings.
§ A380-17. Notice of Franchising Authority decisions.
A. If the Franchising Authority determines that the subscribers to a
regulated cable operator may be entitled to a refund pursuant to FCC
rules and/or regulations (specifically 47 CFR 76.942), the Franchising
Authority shall include a notice in its decision, issued pursuant to
§ A380-14, that the Franchising Authority will hold a public hearing to
consider ordering the regulated cable operator to make a refund to
subscribers.
B. The Franchising Authority shall then conduct a public hearing to
determine whether to order a refund to subscribers and the amount of
the refund.
C. The Franchising Authority shall send, by first-class mail to the
regulated cable operator, written notice of the date, time and location of
the public hearing. Said notice must be sent no less than seven days
before the public hearing.
A. At any refund hearing, the regulated cable operator may appear in
person, by agent or in writing to comment upon whether the
Franchising Authority should order a refund.
B. Members of the public may also comment at the refund hearing in
person, by agent or in writing.
C. At the conclusion of the refund hearing, the Franchising Authority shall
issue a written order, by resolution:
(1) Denying a refund; or
(2) Ordering the regulated cable operator to implement a refund.
A. All decisions of the Franchising Authority issued pursuant to §§ A380-14
and/or A380-16 of this ordinance shall be:
(1) In writing, by resolution, supported by its reasons.
(2) Effective as of the date the Franchising Authority makes the
decision.
B. Notice of all decisions of the Franchising Authority issued pursuant to
§§ A380-14 and/or A380-16 of this ordinance shall be published in a
qualified newspaper of general circulation in the city no less than 15
days after the effective date of the decision. Said notice shall include:
(1) A summary of the Franchising Authority's written decision.
(2) A statement that copies of the Franchising Authority's decision are
available for public inspection.
§ A380-15 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-17
A380:1141
§ A380-18. Proprietary information.
(3) A statement as to the location at which, and times during which,
the public may inspect copies of the Franchising Authority's
decision.
C. The Franchising Authority shall send, by first-class mail, a copy of the
Franchising Authority's decision to the regulated cable operator not
more than seven days after the effective date of the Franchising
Authority's decision.
A. If this ordinance, or any rules or regulations adopted by the city
pursuant to this ordinance, requires the production of propriety
information, the regulated cable operator shall produce the
information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information
is submitted, a regulated cable operator may request that specific,
identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and
withheld from public disclosure.
(1) The request must state the reason why the information should be
treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons.
(2) The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines
that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is
consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5
U.S.C. § 552.
(3) The city shall place in a public file, for inspection, any decision that
results in information being withheld.
(4) If the regulated cable operator requests confidentiality and the
request is denied, the regulated cable operator may withdraw its
proposal when proposing a rate increase, in which case the
allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or the
regulated cable operator may seek review within five working days
of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information
will be stayed pending review.
B. Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as
proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations
favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited, for permitting
inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then
promptly notify the requesting entity and the regulated cable operator
that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It
may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the
regulated cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an
appeal in any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending
resolution of any appeal.
C. The procedure set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous
to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for
confidentiality, including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459.
§ A380-17 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-19
A380:1142
§ A380-19. Additional rules and regulations.
In addition to the rules promulgated pursuant to this ordinance, the city
may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic
cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the
conduct of the hearings), consistent with the Act and FCC rules and/or
regulations.
§ A380-20. Failure to give notice.
The failure of the City Clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports
as required by this ordinance shall not invalidate the decisions or
proceedings of the Franchising Authority.
§ A380-21. Additional hearings.
In addition to the requirements of this ordinance, the Franchising Authority
may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the
Franchising Authority, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe.
§ A380-22. Additional powers.
The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC rules,
the cable operator's franchise and all other applicable law. The powers
exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC rules and this ordinance shall be
in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take
any action not prohibited by the Act or the FCC rules to protect the public
interest in connection with the basic cable service rate regulation.
§ A380-23. Failure to comply; remedies.
The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against
the regulated cable operator for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC
rules and/or regulations, any orders or determinations of the Franchising
Authority pursuant to this ordinance, any requirements of this ordinance or
any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder.
§ A380-19 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-23
A380:1143

ARTICLE II
Granting of Franchise
[Adopted 4-17-1979 by Ord. No. 791 (Art. I of Ch. A380 of the 1984
Code); amended in its entirety 9-23-1997 by Ord. No. 1098]
§ A380-24. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Roseville, Michigan,
Cable Communications Regulatory Ordinance."
§ A380-25. Word usage and definitions.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, and words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY — The City of Roseville, Michigan.
COMPANY — Any grantee of rights under this regulatory ordinance.
COUNCIL — The City Council of Roseville, Michigan.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC — That federal
agency constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES — Revenues received by the
franchisee from subscribers for transmission of broadcast signals and
for programming on required access and origination channels in the
City of Roseville. This term shall further include forfeited deposits,
installation fees, service call fees, fees for the provision or rental of
converters, remote controls, additional outlets and other customer
premises equipment. This term does not include any sales, excise or
other taxes or copyright fees collected by franchisee on behalf of any
state, city or governmental unit and shall be net of bad debt, refunds to
subscribers, home shopping revenues and advertising revenues.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
SYSTEM — The lines, fixtures, equipment, attachments and all
appurtenances thereto which are used in the construction, operation
and maintenance of the community antenna television system herein
authorized.
WRITTEN PROPOSAL — The Continental Cablevision cable
communications proposal for Roseville, Michigan, dated March 1979,
consisting of approximately 48 pages of text, plus attached exhibits and
the proposal overview, Roseville, Michigan, consisting of four pages
of text, and any amendments, revisions or supplements thereto as
§ A380-24 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-25
A380:1145
§ A380-26. Granting of nonexclusive franchise.
This regulatory ordinance, which provides for the granting of the
nonexclusive right to construct, operate and maintain a cable television
system in the city, was passed and adopted by the city after a full, open
and public proceeding. Before any grant hereunder is made, public notice
shall be given, and all interested parties shall be given the opportunity
to comment upon the legal, character, financial, technical and other
qualifications of any proposed company. After receiving at said proceeding
all comments regarding the qualifications of the proposed company, the
city shall make findings concerning whether the company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications and
whether the company's construction arrangements are adequate and
feasible. Based thereon the city may grant to the company a nonexclusive
franchise, right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and
maintain in, upon, along, across, above and over and under the highways,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid out or
dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, in the city,
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
city of a cable television system for the purpose of distributing television
and radio signals and other electronic impulses in order to furnish television
and radio programs and various communications and other electronic
services to the public. The right so granted includes the right to use and
occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and public places and all manner of
easements for the purposes herein set forth.
§ A380-27. Termination; renewal.
The franchise granted to any company hereunder shall terminate after the
term negotiated with Council, which term may be up to 15 years from the
date of the grant, subject to renewal for periods of reasonable duration on
the same terms and conditions as contained herein or on such different
or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the
city and as are consistent with the rules and regulations of the FCC. The
company's application for franchise renewal shall be granted, provided that
the company shows that its cable television service during the preceding
franchise period has reflected a good faith effort to serve the needs and
interests of its service area, that the company had not demonstrated a
callous disregard of the law and all pertinent regulations and that the
company has substantially complied with all terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement with the city.
§ A380-28. Compliance with laws and regulations required.
The company shall, at all times during the life of this regulatory ordinance,
be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city and to such
approved and agreed upon between the city and Continental
Cablevision and/or its successor or successors.
§ A380-25 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-28
A380:1146
reasonable regulations as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance
provide. The construction, operation and maintenance of the system by the
company shall be in full compliance with such portions of the National
Building and Electrical Code and National Electrical Safety Code as may
be applicable and as the same may be amended and revised from time
to time and in full compliance with all other applicable rules, regulations
and ordinances now in effect or hereafter adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission, the city or any other agency of the State of
Michigan or of the United States which may hereafter acquire jurisdiction
of the operations of the company authorized herein; provided, however, that
such amendments by the city do not materially or adversely affect the rights
or privileges granted within the franchise agreement.
§ A380-29. Company to indemnify city; insurance policies to be
carried; application for permit.
The company shall indemnify the city for, and hold it harmless from, all
liability, damage, cost or expense arising from claims of injury to persons
or damage to property occasioned by reason of any conduct undertaken
pursuant to this ordinance, including libel and slander actions. The city shall
notify the company's representative within 15 days after the presentation of
any claim or demand to the city, either by suit or otherwise, made against
the city on account of any negligence or contract as aforesaid on the part of
the company. The company further agrees as follows:
A. The company shall carry worker's compensation insurance, with
statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of no less
than $100,000, which shall cover all operations to be performed by the
company as a result of this ordinance.
B. The company shall carry comprehensive general liability and
comprehensive automobile liability insurance with bodily injury limits
of not less than $1,000,000 per person and $1,000,000 per occurrence.
C. The company's worker's compensation comprehensive general liability
and comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be written by an
insurance company agreed upon by the city, which agreement shall not
be unreasonably withheld, and the company agrees to furnish the city
with certified copies of certificates of insurance of said policies, which
shall provide that insurance shall not be canceled unless 10 days' prior
written notice shall first be given to the city.
D. The company shall, within 30 days subsequent to the effective date of
any grant hereunder, post a performance bond with the city, written by
an approved corporation surety in the amount of $100,000 and in a
form satisfactory to the city, guaranteeing the company's continued
operation of the cable television system within the city, and the
company shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and
condition of the bond; provided, however, that if the company had
posted a bond pursuant to the requirements of the ordinance heretofore
granted and said bond is in effect when the term of this ordinance
§ A380-28 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-29
A380:1147
§ A380-30. Construction and maintenance of system.
begins and is in a form and amount satisfactory to the city, such
bond shall constitute full compliance with the requirements of this
subsection. All damages which may be directly occasioned by the
failure of the company to perform under this ordinance, up to the
principal amount of the bond, shall be recoverable from the principals
and sureties of said bond by the city. The bond required hereunder may
be reduced in face amount to $25,000 at such time as may be provided
in the company's franchise agreement.
E. If the company should commit a breach of this ordinance and not
remedy such breach within 60 days after having received written notice
from the city to do so, then the city, at its discretion, may declare a
portion of the bond equivalent to the amount of damages sustained by
the municipality which are directly attributable to such breach
forfeited, and the company shall thereupon be required to remedy the
breach with reasonable dispatch and, within 60 days of such forfeiture,
to replace the forfeited portion of the bond. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, nothing contained in this subsection shall serve to absolve
the company of any of its obligations under this ordinance or the rules
and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
F. The company shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and shall
keep the same in full force and effect at all times throughout the term of
this ordinance and during the removal of all poles, wires, cable,
underground conduits, manholes and other conductors, converters,
equipment and fixtures subsequent to the termination of this ordinance.
The bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or
otherwise allowed to expire prior to 30 days after written notice to that
effect is given to the Clerk or similar official of the city.
G. Resident company and agent. All insurance policies and bonds as are
required of the company in this regulatory ordinance shall be written by
a company or companies authorized and qualified to do business in the
State of Michigan. Certificates of all coverage required shall be
promptly filed by the company with the city.
H. Application for permit. Within 60 days after the effective date of any
grant hereunder, the company shall file with the Federal
Communications Commission such request, petition or other
application as is then proper to secure from said Federal
Communications Commission any and all necessary permits, licenses,
waiver or the like as may be necessary to be secured from said Federal
Communications Commission to fully comply with the terms of this
ordinance. The company shall thereafter diligently pursue such
application with the Federal Communications Commission and shall do
all reasonable things necessary and proper to secure any such permit,
license, waiver, approval or the like from it. The company shall keep the
city advised, from time to time, of the progress of such application.
§ A380-29 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-30
A380:1148
A. Upon the grant of this ordinance to construct and maintain a cable
television system in the city and in furtherance of the company's
execution of contracts with public utility companies or any other owner
or lessee of any poles located within or without the city to whatever
extent such contract or contracts shall be expedient and of advantage
to the company for use of poles and posts necessary for proper
installation of the system, the company shall obtain right-of-way
permits, from appropriate state, county and federal officials, necessary
to cross highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions to
supply main trunk lines from the company's receiving antennas, obtain
permission from the Federal Aviation Authority to erect and maintain
antennas suitable to the needs of the system and its subscribers and
obtain whatever other permits a city, county, state or federal agency
may require. The company shall construct its cable system using
material of good and durable quality, and all work involved in the
construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the cable system
shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner. Any
municipal property damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired or
replaced by the company and restored to serviceable condition.
B. The company's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be
located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall
endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or interfere with any
improvements the city may deem proper to make or unnecessarily
hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements
or public property.
C. In the event that the city shall annex further territory as authorized by
law, the company shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining
portions of the city so annexed within an acceptable time thereafter,
unless additional time is granted by the City Council upon request of
the company for good cause shown, subject to § A380-32 of this
ordinance.
D. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the company within the city shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys or other
public ways and places.
E. In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other
surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a
manner approved by the city and/or Macomb County, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley
disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced.
F. In the event that at any time during the period of this ordinance the city
and/or Macomb County shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade
of any street, alley or other public way, the company, upon reasonable
notice by the city and/or Macomb County, shall remove, relay and
relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other fixtures at its own expense.
§ A380-30 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-30
A380:1149
§ A380-31. Construction schedule.
The company shall make cable service available to all residents of the city,
subject to the line extension provisions of § A380-32A, within five months
after all necessary permits and notifications are received and all necessary
utility (telephone and power) pole rearrangements are completed, unless
otherwise agreed in the franchise agreement.
§ A380-32. Extension of service.
G. The company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture or water hydrant or
main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be
placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curbline, and
those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting
on said alley, and then in such manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on said streets, alleys and public ways.
H. The company shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the company shall have the authority to
require such payment in advance. The company shall be given not less
than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
I. The company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cables of the company, all trimming to be done under the
supervision and direction of the city and/or Macomb County and at the
expense of the company.
J. The company shall provide, upon request and without charge, one
service outlet to any municipal buildings owned and operated by the
city and to any public and parochial educational facilities. Additional
internal wiring and service outlets shall be borne by the institution at
cost of time and materials except as may be agreed upon in any
franchise agreement.
A. It shall be the obligation of the company to serve all residents of the
city. The company shall extend service to new subscribers at the normal
installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification
where there are an average of 70 homes per each linear mile of new
cable construction.
B. In the event that the requirements of Subsection A are not met,
extensions of service shall be required only on a basis which is
reasonable and compensatory.
§ A380-30 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-33
A380:1150
§ A380-33. Compliance with standards required.
All facilities and equipment of the company shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the
National Electrical Safety Code and such applicable ordinances and
regulations set forth by the city and/or any other local, state or federal
agencies.
§ A380-34. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the company to exercise its rights and
perform its obligations under this ordinance and to assure an uninterrupted
service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions
hereof or with federal and state laws.
§ A380-35. Renewal proceedings.
No renewal of this ordinance shall be effective except pursuant to a public
proceeding affording due process. The company shall be party to any such
proceedings and any other proceedings in which its rights, privileges or
interests would be affected and shall be fully entitled to such due process
rights as may be available under applicable laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations.
§ A380-36. Approval of transfer required.
The company shall not sell, assign or transfer its system to another, nor
transfer any rights under this ordinance to another, except to a wholly
owned subsidiary, without written approval by the city, provided that such
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the vendee, assignee or
lessee has filed with the appropriate official of the city an instrument duly
executed, reciting the fact of such sale, assignment or lease, accepting the
terms of this ordinance and agreeing to perform all conditions thereof.
§ A380-37. Compliance with FCC rules and regulations required.
The company shall at all times comply with the rules and regulations
governing CATV operations promulgated by the FCC. This shall include
adherence by the company to FCC rules regarding technical and
engineering specifications involved in the construction of the CATV system
and signal carriage therein.
§ A380-38. Channel capacity and access.
Channel capacity and access to the cable television system to be installed
shall be fully consistent with the company's written proposal or the
franchise agreement which are hereby incorporated by reference in this
ordinance.
§ A380-33 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-39
A380:1151
§ A380-39. Modification of FCC rules.
Consistent with the requirements of FCC, any modification of FCC rules
and regulations shall be considered incorporated in this ordinance unless
same are permissive only and are less restrictive upon the company than
this ordinance and/or the franchise agreement.
§ A380-40. Company to assume publication costs.
The company shall assume the costs of the publication of this ordinance
as such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall
be presented to the company by the appropriate city officials upon the
company's filing of its acceptance of this ordinance, and said publication
costs shall be paid at that time by the company.
§ A380-41. Rights of city.
A. City rules. The right is hereby reserved to the city to adopt, in addition
to the provisions herein contained and existing applicable ordinances,
such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of
the police power, provided that such regulations, by ordinance or
otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein
granted and shall not be in conflict with the applicable laws of the State
of Michigan or of the United States and provided that such amendments
do not materially or adversely effect the rights or privileges granted
within a franchise agreement.
B. Use of system by city. The city shall have the right, during the life of this
ordinance, of maintaining upon the poles or in the underground
conduits of the company, within the city limits, wire and fixtures
necessary for a traffic signal control system and/or a police and fire
alarm system. Such wires and fixtures shall be installed and maintained
at the sole expense of the city and shall at all times comply with all the
reasonable rules and regulations of the company so that there may be a
minimum danger of contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures
of the company and wires and fixtures used by the city.
C. Emergency or disaster. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the
company shall, upon request of the City Manager, make its facilities
available to the city for emergency use during the emergency or
disaster period.
D. Liability. The city shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the
property of the company caused by employees of the city in the
performance of their duties, except for damage caused to the
company's facilities by the negligence of the city's employees. The city
shall not be liable for the interruption of service by actions of city
employees in the performance of their duties, nor shall the city be held
liable for the failure of the company to be able to perform normal
services due to acts of God or other factors beyond the control of the
city.
§ A380-39 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-41
A380:1152
§ A380-42. Prohibited activities.
§ A380-43. Annual payment to city; report.
E. No property right. Nothing in this ordinance shall grant to the company
any right of property in the city-owned property, nor shall the city be
compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any
fashion other than, in the city's judgment its own business or needs may
require.
F. Construction approval by city. Except for individual service drops, the
company shall not erect any pole, install any underground lines or
conduits, run any line, make any attachment, nor shall any construction
of any kind be commenced, without the prior approval of the Director of
Department of Buildings and Inspections or appropriate department of
the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, and the city
shall have and maintain the right to inspect the construction, operation
and maintenance of the system by the company to ensure the proper
performance of the terms of this regulatory ordinance.
A. The company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with television reception of persons not served by the company, nor
shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city.
B. The company shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations or any other respect, make or grant any preference or
advantage to any person and not subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage, provided that nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed
to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and
classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
legally allowed classification would be entitled.
A. The company shall, during each year of operation under this ordinance,
pay to the city such percent of the annual gross subscriber revenues
received by the company for its cable services as agreed upon and set
forth in the franchise agreement. At the time of this annual payment,
the company shall furnish the city with an operating report showing the
company's annual gross subscriber revenues during the preceding year
and such other information as the city shall reasonably require with
respect to properties related to the company's services within the city
for such period.
B. Manner of payment. All payments as required by the company to the
city shall be made annually and shall be due 30 days after the close of
the twelve-month period unless otherwise agreed in the franchise
agreement.
§ A380-41 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-44
A380:1153
§ A380-44. Books and records to be kept.
The company shall keep full, true, accurate and current books of account,
which books and records, and all other pertinent books, records, maps,
plans, revenue statements and other like materials, shall be made available
for inspection and copying by the city upon reasonable notice and during
normal business hours to the extent necessary to enforce the terms of this
ordinance and the franchise agreement.
§ A380-45. Local and business office; complaints.
During the term of this ordinance, and any renewal thereof, the city may
require the company to maintain within the city a service business office or
agent for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding
the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters or a
substitute service office adequate to respond to the service needs of the
public as set forth in the franchise agreement. The service office shall be
reached by a toll-free telephone call; and the company shall provide the City
Manager's office with the name, address and phone number of a person
who will act as the company's agent to receive complaints regarding the
quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. The service
office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints from subscribers
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday. Any complaints from subscribers shall be
investigated and acted upon as soon as possible, but at least within three
business days of their receipt. The company shall keep a maintenance
service log listing all complaints resulting in service calls, their dispositions
and any service interruption. This log shall be made available for periodic
inspection by the city.
§ A380-46. Transmission of signals from subscriber's premises; use
of service without payment unlawful.
A. The company shall not permit the transmission of any signal, aural,
visual or digital, including polling the channel selection, from any
subscriber's premises without first obtaining written permission of the
subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit the use of
transmission of signals useful for the control or measurement of system
performance.
B. The company shall not permit the installation of any specific terminal
equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission
from the subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing aural,
visual or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the
subscriber.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix or to cause to be
attached or affixed any equipment or device which allows access or use
of the cable television service without payment to the grantee for same.
§ A380-44 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-47
A380:1154
§ A380-47. Adoption of additional regulations.
The city reserves the right to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained
in this ordinance, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in
the exercise of its police power; provided, however, that such regulations
are reasonable and not materially in conflict with the privileges granted in
this ordinance; provided, however, that any such additional regulations by
the city do not materially or adversely affect the rights or privileges granted
with the franchise agreement.
§ A380-48. Receivership or bankruptcy of franchise.
§ A380-49. Program content.
In addition to providing basic cable television service consisting of
broadcast and access signals, the company may offer subscribers optional
services on a per-program or per-channel basis (pay cable). The company's
A. The franchise herein granted hereunder shall, at the option of the City
Council or its designee, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take
over and conduct the business of the franchisee, whether in a
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding,
unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to
the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
(1) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this ordinance and the franchise granted pursuant
hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall
have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and
(2) Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to
be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the
franchise herein granted.
B. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property
and equipment of the franchisee, or any part thereof, including or
excluding this franchise, the City Council or its designee may serve
notice of termination upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at
such sale, in which event the franchise herein granted and all rights and
privileges of the franchisee hereunder shall cease and terminate 30
days after service of such notice, unless:
(1) The City Council shall have approved the transfer of this franchise,
as and in the manner in this ordinance provided; and
(2) Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of this
franchise.
§ A380-47 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-49
A380:1155
programming shall be in compliance with the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States.
§ A380-50. Discrimination prohibited; affirmative action required.
The grantee shall not refuse to hire nor discharge from employment nor
discriminate against any person regarding compensation, terms, conditions
or privileges of employment because of sex, race, color, creed or national
origin. The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that employees
are treated, during employment, without regard to their sex, race, color,
creed or national origin.
§ A380-51. Violations and penalties.261
Violation of this ordinance shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I.
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ A380-49 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-51
A380:1156
ARTICLE III
Renewal of Franchise
[Adopted 3-23-1993 by Ord. No. 1031 (Art. II of Ch. A380 of the
1984 Code)]
§ A380-52. Renewal granted.
A. The grantor hereby grants to the grantee a renewal of its cable
television franchise subject to the provisions of Ordinance No. 791, as
amended,262 this agreement, the grantee's renewal proposal, the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992. To the extent of any conflict or
overlap between the provisions of Ordinance No. 791, as amended, and
this agreement and the grantee's renewal proposal, this agreement and
the grantee's renewal proposal shall prevail subject to federal and state
law. This renewal further amends the term of the original franchise and
extends the franchise, authority, right and privilege to construct,
reconstruct, operate and maintain a cable television system within the
streets and public ways in the City of Roseville as it is now or may in the
future be constituted.
B. This amendment and renewal shall become effective upon approval by
resolution or ordinance by the grantor at its regularly scheduled public
meeting, provided that the same occurs on or before February 28, 1993.
This agreement is further contingent upon payment by the grantee to
the grantor of all moneys and grants required hereunder in a timely
manner.
C. The term of the renewal shall be 15 years commencing on the
expiration date of the current agreement and thereafter shall expire
and be of no force and effect unless renewed. Renewal shall be in
accordance with applicable law at that time.
D. This franchise shall not be construed as any limitation upon the right of
the grantor, through its proper offices, and in accordance with
applicable law, to grant to other persons or corporations rights,
privileges or authority similar to or different from the rights, privileges
and authority herein set forth, in the same or other streets and public
ways or public places or other places the grantee is entitled to occupy
by franchise, permit or otherwise; provided, however, that such
additional grants shall not operate to materially modify or diminish,
revoke or terminate any rights granted to the grantee herein and shall
include at a minimum similar terms and conditions as required by
Ordinance No. 791, as amended, and this agreement, and further, shall
be in accord with the provisions of all City of Roseville regulatory
ordinances.
E. The provisions of the City of Roseville Cable Television Regulatory
Ordinance No. 791, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act
262. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ A380-52 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-52
A380:1157
§ A380-53. Franchise fee.
§ A380-54. Rate regulation.
If the grantor is permitted under federal and/or state law to regulate the
rates charged by the grantee to subscribers, and if the grantor elects to so
regulate, the grantor shall establish reasonable procedures consistent with
due process and follow those procedures before so regulating subscriber
rates.
§ A380-55. Grants.
of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992 and Continental Cablevision of Michigan, Inc.'s renewal
proposal are hereby incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in
full.
A. The grantee shall pay to the grantor an annual franchise fee
commencing May 7, 1994, based upon the gross annual revenues of the
grantee from any and all operations of its cable system and business in
the City of Roseville. The fee shall be payable quarterly by April 30, July
31, October 31 and January 31 for the preceding calendar quarter. The
rate of said fee over the term of this agreement shall be as follows:
(1) May 7, 1994, to December 31, 1997: 3.5%.
(2) January 1, 1998, to December 31, 2001: 4.0%.
(3) January 1, 2002, to December 31, 2005: 4.5%.
(4) January 1, 2006, to May 6, 2009: 5.0%.
B. In the event that the grantee substantially reduces the size of its
facilities in the City of Roseville and/or relocates its offices to another
locality, this agreement shall be opened for renegotiations on the issue
of franchise fee rates. It being understood that the rate structure
agreed upon herein by the grantor is based in part upon projected
revenues to be derived from property taxes assessed on the grantee's
facilities.
A. The grantee shall make a ten-thousand-dollar programming grant to the
City of Roseville. This grant shall be paid in two installments of $5,000
each, the first installment being within 30 days of the ordinance and/or
resolution approving this agreement, and the second payment in
January of 1994. This grant is for the sole purpose of stimulating senior
citizens to use cable television as a source to share the many senior
citizens activities with the rest of the community via cable television.
Senior programs, once created, may be cable casted on the city access
channel or be provided to the grantee to be replayed on the grantor's
public access channel. Additionally, the grantee will grant to the
grantor for its recreation center one television set and video cassette
recorder (VCR) for the grantor's senior citizens to use at the Recreation
§ A380-52 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-55
A380:1158
§ A380-56. Early renewal grant.
In further consideration of the terms and conditions of this agreement and
the grantor's early renewal of this franchise agreement, the grantee shall
make a lump sum grant of $96,000 to the grantor within 30 days of the
resolution and/or ordinance approving this agreement.
§ A380-57. Interconnection.
Upon the request of the grantor that the grantee interconnect its system
with that of another cable operator in an adjacent municipality, the grantee
shall contact said cable operator and attempt to negotiate reasonable terms
and conditions for the interconnection of the two cable systems. Should
the grantee be unable to reach terms and conditions with another cable
operator, it shall so inform the grantor in writing. Where the grantee is able
to reach an agreement with the other cable operator, it shall advise the city
of the costs of such an interconnection. The grantee agrees to pay as a onetime
grant up to a maximum of $25,000 for said interconnection expenses.
Additionally, in such interconnection, the grantee will dedicate up to six
MHz video channels for the use of public entities serving the city to use for
noncommercial purpose only.
§ A380-58. Renewal expenses.
The grantee shall not assign the franchise to a party not controlled by,
controlling or under common control with the grantee, nor transfer 51%
or greater ultimate voting control of the grantee, without written approval
by the city; provided that such approval will not be unreasonably withheld
if the assignee or transferee has filed with the appropriate officials of the
city an instrument duly executed, reciting the fact of such assignment or
transfer, accepting the terms of this ordinance and agreeing to perform
all conditions thereof; and that the assignee or transferee shall reimburse
the grantor for all reasonable out-of-pocket costs incurred by the grantor's
review and processing of the assignment or transfer. Any such costs shall
not be charged against any franchise fees due to the grantor during the
term of this franchise.
§ A380-59. Insurance.
Center. Throughout the term of this renewal, senior citizens shall be
afforded free installation of cable service by Continental Cablevision, its
assigns or successors.
B. Additionally, the grantee will provide, at no cost to the senior citizens,
an orientation program and workshop for the purpose of educating
senior citizens and the development of senior citizen programming for
local broadcasting. Also, the grantee shall, for as long as it published its
Roseville Cable Guide, make the same available to senior citizen
package customers for pickup at its Roseville Office and the Roseville
Recreation Center, at no charge, its Roseville Cable Guide.
§ A380-55 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-59
A380:1159
A. Upon the effective date of renewal, the grantee shall, at its sole
expense, increase and/or maintain during the life of this agreement
public liability insurance that shall protect the grantee, the grantor, its
officials, officers, directors, employees and agents from claims which
may arise from operations under this agreement, whether such
operations be by the grantee, its officials, officers, directors, employees
and agents or any subcontractors of the grantee. This liability insurance
shall include but shall not be limited to protection against claims arising
from bodily and personal injury and damage to property resulting from
the grantee's automobiles, products and completed operations. The
amounts of insurance shall not be less than existing coverage currently
held by the grantee, as presented by Exhibit A.263
B. Except as otherwise provided herein, the grantee shall indemnify, hold
harmless, release and defend the grantor, its officers, employees and
agents from and against any and all actions, claims, demands, damages,
disability, losses, expenses, including attorney's fees, and other defense
costs or liabilities of any nature that may be asserted by any person or
entity, including the grantee, from any cause whatsoever arising out of
or in any way connected with the aforesaid operations, the exercise or
enjoyment of the franchise renewed pursuant to this agreement and/or
the activities of the grantee, its subcontractors, employees and agents
hereunder. The grantee shall be solely responsible and save the grantor
harmless from all matters relative to payment of the grantee's
employees, including compliance with social security, withholding, etc.
C. This indemnification obligation is not limited in any way by a limitation
on the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for
the grantee under worker's compensation, disability or other employee
benefit acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this
agreement or the terms, applicability or limitations of any insurance
held by the grantee.
D. The grantor does not, and shall not, waive any rights against the
grantee which it may have by reason of this indemnification because of
the acceptance by the grantor or the deposit with the grantor by the
grantee of any of the insurance policies described in this section.
E. This indemnification by the grantee shall apply to all damages and
claims for damages of any kind suffered by reason of any of the
aforesaid operations referred to in this section, regardless of whether
or not such insurance policies shall have been determined to be
applicable to any of such damages or claims for damages.
F. The grantee shall not be required to indemnify the grantor for
negligence or misconduct on the part of the grantor or its officials,
boards, commissions, agents or employees (hereinafter "such acts").
The grantor shall hold the grantee harmless from any damage resulting
from any such acts of the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions,
263. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the city offices.
§ A380-59 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-59
A380:1160
§ A380-60. Customer service.
The grantee, as a term and conditions of this franchise agreement, shall
maintain a minimum standard of customer service consistent with the
guidelines of the NCTA. These guidelines, a copy of which are attached
hereto as Exhibit B, are incorporated herein by reference. In the event
that the FCC dictates standards of customer service, said standards shall
supersede the NCTA standards.
§ A380-61. Performance bond.
In the event that the grantee shall fail to abide by its time schedule set
forth in its written renewal proposal of May 14, 1992, for technological
upgrading, the grantor may demand of the grantee and the grantee shall
forthwith establish and provide to the grantor a security fund, as security
for the faithful performance by the grantee of all material provisions of this
agreement and the grantee's renewal proposal concerning technological
upgrading. This security fund shall consist of a performance bond
acceptable to the grantor in the amount of $500,000 until the system
upgrade and/or rebuild provided for in the grantee's renewal proposal is
completed, at which time the bond shall be released, provided that there
are then no outstanding material violations of this agreement.
§ A380-62. Remedy for franchise violation.
agents or employees in utilizing any PEG access channels, equipment or
facilities and for any such acts committed by the grantor in connection
with work performed by the grantor and permitted by this agreement
on or adjacent to the cable system.
G. The grantee shall not commence any system reconstruction work or
permit any subcontractor to commence work until both shall have
obtained or cause to be obtained all insurance required by the grantor
for such construction. Said insurance shall be maintained in full force
and effect until the completion of reconstruction and approval thereof
by the grantor.
H. The grantee shall obtain and maintain workers' compensation
insurance for all the grantee's employees, and in case any work is
sublet, the grantee shall require any subcontractor similarly to provide
workers' compensation insurance for all subcontractor's employees, all
in compliance with state laws, and to fully protect the grantor from any
and all claims arising out of occurrences on the work. The grantee
hereby indemnifies the grantor for any damage resulting to it from
failure of either the grantee or any subcontractor to take out and
maintain such insurance. The grantee shall provide the grantor with a
certificate of insurance indicating workers' compensation coverage
prior to commencing reconstruction of the system.
A. In addition to any procedure and remedy allowed either party hereto by
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television
§ A380-59 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-62
A380:1161
§ A380-63. Miscellaneous consideration.
In addition to the grantee's representation set forth in its written renewal
proposal and terms and conditions set forth above, the grantee agrees that:
Consumer Protection Act of 1992 and regulations enacted in support of
said acts, together with other applicable state and/or federal law, the
following procedures and remedies shall apply. Upon violation of this
agreement by the grantee, the grantor, by action of the City Manager or
a delegate, shall first notify the grantee of the violation, in writing, by
personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction
within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than five days in the
case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due
the grantor under this agreement and 30 days in all other cases. If the
grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed or if the
grantee fails to commence corrective action within the time prescribed
and diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the grantee shall then
be given a written notice of not less than 20 days of a public hearing
to be held before the Council. Said notice shall specify the violations
alleged to have occurred. At the public hearing, the Council shall hear
and consider all relevant evidence and thereafter render findings and
its decision.
B. In the event that the Council finds that the grantee has corrected the
violation or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after
notice thereof from the grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully
remedy such violation, or that no material violation has occurred, the
proceeding shall terminate, and no penalty or other sanction shall be
imposed. In determining whether a violation is material, the grantor
shall take into consideration the standards of the industry, the
reliability of the evidence of the violation, the nature of the violation
and the damage, if any, caused to the grantor thereby, whether the
violation was chronic, and any justifying or mitigating circumstances
and such other matters as the grantor may deem appropriate.
C. In the event that the Council finds that a material violation exists and
that the grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or
has not diligently commenced correction of such violation, the Council
may impose liquidated damages of up to $1,000 per day or per incident
for unexcused violation of the system upgrade and/or rebuild
completion schedule and up to $100 per day or per incident for all other
material violation, provided that all violations of a similar nature
occurring at the same time shall be considered one incident.
A. Within 90 days of the execution of this agreement, the grantee will
make available as part of its basic programming a religious channel.
B. Within a reasonable time after regulations pursuant to the Cable Act of
1992 have been issued, the grantee will amend its current billing
practice as the same concerns charges for additional outlets in the
same dwelling, converter boxes and remote controls to assure that
§ A380-62 ROSEVILLE CODE § A380-63
A380:1162
charges, if any, for said services shall not be in excess of the rates
allowed by the FCC under the Cable Consumer Protection Act of 1992.
Notwithstanding, the grantee may not prohibit or restrict any
subscribers from purchasing and/or renting converter boxes and/or
remote controls from any other source, except to prevent theft of
service by a subscriber.
C. The terms and conditions and fees incurred by the grantee pursuant to
this agreement will not, in and of themselves, be the cause of or basis
for any increase of rates to subscribers in 1993, unless required by
federal law.
D. If at any time the grantee, its successors or assigns is granted and/or
operates a franchise in another municipality in the State of Michigan
which contains terms and conditions for the provision of service,
technology and/or franchise fees which are substantially better terms
and conditions for the franchiser than those contained in this franchise
agreement, then the grantee shall inform the grantor of such fact and
provide a copy of such ordinance or agreement to the grantor. Should
the grantor wish to include any such terms and conditions of said other
ordinance and/or agreement, it shall have 90 days after receipt of said
information to request that inclusion. Upon such request, the grantee
shall negotiate in good faith to reasonably comply with the grantor's
request, it being the intent of the parties that the grantor receive no
less than equal value with any other similarly sized municipalities
served by the grantee, its successors or assigns. In determining
reasonable compliance, the grantee and the grantor shall take into
consideration all the other terms and conditions of such other
ordinance and/or agreement, including the terms and expiration dates
of said agreements, the natural evolution of technology at the time of
any other such grants, the rates and penetration levels in such other
municipalities, potential additional capital and operating expenditure
and any other appropriate factors to assure that the grantor receives
equal value in services, technology and franchise fees with such other
municipalities.
E. To the extent that Section 19(a) of Ordinance No. 791264 prevents the
grantee from developing digital cable radio service and/or interferes
with the use of compression technology, the same shall be repealed by
the grantor.
F. The number of sets of portable equipment commonly referred to as
"studio suitcases" granted to the city shall be three.
264. Editor's Note: See § A380-42A.
§ A380-63 CABLE TELEVISION § A380-63
A380:1163
Chapter A384
GAS SERVICE FRANCHISE
CHARTER REFERENCES
Public utility franchises — See Ch. 14.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television — See Ch. A380.
§ A384-1. Franchise granted; term.
The City of Roseville, Macomb County, Michigan, hereby grants to the
Consumers Energy Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and
assigns, hereinafter called the "grantee," the right, power and authority to
lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across
and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other
public places, and to do a local gas business in the City of Roseville,
Macomb County, Michigan, for a period of 30 years.
§ A384-2. Performance by grantee required.
In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said
grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.
§ A384-3. Obstruction and interference.
No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway or other public place used by
said grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work
of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and
condition as when such work was commenced. All of the grantee's pipes
and mains shall be placed in the highways and other public places as not to
unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes.
§ A384-4. Defense and indemnification.
Said grantee shall at all times keep and save the City free and harmless
from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the
negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment
hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the City on
account of the permission herein given, said grantee shall, upon notice,
defend the City and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage
arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance.
§ A380-63 ROSEVILLE CODE § A384-5
A380:1164
§ A384-5. Compliance required.
Said grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within
said City, and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance
with applicable laws, rules and regulations.
§ A384-6. Nonexclusive rights granted.
The rights, power and authority herein granted, are not exclusive. Either
manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder.
§ A384-7. Gas rates; rules regulating service.
Said grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said City for gas
furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service
Commission, to which Commission or its successors authority and
jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service
in said City are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates
and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition
therefor being made by either said City, acting by its City Council, or by said
grantee.
§ A384-8. Revocation of franchise.
The franchise granted by this chapter is subject to revocation upon 60 days'
written notice by the party desiring such revocation.
§ A384-9. Applicability of Michigan Public Service Commission
rules and regulations.
Said grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not
herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations
of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to
gas or electric service in said City.
Chapter A385
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
§ A385-1. Preamble.
An ordinance to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City of Roseville, which provides for and grants a limited,
nonexclusive revocable electric franchise to DTE Energy Marketing, Inc.
and provides the terms and conditions associated with such franchise.
§ A385-2. Grant of franchise.
The City of Roseville, 29777 Gratiot Avenue, Roseville, Michigan 48066,
referred to as "city" grants to DTE ENERGY MARKETING, INC., 101 North
Main, Suite 300, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104 referred to as "grantee," a
§ A384-5 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE § A385-2
A385:1165
limited, nonexclusive permission to market electricity through and over
existing and future electrical lines operated and owned by another public
utility and to conduct the local electric business as an electric power
marketer and third-party supplier of electricity in the city for a period of five
years.
§ A385-3. Conditions.
The following shall be strictly adhered to:
§ A385-4. Rates.
Grantee may charge its customers for electricity and electrical services
at rates mutually agreeable to grantee and the customer, subject to the
parties' agreement that they will abide by all applicable federal and state
laws and Michigan Public Service Commission regulations.
A. As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity,
grantee will not directly transmit or supply electricity, nor impair or
attempt to control or occupy any street, alley, public place nor engage
in any construction in any public street, alley or other public place or
right-of-way.
B. Grantee, to the fullest extent permitted by law, shall completely
indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers,
employees and contractors from any and all judgments, damages,
decrees, losses, costs and expenses, which the city may incur or which
may be legally obtained by the city for or by reason of the wrongful
construction, maintenance or repair of the structures and equipment or
the use and occupation of any highway, street, alley or other public
place in the city by grantee, pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance or
resulting from the exercise by the grantee of any of these privileges or
the privileges of this Ordinance. Such indemnification shall extend to
the costs of defense for attorneys as selected in the sole discretion of
the city and shall apply to any and all claims, demands, or causes of
action, whether deemed frivolous or otherwise.
C. The city may establish reasonable standards of service and marketing
practices, prevent unjust discrimination and service and impose any
other regulations as determined by the city to be conducive to public
health, safety and welfare. grantee shall be, and shall remain, subject to
all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city now in effect or which
might be adopted.
D. Grantee shall reimburse the city for the city's costs associated with the
issuance of the franchise, which costs are stipulated at $5,000.
E. Grantee shall provide a current list of customers, including name and
address, to the Clerk for the city, which list shall be maintained as
current during the term of this franchise.
§ A385-2 ROSEVILLE CODE § A385-5
A385:1166
§ A385-5. Insurance.
A. Prior to commencing marketing electricity and furnishing service to
customers, grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect the
best A-rated or better insurance company's insurance required by this
section. Grantee shall be solely responsible for any deductible or selfinsured
retention. The purchase of such insurance shall not be in
satisfaction of the grantee's duty to indemnify the city.
B. The following coverages shall be maintained:
(1) Workers compensation insurance in accordance with all applicable
statutes of the State of Michigan. Coverage shall include
employers' liability coverage.
(2) Commercial general liability insurance on an "occurrence" basis
with limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence
for bodily injury and personal injury and $1,000,000 per
occurrence for property damage. Coverage shall include the
following extensions:
(a) Contractual liability.
(b) Products and completed operations.
(c) Independent contractors' coverage.
(d) Broad form general liability extensions or equivalent.
(e) Coverage for X, C and U hazards.
(3) Motor vehicle liability coverage, including Michigan no-fault
coverage for all vehicles used in performance of the contract, with
limits not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, combined single
limit bodily injury and property damage.
C. Commercial general liability insurance and motor vehicle liability
insurance shall include an endorsement indicating that the city and all
elected and appointed officials, boards, commissions, officers and
employees are named as additional insured. All insurance shall include
an endorsement stating that the policy may not be canceled by the
insurer or the intention not to renew stated by the insurer until 30 days
after receipt by the city by certified or registered mail of a written
notice of such intention to cancel or not renew directed to:
City Clerk, City of Roseville
29777 Gratiot Avenue
Roseville, Michigan 48066
D. Copies of the insurance policies provided hereunder shall be furnished
to the Clerk for the City of Roseville.
§ A385-5 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE § A385-6
A385:1167
§ A385-6. Most favored nation.
In the event that grantee or any of its affiliates or subsidiaries pays any fees,
charges or other payment of any kind, directly or indirectly, on a periodic
basis (monthly, quarterly, annually, etc.) for a franchise grant of permission
to operate from any municipality to operate in Michigan then grantee shall
pay to the city a fee computed in the same manner to the city. If such fee
is computed on a lineal measure or unit basis, the same unit price shall be
applicable when paid to the city. A one-time charge prior to and for attorney
fees or administrative expenses associated with the franchise shall not be
considered a periodic fee unless the charge is unreasonably higher than
that paid to other municipalities. The city shall have the right, at its own
expense, to audit books and records and to review audits of any books and
records of the grantee to determine whether and to what extent a fee is due.
Any such fee shall be immediately due and payable. Should an audit review
an additional fee due greater than 2% of the previous fee due, grantee shall
pay the city's cost of the audit.
§ A385-7. Interpretation.
Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to alienate the public right in
and to any highway, street, alley or public place. Nothing in this franchise
shall be construed in any manner as a surrender by the city of its legislative
power with respect to the subject matter of this agreement or with respect
to any other manner, limiting the right of the city to regulate any highway,
street, alley, or public place in the city to the extent permitted by law.
§ A385-8. Extension of service.
Grantee may from time to time market electrical service to customers
within the city, provided that names and addresses of such customers are
timely submitted to the Clerk of the city in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
§ A385-9. Limitations.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as a waiver by grantee of
any of its rights under state or federal law. Grantee shall, as to all other
conditions and elements of service not addressed or fixed by this Ordinance,
remain subject to rules and regulations applicable to electrical service by
the Michigan Public Service Commission, or its successor. With respect
to the grantee's provision of electrical service to customers in the city,
grantee shall provide the city with copies of all documents which grantee
sends to the Public Service Commission and copies of all orders, decisions
or correspondence grantee receives from the Public Service Commission.
Grantee shall permit the city inspection and examination of all records
and is required to maintain or file under the Michigan Public Service
Commission rules or regulations at no cost to the city during regular
business hours.
§ A385-6 ROSEVILLE CODE § A385-10
A385:1168
§ A385-10. Assignment.
This franchise may not be sold, leased, assigned, transferred or used by
any party other than the grantee without the written consent or approval
by the City Council, except for an assignment necessary to accommodate a
corporate reorganization on the part of the grantee.
§ A385-11. Acceptance.
Upon acceptance and publication, this Ordinance shall constitute a contract
between the city and the grantee.
§ A385-12. Revocation.
This franchise shall be revocable by either party upon 60 days' written
notice to the other party. The city may repeal this ordinance for misuse,
nonuse or failure to comply with its provisions.
§ A385-13. Severability.
Any and all sections, terms, provisions or clauses of this franchise shall be
deemed independent and severable. If any court of competent jurisdiction
holds any section, term, provision or clause void or invalid, all remaining
sections, terms and provisions or clauses not held void or invalid shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ A385-14. Affirmative.
Grantee, prior to commencing any marketing herein and within 30 days
of the effective date of this franchise, shall provide the sum of $5,000 for
actual administrative services incurred and legal expenses associated with
preparation of this ordinance and issuance of this franchise.
§ A385-15. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect 20 days after adoption; provided, however,
that it shall cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption, unless
within said period, the grantee shall accept the same in writing, filed with
the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, said ordinance
shall constitute the contract between the city and the said grantee.
§ A385-10 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE § A385-15
A385:1169

ZONING
370 Attachment 2
City of Roseville
Schedule of Regulations
[Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1308]
Zoning District
Minimum Zoning Lot
Size Per Dwelling Unit
Maximum Height
of Structures
Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Feet)
Minimum Floor
Area Per Unit
(square feet)
Maximum
% Lot Area
Covered by
All
Buildings
Area In
Square Feet
Width in
Feet
In
Stories In Feet Front
Sides
Minimum Total Rear
R-1A One-Family
Residential
15,000 75 2 25 25(r) 10 20 35 (c) 15
R-1 One-Family
Residential
5,500 55(a) 2 25 25(r) 5(b) 15 35 (c) 30(b)
R-2 Two-Family
Residential
4,000 40 2 25 25(r) 5(b) 15 35 (c) 30
RM-1 Multiple-Family
Residential (Low Rise)
(d) (d) 2 25 25(e,r) 20(e) 40(e) 35(e) 1 bedroom: 500
2 bedroom: 700
3 bedroom: 900
4 bedroom: 1,100
25
RM-2 Multiple-Family
Residential (High Rise)
(d) (d) (no maximum) (e,r) (e) (e) (e) 1 bedroom: 500
2 bedroom: 700
3 bedroom: 900
4 bedroom: 1,100
15
OS Office Service (f) (f) 3(g) 30(g) (h,r) 15(l,q) 30(i,q) 20(j) None (f)
B-1 Local Business (f) (f) 2 25 (h,r) (i,q) (i,q) 20(j) None (f)
B-2 Community
Business
(f) (f) 3(g)(s) 30(g)
(s)
(h,r) 75(k) 150(k) 75(j,k) None (f)
B-3 General Business (f) (f) 3(g)(s) 30(g)
(s)
(h,r) (i,q) (i,q) 20(j) None (f)
I-1 Light Industrial (f) (f) — 40(g) (h,m,r) 20(n,o,q) 20(n,o,q) 10(n,p) None (f)
I-2 General Industrial (f) (f) — 60(g) (h,l,m,r) 30(n,o,q) 30(n,o,q) 10(n,p) None (f)
370 Attachment 2:1 05 - 01 - 2019
ROSEVILLE CODE
NOTES:
(a) In the R-1 One-Family Residential District, all corner lots shall be a minimum width of 60 feet. Interior lots on irregular and curving streets may have a minimum
frontage of 45 feet at the front property line, provided, however, the lot area is at least 5,500 square feet in area and the lot is at least 55 feet wide at the minimum
required front yard setback line.
(b) For lots of record of less than 55 feet in width at the building line, the side yards shall be a minimum of four feet for a total of 14 feet for all side yards. If an attached
garage is part of the main building; provided, however, that when a driveway is provided leading to required off-street parking within a side yard, said driveway shall
be a minimum of 10 feet wide. The minimum width of the house at the building line shall be at least 24 feet.
(c) A side yard abutting the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than 10 feet in width, provided a lawful nonconforming lot of record with frontage of less than 55
feet may have the side abutting the street reduced to not less than eight feet.
Existing lots of record containing less than the minimum required lot area of the district may have a lot coverage by all buildings of up to 35%.
The minimum square feet of living space required at ground level for each dwelling unit, exclusive of any area contained within any attached garage and porches,
shall be as follows:
Lot Width Less Than 55 Feet
Story
Minimum Area Requirements
(square feet)
With Basements Without Basements
1 816 960
1 1/2 720 864
2 624 768
Lot Width Greater Than 55 Feet
Story
Minimum Area Requirements
(square feet)
With Basements Without Basements
1 960 1,108
1 1/2 864 1,012
2 768 916
(d) In an RM-1 Multiple-Family District, the total number of rooms of 80 square feet or more (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the net
area of the parcel (exclusive of any public rights-of-way), in square feet, divided by 725.
In the RM-2 Multiple-Family District (High Rise), the total number of rooms of 80 square feet or more (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities) shall not be
more than the net area of the parcel (exclusive of any public rights-of-way), in square feet, divided by 300, except as permitted in § 370-61.
370 Attachment 2:2 - 01 - 2019
ZONING
In both the RM-1 and RM-2 Districts, for the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments shall control:
Efficiency and one bedroom = 3 rooms Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units, including "den,"
"library" or other extra room, shall count such extra room as a bedroom for
the purpose of computing density.
Two bedrooms = 4 rooms
Three bedrooms = 8 rooms
Four bedrooms = 10 rooms
In an RM-2 Multiple-Family District (High Rise), multiple-family residential buildings two stories or less in height (low rise) shall conform to the requirements of
the RM-1 District as set forth in the Schedule of Regulations.
(e) In RM-2 Districts, the minimum yards shall be equal to the height of the building, except that where a lot line abuts a street, 1/2 the width of the right-of-way of said
street may be considered as yard setback, but in no instance shall any yard setback be less than 50 feet, measured from the street right-of-way line. In all multipleresidence districts (RM-1 and RM-2), the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings, and
in no instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. In all RM Districts, the area used for computing density shall be the total site area, exclusive of any dedicated
public road rights-of-way, of either interior or bounding roads. In the RM Districts, parking areas, maneuvering lanes and/or drives intended for ingress-egress to
parking spaces which are adjacent to residential building walls containing windows and/or doorways on the ground floor level shall be located at least 15 feet from
such walls. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two buildings in the RM Districts is as follows:
S=LA+LB+2 HA+HB
6
where: S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either.
LA = Total length of building A.
The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn
perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B.
LB = Total length of building B.
The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, the lines drawn
perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A.
HA = Height of building A.
The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural
grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.
HB = Height of building B.
370 Attachment 2:3 05 - 01 - 2019
ROSEVILLE CODE
The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. Natural
grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length.
(f) The minimum lot area and width, and maximum percent of building coverage, shall be determined on the basis of off-street parking and loading, greenbelt screening,
and yard setback requirements as required in this chapter for the respective uses and use districts indicated.
(g) The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify height regulations after recommendation by the Planning Commission. In approving any increase in the height of
structures, all yards shall be increased at least one foot in depth for each additional one foot of building height.
(h) In the nonresidential districts, a minimum front yard setback equal to the following schedule of setbacks by thoroughfare and by district shall apply. All setbacks
shall be measured from the center line of the fronting thoroughfare.
370 Attachment 2:4 - 01 - 2019
ZONING
DISTANCE SPACING FOR MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
370 Attachment 2:5 05 - 01 - 2019
ROSEVILLE CODE
Dimensional Setback in Feet by District (1)
Thoroughfare OS B-1 B-2 B-3 E-S I-1 I-2
Gratiot 122 112 177 127 152 142 162
Groesbeck 122 112 177 127 152 142 162
Hayes Road (N. of 12 Mile) 80 70 135 84 110 100 120
Little Mack 80 70 135 85 110 100 120
Mile Roads 80 70 135 85 110 100 120
Utica 80 70 135 85 110 100 120
Common 63 53 118 68 93 83 103
Frazho 63 53 118 68 93 83 103
Hayes Road (S. of 12 Mile) 63 53 118 68 93 83 103
Martin 63 53 118 68 93 83 103
Masonic 63 53 118 68 93 83 103
(1) All setback requirements are to be applied from the center line of the road. Dimensions represent 1/2
of projected right-of-way, plus required setback.
Except as otherwise restricted in footnote (l) of this section, off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy the required front yard, provided that there shall be created and
maintained a minimum unobstructed landscaped setback of 10 feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveway(s) and the nearest
right-of-way line as indicated on the City’s Major Thoroughfare Plan.
(i) Except as otherwise specified in the Building Code, no side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except if walls of structures facing such
interior side lot lines contain window or door openings, side yards not less than 10 feet in width shall be provided, except further, whenever an interior side yard is
provided, such side yard shall be not less than 10 feet in width.
(j) Off-street loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least one space per each establishment and shall be provided in addition to any required
off-street parking area. Off-street loading shall further meet the requirements of § 370-78 of this chapter.
(k) No building shall be closer than 75 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district.
(l) A minimum front yard of 80 feet shall be provided wherever an I-2 District is located directly across a public street or road from any residential district.
A required front yard may be penetrated to within 40 feet of an existing or proposed right-of-way line (as shown on the major thoroughfare plan) with: (1) that
portion of the use housing only office facilities, provided the height of such office facilities shall not exceed 25 feet; or (2) off-street parking for use by customers,
clients and/or visitors if screened from public view by an intense planting screen of at least 20 feet in width, subject further to the provisions of Art. XXII of this
chapter.
(m) A modification of the front yard setback shall be permitted whenever the front yards of existing principal permitted structures on adjacent zoning lots are less than the
minimum depth required above. In such case, the minimum front yard shall be equal to the average of the required and existing front yard depths.
370 Attachment 2:6 - 01 - 2019
ZONING
Front yard depths of existing principal permitted structures that do not meet the above requirements shall not be considered nonconforming. However, such front yard
depths shall not be reduced below the present setback of the established principal structure.
(n) Required off-street parking for employees shall be provided in the side or rear yards except where provided in an abutting P-1 (Vehicular Parking) District, or
otherwise provided herein. Such off-street parking shall further be subject to the requirements of Art. XX of this chapter.
Off-street loading space shall be provided in interior side or rear yards only, except as otherwise provided herein, at a ratio of at least one space for each
establishment and shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. Off-street loading space shall further meet the requirements of § 370-78 of this
chapter.
Any area used for employee parking, loading, servicing or outdoor storage shall be screened from the view of any adjacent residential district in the manner set forth
and regulated in Art. XXII of this chapter.
(o) Only one interior side yard shall be required, provided that approval is obtained from the abutting property owner, and provided further that the minimum distance
between building masses shall be at least equal to twice the minimum side yard depth. Any building wall erected on a side lot line shall not contain any window or
door openings, and construction of such wall shall be approved by the Building Department regarding fireproof materials. Whenever a side yard is provided, it shall
be at least equal to the minimum depth set forth above.
(p) Whenever a property line abuts a residential district, a minimum setback of 60 feet shall be required for any principal or accessory use or structure, except off-street
parking.
(q) Where the side yard abuts a residential district, an exterior side yard (abutting a street) shall not be less than 25 feet, provided further that off-street parking and/or
loading shall not be permitted within said exterior side yard. Curb cuts providing access to off-street parking and/or loading areas shall be approved by the Building
Department.
(r) In all zoning districts, exterior building wall materials shall be subject to the approval of the Building Department or the Planning Commission and subject further to
the standards set forth in § 370-107 of this chapter.
(s) In B-2 and B-3 Zoning Districts, for parcels with at least 100 feet of frontage on Gratiot Avenue, the maximum height of structures in stories shall be four; the
maximum height of structures in feet shall be 50.
370 Attachment 2:7 05 - 01 - 2019