CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ROCHESTER HILLS, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Adopted July 25, 2001 
Effective August 3, 2001 
____________ 
Published in 2001 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ROCHESTER HILLS, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Bryan K. Barnett 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mark A. Tisdel, President 
Susan M. Bowyer, Ph.D. 
David Walker 
Dale A. Hetrick 
James Kubicina 
Stephanie Morita 
Ryan Deel 
City Council 
____________ 
John Staran 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Tina Barton 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ROCHESTER HILLS, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Pat Somerville 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Dalton, President 
Barbara Holder, Vice-President 
Bryan Barnett 
Jim Duistermars 
Lois Golden 
Melinda Hill 
Gerald Robbins 
City Council 
____________ 
John Staran 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Beverly A. Jasinski 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through Ordinance Number 399, June 19, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Chantal Parker, Code Attorney, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Beverly A. Jasinski, CMC, City Clerk, Jane Leslie, Deputy City Clerk, Susan Galeczka, City Council Liaison, and John Staran, City Attorney, for their assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan. 2001. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 464 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ROCHESTER HILLS, OAKLAND COUNTY, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER HILLS ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Rochester Hills, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 138, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 5, 2000, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment of not more than 90 days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 5, 2000, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. Effective Date: This ordinance shall become effective on Friday, August 3, 2001, the day following its publication in The Clarion-Eccentric on Thursday, August 2, 2001. 
Adoption: This ordinance was adopted by the City Council of the City of Rochester Hills at a meeting thereof held on Wednesday, July 25, 2001. 
/s/   
      Pat Somerville, Mayor 
      City of Rochester Hills 	
 	 
CERTIFICATE 
I hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance was adopted by the City Council of the City of Rochester Hills at a meeting thereof held on Wednesday, July 25, 2001. 
;sigl; \Beverly A. Jasinski 
City of Rochester Hills  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan, as adopted by the electorate on May 22, 1984, and effective on November 20, 1984. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Constitution reference— Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22. 
State Law reference— Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq. 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, the people of the City of Rochester Hills, grateful to God for the blessings of freedom, peace and justice and in order to secure the benefits of efficient self-government and otherwise to promote our common welfare, do ordain and establish this Charter for the government of our City, pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan.  
INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 
The municipal corporation created by the vote of the electors on May 22, 1984, to be known as the "City of Rochester Hills" shall be the body corporate and politic and shall have perpetual succession in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State which are applicable thereto. It embraces the following described territory in the County of Oakland, and the State of Michigan, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto in accordance with law: 
All that territory known as the Charter Township of Avon located in Town 3 North, Range 11 East, Oakland County, Michigan.  
CHAPTER I - MUNICIPAL POWERS 
 
Section 1.1 - General powers 
Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the City and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the Constitution and statutes of the State, including Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.), as amended, as fully and completely as though those powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this Charter. In no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities herein be held to be exclusive. 
The City and its officers shall have the power to exercise any and all municipal powers in the administration of the municipal government and in the management and control of municipal property whether such powers be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the City; to promote ethical, representative government and prosperity of the municipality and to do such acts and to pass and enforce ordinances and resolutions to provide for the peace, health and safety of persons and property, and to provide for the protection and preservation of the natural environment.  
Section 1.2 - Construction 
The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, and specific mention of particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the City.  
Section 1.3 - Exercise of powers 
Where no procedure is set forth in this Charter for the exercise of any power granted to or possessed by the City, any procedure set forth in applicable State law may be utilized. Where no procedure for the exercise of any power of the City is set forth, either in this Charter or in State law, the Council may prescribe by ordinance a reasonable procedure for the exercise thereof.  
Section 1.4 - Intergovernment cooperation 
The City may join with any municipal corporation or with any other unit of government or with any number or combination thereof, by contract or otherwise, as may be permitted by law in the ownership, operation or performance, jointly or by one or more on behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate or perform separately. 
State Law reference— Permissible that, in providing for the public peace, health and safety, a city expend funds or enter into contracts with a private organization, the federal or state government, a county, village or township or another city for services considered necessary by the municipal body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(j).  
Section 1.5 - Division of powers of government 
All powers of municipal government possessed by the City are hereby divided into: 1) Legislative or Policy Forming, and 2) Administrative. It shall be the duty of every officer of the City to preserve the divisions of the City government distinct and separate.  
CHAPTER II - CITY LEGISLATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Constitution reference— General authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k). 
 
Section 2.1 - Ordinance enactment 
All legislation of the City shall be by ordinance or by resolution. The word "resolution" as used in this Charter shall be the official action of the Council in the form of a motion, and such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by resolution by this Charter or by State or Federal law and to matters pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the City government. All other acts of the Council, and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. The style of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be, "The City of Rochester Hills Ordains:". Except ordinances which are declared by the Council to be emergency ordinances affecting the health, safety and general welfare of the City, no ordinance shall be finally passed by the Council at the same meeting at which it is introduced. No ordinance shall be revised, altered, or amended by reference to its title only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised, altered or amended shall be reenacted and published at length. All ordinances when enacted shall be immediately recorded by the Clerk in the Ordinance Book, and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures thereon. Ordinances may be amended or repealed in the same manner as herein provided for the original adoption of ordinances.  
Section 2.2 - Prior legislation 
All valid ordinances of the Charter Township of Avon which are not inconsistent with this Charter, and which are in full force and effect at the time of the effective date of this Charter, shall be ordinances of the City. If any such ordinance provides for the appointment of any officers or any members of any boards or commissions, such officers or members of any boards or commissions shall, after the effective date of this Charter, be appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Provisions of any ordinance which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed.  
Section 2.3 - Penalties 
The Council shall provide in each ordinance for the punishment of violations thereof. No such punishment shall exceed the maximum fine or imprisonment, or both, provided by statute. No criminal prosecution for the violation of an ordinance shall be commenced after the expiration of two (2) years after the commission of the offense. 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i(k).  
Section 2.4 - Publication of ordinances 
Each ordinance passed by the Council shall be published at least once within fifteen (15) days after its adoption by the Council. The publication of any ordinance in full after its final passage as a part of the published proceedings of the Council shall constitute publication of such ordinance. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k).  
Section 2.5 - Date of effect of ordinance 
All ordinances of the City shall become effective on the day following publication, unless a subsequent date is specifically provided in the ordinance.  
Section 2.6 - Technical codes 
The Council may adopt any law, code, rules or regulations, with such amendments or modifications as the Council determines, pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire prevention, fire waste, plumbing, electrical, building, refrigeration machinery, piping, flammable liquids and gases, or hazardous chemicals and materials, which have been promulgated by the State or by any department, board or other agency thereof or by any organization or association which is organized and conducted for the purpose of developing any such code or codes by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. Any such adoption may be without publishing it in full, provided, however, that it be clearly identified in said ordinance and that the purpose shall be published with the adopting ordinance and that printed copies thereof are kept in the office of the City Clerk available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times. Provided further that the publication shall contain a notice to the effect that a complete copy of said law, code, rules or regulations are available for public use and inspection at the office of the City Clerk. Any amendment to or revision may be adopted and published in the same manner. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k).  
Section 2.7 - Franchise and contracts 
.1  No franchise shall be granted by the City for a term exceeding thirty (30) years and no exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. Each franchise shall include a provision requiring the franchise to take effect within one (1) year after the adoption of the ordinance granting it, except in the case of grants to take effect at the end of an existing franchise. An irrevocable franchise and any extension or amendment of such franchise may not be granted by the City, unless the ordinance granting such franchise has first received the affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special City election. An irrevocable franchise ordinance may be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate only after a public hearing, and after the grantee has filed with the Clerk an unconditional acceptance of all terms of the franchise. No special election for such purpose may be ordered by the Council unless the expense of holding such election has first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. 
.2  Every ordinance granting a franchise, license, or right to occupy or use streets, alleys, bridges, or public places shall remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection in its final form for at least thirty (30) days before the final adoption thereof, or the approval thereof for referral to the electorate. 
.3  The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow another to use the same unless the Council gives its consent. Nothing in this Section shall limit the right of the grantee of any public utility franchise to mortgage its property or franchise, nor shall it restrict the rights of the purchaser, upon foreclosure sale, to operate the same, except that such mortgagee or purchaser shall be subject to the terms of the franchise and provisions of this Charter. 
.4  The Council may, by ordinance, require each public utility conducting a business in the City to file with the Clerk a duplicate copy of layout plans of pipes, conduits, and other facilities which are to be placed on, under, or above the surface of the City's streets, alleys, bridges, and public places. 
State Constitution reference— Submittal to electors required if irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 25; franchises limited to 30 years, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 30. 
State Law reference— Restriction on number of special elections, MCL 117.5(c); expenses of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i); special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639.  
Section 2.8 - Compilation 
Copies of the City Charter, ordinances and amendments shall be available at the office of the Clerk. 
.1  At least once in every ten (10) years the Council shall direct the compilation or codification and the publication of the Charter and all ordinances of the City then in force and may provide for a reasonable charge for copies thereof. No further publication of any such compilation or codification shall be required for the validity thereof. In case the compilation or codification of the ordinances of the City shall have been maintained current and up to date during any ten (10) year period, no recompilation or recodification of the ordinances of the City shall be required during or at the end of such period. 
.2  The copies of ordinances and of any compilation, code or codes referred to in this Charter may be certified by the Clerk and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matters contained therein. 
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117.5b.  
Section 2.9 - Initiative and referendum 
An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or electors may petition for a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the Council. 
State Constitution reference— Initiative and referendum, Mich. Const. 1963, art. II, § 9. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g).  
Section 2.10 - Initiatory and referendary petitions 
.1  An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by registered electors of the City. The minimum number of valid signatures shall be ten percent (10%) of the number of active electors registered at the last City or general election preceding the filing date of said petition. 
.2  The petition shall be filed with the Clerk not more than ninety (90) days after the date of the earliest signature. 
.3  a.  Before circulation, all such petitions may be approved as to form by the Clerk. Petitions may be on more than one page. 
b.  Each signer of a petition shall sign in ink or indelible pencil and shall include the date and place of residence by street and number or by description sufficient to identify it. 
c.  On each petition there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof stating the number of signers thereto and that each signature is that of the person whose name it purports to be and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. 
d.  Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall within ten (10) days canvass the signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof and notify the person filing said petition of the compliance or noncompliance with the Charter requirements for said petition. 
e.  If the petition is found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the City or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this Charter, the person filing such petition shall be allowed ten (10) days from notification of noncompliance for the filing of supplemental petition papers. The ten (10) days shall not be part of the ninety (90) day limitation. Only one supplemental filing shall be allowed. 
.4  When the petition is found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall present it to the Council at its next regular meeting.  
Section 2.11 - Petition procedure 
Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall within thirty (30) days either: 
.1  If it is an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the City; or 
.2  If it is a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the City.  
Section 2.12 - Submission to the electors 
Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election in the City for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting, except in the cases where otherwise required by the Constitution or laws of the State. The Council shall approve the form of any question submitted to the electors. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on number of special elections, MCL 117.5(c); special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639.  
Section 2.13 - Ordinance suspended - amended 
The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition, which was filed with the Clerk not more than thirty (30) days after the passage of the ordinance to which such petition refers, shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors as the case may be. An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of two (2) years after the date of the election at which it was adopted and then only by the affirmative vote of not fewer than five (5) Councilmembers. Should two (2) or more ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions.  
Section 2.14 - Veto of Council action 
No ordinance or resolution of the Council shall have any force or effect if, within seventy-two (72) hours after the adoption thereof, the Mayor shall file in the office of the Clerk a written notice, with reasons, suspending the operation of such ordinance or resolution. In each case where the Mayor shall file such notice, such ordinance or resolutions shall not go into effect unless the Council shall within three weeks thereafter adopt such ordinance or resolution by the affirmative vote of not less than five (5) Members. If any such ordinance or resolution shall be passed, it shall become effective according to the terms thereof as originally adopted, except that it shall not be effective prior to the time of its last adoption. In the event a veto is overridden, the Mayor may not again veto the same resolution or ordinance.  
CHAPTER III - BUDGET PROCEDURE AND GENERAL FINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 
 
Section 3.1 - Fiscal year 
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of January and end on the last day of December of each year.  
Section 3.2 - Budget procedure 
On or before the first Monday in July, each Department Director shall submit to the Mayor an itemized estimate of expected income, if any, and expenditures for the next fiscal year. The Mayor shall prepare a complete itemized budget proposal for the next fiscal year and shall submit it to the Council at its first meeting in August.  
Section 3.3 - Budget document 
The budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information. 
.1  Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each Department and office of the City showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the current and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for any recommended increases or decreases, as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
.2  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any. 
.3  Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the City from sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal years. 
.4  A statement of the estimated balance for the end of the current fiscal year. 
.5  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures and commitments of the City government during the ensuing year. 
.6  Funds established for special purposes by a vote of the electorate either as a special assessment or as an ad valorem tax shall be separated in the budget document both as to expenditure and as to source of revenue. 
.7  Such other supporting schedules as the Council may deem necessary. 
.8  Such other items required to be included, by Section 15 of Public Act No. 2 of 1968 (MCL 141.435, MSA 5.3228(35)), as amended.  
Section 3.4 - Budget statement of Mayor 
Each budget proposal statement shall explain the budget proposal and shall contain an outline and explanation of the proposed financial policies of the City relating to its current and future operations. The budget proposal shall present a complete financial plan for the next fiscal year. It shall include such information and supporting schedules as the Mayor and Council may deem necessary.  
Section 3.5 - Budget, public hearing and notice 
A public hearing at such time and place as the Council shall direct shall be held on the budget proposal each year. A copy of the budget proposal shall be on file and available to the public during regular office hours in the office of the Clerk for a period of not less than seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. Notice that the proposed budget is on file and of the time and place of the public hearing thereon shall be published by the Clerk in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing on the budget by the Council, provided, however, that failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the adoption of any budget. Each budget proposal, together with all supporting schedules and the budget statement, shall be a matter of public record.  
Section 3.6 - Adoption of budget 
After the Public Hearing but prior to November 1, the Council shall by resolution concurred in by at least four members, adopt a budget for the new fiscal year. The Council shall in such resolution make an appropriation of the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year and establish the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for such purposes. In no event shall the Council adopt a deficit budget. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h); restriction on rate of taxation, MCL 117.5(a).  
Section 3.7 - Budget expenditures and amendments 
No money shall be drawn from the Treasury of the City nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The Council may amend the budget during the fiscal year, either on its own initiative or upon recommendation of the Mayor. If during the fiscal year it appears that the expenditures within any fund or activity will exceed the revenue proposed therefor, the Mayor shall advise the Council. The Council shall determine what action to take including possible amendment to the current budget. If the Council in fact determines to amend the budget, there shall be a public hearing held as required in Section 3.5 of this Chapter.  
Section 3.8 - Transfer of appropriations 
The Council may transfer, without amending the budget, any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one department fund or agency to another. Funds established by ad valorem tax for special purposes by a vote of the electorate or as a special assessment shall not be transferred. The balance in any General Fund appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the General Fund and be reappropriated during the next fiscal year. The Mayor shall not transfer appropriations without approval of the Council.  
Section 3.9 - Budget performance 
At the beginning of each quarter, and more often if required by the Council, the Mayor shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenses to date.  
Section 3.10 - Depository 
The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for City funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City monies. The Council shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized or permitted by State law, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
State Law reference— Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12; deposit of public monies, MCL 211.43b.  
Section 3.11 - Independent audit 
An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City at least annually and more frequently if the Council deems it necessary. The annual audit shall be made by Certified Public Accountants employed by the Council and shall be completed within 120 days following the close of the fiscal year. The audit shall be made public in such manner as the Council may determine. 
State Law reference— Local units less than 1,000,000, annual audit, MCL 141.425.  
CHAPTER IV - TAXATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
 
Section 4.1 - Power to tax and secure revenue 
In order to carry out the purposes, powers and duties of City government established by this Charter, the City may assess, levy, and collect taxes, rents, tolls, and excise or specific taxes. The power to tax shall not include an income tax without the prior approval of the electorate at a regular or special election and only then at the rate and for the duration approved by the electorate. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for annual levy and collection of taxes, MCL 117.3(g).  
Section 4.2 - Charter tax rate and special voted millages limitation 
.1  The annual ad valorem tax levy shall be sufficient to provide funding to adequately cover only budgeted expenditures for the fiscal year but in no case shall the levy exceed five-tenths of one percent ( 5/10 of 1%) or five (5) mills of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City, except for tax levies authorized in subsections .2 through .7 of this Section. This maximum levy shall be known and referred to as the Charter Tax Rate Limit of the City and shall be subject to all provisions of the Constitution of the State of Michigan and the statutes pertaining thereto. 
.2  The City may levy such amounts as are required for the payment of principal and interest on outstanding bonds of the City. 
.3  The City shall levy special voted millages currently in effect authorized by the electors of the Charter Township of Avon in the amounts and for the duration authorized, as follows: 
Up to 0.5 mills for road chloride and repair through the year 1986 inclusive (approved by the electors on August 7, 1980). 
Up to 1 mill for police purposes through the year 1993 inclusive (approved by the electors on August 8, 1974). 
Up to 0.25 mills for older persons activities and general community recreation, such as the Rochester-Avon Recreation Authority, through the year 1985 inclusive (approved by the electors on August 4, 1976). 
Up to 0.25 mills for older persons transportation activities and services through the year 1991 inclusive (approved by the electors on August 10, 1982). 
.4  The City may levy up to 3.0 mills for funding of the Fire Department. 
.5  The City shall levy up to 1 mill for library purposes, pursuant to Public Act No. 164 of 1877 (MCL 397.201 et seq.), as amended. 
.6  The City may levy such taxes as may be authorized by statute to be made beyond the Charter Tax Rate Limit. 
.7  The City may levy taxes for general purposes or for any specially designated purpose for a stated period of time not to exceed twenty (20) years, if approved by a majority of the registered electors voting on the proposition. Such election may be authorized by a majority vote of the Council or shall be called if an initiatory petition is filed as described in Sections 2.9 through 2.13 of this Charter. Where any special tax levy shall be approved by the electorate for a specially designated purpose, such funds shall not be used for other than the designated purpose, and all interest accruing on the investment of such funds shall be credited to that fund and not to the general fund of the City. 
(Amend. of 8-11-2014 ) 
State Law reference— Restriction on rate of taxation, MCL 117.5(a).  
Section 4.3 - Subjects of taxation 
The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for State, County and School purposes under State law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, City taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by State law. The City shall likewise levy, collect and return State, County and School taxes as provided in State law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes, MCL 117.3(f); General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq.  
Section 4.4 - Tax day 
Subject to the exceptions provided by and permitted by law, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the thirty-first (31st) day of December or such other date as may subsequently be provided by law, which day shall be deemed the Tax Day. 
State Law reference— Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2.  
Section 4.5 - Preparation of the assessment roll 
On or before the first Monday in March of each year, the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the City subject to taxation. Such roll shall be prepared in accordance with the State law and this Charter. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq.  
Section 4.6 - Board of Review 
A Board of Review is hereby created, composed of not less than three (3) nor more than nine (9) Members, as determined by the Council. A Member shall be a registered elector of the City and own real property in the City. An officer, employee or Councilmember of the City shall not be a Member of the Board of Review. 
.1  Members of the Board of Review shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the Council. 
.2  The initial Members of the Board of Review shall be appointed not later than January 15, 1985. One-third of the members shall be appointed for a one-year term, one-third for a two-year term and one-third for a three-year term. Thereafter, one-third of the Board shall be appointed each year for a three-year term. All terms shall expire December 31, except that a Member shall serve until a successor is appointed. 
.3  The Board shall at its first meeting of each year select a Chairperson for the year. The Assessor shall serve as Secretary to the Board of Review, attend and be heard at all meetings, but shall have no vote on any appeal, proposition or question. 
.4  Members of the Board of Review shall be paid such compensation on a per diem basis as the Council may determine. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a).  
Section 4.7 - Duties and functions of Board of Review 
The Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties as are by law conferred upon and required of Boards of Review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. At the time and in the manner provided in the following Section, it shall hear complaints of all persons aggrieved by assessments. If it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, other than the Board of Review, shall authorize any change upon, addition to, or correction to, the assessment roll. The Secretary of the Board of Review shall keep a permanent record of all proceedings of the Board and enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. Such record shall be filed with the Clerk on or before the first day of May.  
Section 4.8 - Meetings of the Board of Review: quorum 
The Board of Review shall first convene on the Tuesday following the first Monday in March each year, or on such date as may subsequently be required by State law for the meeting of Boards of Review in cities for the purpose of reviewing the newly prepared assessment roll. The Board shall convene a second time beginning the second Monday in March for a minimum of six (6) hours per day, for not less than three calendar days for the purpose of hearing individual assessment appeals. 
If six (6) or nine (9) members are appointed, the Board of Review shall be divided into subcommittees of three (3) members each for the purpose of hearing and deciding assessment-related matters. Two of the three members of a Board of Review committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business of the committee. A majority of the entire Board of Review shall endorse the assessment roll. 
The Board of Review may examine under oath any person appearing before it. Any member of the Board may administer such oath. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i); completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a.  
Section 4.9 - Notice of meetings 
Notice of the time and place of meetings of the Board of Review shall be published by the Clerk in the official newspaper of the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the first meeting.  
Section 4.10 - Endorsement of roll 
After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, its members then shall immediately endorse it and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the City for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll.  
Section 4.11 - Clerk to certify tax levy 
Within five (5) days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by general tax; all amounts of special assessments the Council requires to be assessed or reassessed upon any property or against any person; and all other amounts the Council may determine shall be charged, assessed, or reassessed against any person or property.  
Section 4.12 - City tax roll 
After the last day for the meeting of the Board of Review, the Assessor shall, upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in the preceding section, proceed forthwith to spread upon the assessment roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged, assessed, or reassessed against persons or property and shall also proceed to spread the amounts of the general City tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. 
State Law reference— Avoidance of fractions, MCL 211.39.  
Section 4.13 - Tax roll certified for collection 
After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than the first day of October in each year, the Assessor shall certify said tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex a warrant thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and granting, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such roll, all the power and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes under State law. 
State Law reference— Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq.  
Section 4.14 - Taxes, lien on property 
City taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt due to the City from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall on the first day of December become a lien upon such real property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and other charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal property taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal property of the persons so assessed from and after the first of December in each year and shall so remain until paid, which said tax liens shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after the assessment or [of] said personal taxes. No transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to divest or destroy such lien except where such personal property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
State Law reference— Lien for taxes, MCL 211.40.  
Section 4.15 - Taxes due, notification 
The Treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayers of the City by publication in a newspaper published, or of general circulation, in the City at least once, which publication of notice shall be made at least ten (10) days prior to the first day of December in each year, of the time when said taxes shall be due for collection. The Treasurer may also give such notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection by first-class mail addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed according to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax roll, which notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes on said tax roll. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from any penalty or interest provided in this Chapter in case of nonpayment of the same.  
Section 4.16 - Collection of city taxes 
City taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of December of each year. No penalty shall be charged for City taxes paid on or before the fourteenth (14th) day of February. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, the tax payment schedule for the City taxes paid after the fourteenth (14th) day of February, and the amount of penalty, collection fee, or interest charges, if any, to be added in an amount not to exceed the limit allowed by State law. Such charges shall belong to the City and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added.  
Section 4.17 - Delinquent tax roll to County Treasurer 
If the Treasurer has been unable to collect any of the City taxes on said roll on real property before the first day of March following the date when said roll was received, it shall be the Treasurer's duty to return all such unpaid taxes on real property to the County Treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the Treasurer and shall include all of the additional charges and fees provided, which charges shall, in such return, be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes thus returned to the County Treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the State and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed until paid. 
State Law reference— Failure or refusal to pay tax, MCL 211.47; return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq.  
Section 4.18 - Protection of City lien 
The City shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not conflict with or contravene State law, to acquire by purchase any premises within the City at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the State or the fee owner, when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the City for taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises. The City may hold, lease, or sell the same solely for the purpose of securing therefrom the amount of such taxes or special assessments, or both, together with any incidental expenses incurred in connection with the exercise of this power. Any such procedure exercised by the City in the protection of its tax lien shall be deemed to be for a public purpose.  
CHAPTER V - MUNICIPAL BORROWING POWER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq. 
 
Section 5.1 - General power to borrow 
Subject to applicable provisions of State law and this Charter, the Council, by ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the City and the issuance of bonds of the City or other evidence of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the full faith and credit of the City for the payment of the obligation created thereby. 
State Law reference— Authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a, MSA 5.2074; limitation of net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL 117.4a(2).  
Section 5.2 - Special assessment bonds 
Bonds issued in anticipation of payment of special assessments may be an obligation of a special assessment district or districts or may be both an obligation of a special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the City. All collections on each special assessment roll shall be set apart in a special fund and shall be used only for the purpose or purposes for which they were levied and for the payment of the principal and interest of any bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments. If there is a deficiency in any special assessment fund to meet the payment of the principal and interest, monies shall be advanced from the general funds of the City to meet the deficiency and shall be replaced when such special assessment funds are available. 
State Law reference— Authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(7).  
Section 5.3 - Bond issuance and records 
Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which it is issued. It shall be unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the Clerk. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled." 
State Law reference— Cremation or disintegration of public obligations, MCL 129.121 et seq.  
CHAPTER VI - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND CONTRACTS 
 
Section 6.1 - City may perform public work 
The Council shall have power to do any public work or make any public improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the necessary supplies and materials with separate accounting as to each improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after competitive bidding. Where competitive bids are secured, any City Department qualified to do the work may enter a bid. The Council shall also have the power to do any public work or make any public improvement under any legally constituted plan under which the labor is furnished by any other governmental unit, department, or agency of the County of Oakland, the State of Michigan or the United States which is wholly or in part [partly] financed by one or more of them.  
Section 6.2 - Purchasing and contractual procedure 
Before making any purchase or contract for supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services, opportunity shall be given for competition under such rules and regulations and with such exceptions as the Council may by ordinance prescribe, subject to the following: 
.1  The Council shall have the power to reject any and all bids and advertise again. 
.2  The Council shall provide by ordinance for the ordinary purchasing procedure to be followed in purchasing city supplies. 
.3  No contract or purchase order shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing any dollar value limitations contained in such ordinance. 
State Law reference— Restriction on making contracts with persons in default to city, MCL 117.5(f).  
Section 6.3 - Nuisances and hazards 
When any lot, building, or structure within the City, because of accumulation of refuse or debris, uncontrolled weeds, age or dilapidation, or any other condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the City, the Council may give notice to the owner of the land or the building or structure, specifying the nature of the nuisance and demanding the removal or correction within a time commensurate with the nature of the nuisance. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, said owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure is not known, the Council may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the City which is qualified to do the work required or by private contract after competitive bidding and the cost of such abatement may be assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance was located and added to the tax rolls for collection with general property taxes. The authority created herein and the procedure shall be consistent with State law. The procedure to be followed shall be established by ordinance.  
Section 6.4 - Cost of acquired property added 
Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation or otherwise for the purpose of any public improvement, the cost thereof and of the proceedings required to acquire such property may be added to the cost of such improvement.  
Section 6.5 - Sidewalks and pathways 
The Council by ordinance may require the construction of sidewalks and pathways in connection with the improvement or development of land. The Council may prescribe that sidewalks and pathways, except crosswalks, be built and/or maintained by the owners of the land within the City which abut upon such sidewalks and pathways in the manner and within the time prescribed by ordinance. If an owner fails to comply with the provisions of such ordinance, the City may build and/or repair or cause to be built and/or repaired such sidewalk and pathway and assess the cost thereof against such owner and against the land improved thereby, in the manner prescribed by ordinance.  
Section 6.6 - General powers relative to special assessments 
The Council shall have the power to determine the necessity of any local or public improvement, following public hearing on the necessity of said improvement, and to determine that the whole or any part of the expense shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited; provided that such expense shall in each case be in accordance with, and in proportion to, benefits derived. 
State Law reference— Power reassessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5.  
Section 6.7 - Additional assessments, refunds 
When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the improvement for which it was made, the Council may make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed shall not exceed the value of benefits received by any lot or parcel of land. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by five percent (5%) or less, the Council may place the excess in the City treasury. If more than five percent (5%), the excess shall be refunded pro rata according to assessments, provided, however, no refunds shall be made of less than five dollars ($5.00). In either case, the Council may provide by resolution that the amount of any such excess may be allowed as a credit on the last installment where such installment still remains unpaid at the time the final cost of the improvement is determined.  
Section 6.8 - Procedure to be fixed by ordinance 
The Council shall prescribe by ordinance a complete special assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and specifications, estimates of costs, notice and hearings, making and confirming of assessment rolls, corrections of errors, contested assessments, financing of improvements made by special assessment, collection of special assessments, and any other matters concerning such improvements. 
State Law reference— Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.,; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq.  
Section 6.9 - Acquisition of private property 
Private property may be taken and appropriated, either within or without the City for any public use in connection with any acquisition, enlargement or extension of public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, transportation, garbage and refuse disposal facilities, or any of them; for the purpose of opening, widening, altering, and extending streets, alleys and avenues; for the construction of bridges, for public buildings and for other public structures; for public grounds, parking spaces, parks, market places and spaces; for the improvement of waters and watercourses within the City; for sewers, drains and ditches; for public hospitals, and public cemeteries; and for other lawful and necessary public uses, and may hold the same. The ownership of such property shall be acquired by the City by negotiation and purchase, or in any other manner permitted by State law for the taking of private property for public use. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for the acquisition of property, MCL 117.4e.  
CHAPTER VII - CITY LEGISLATIVE BODY 
 
Section 7.1 - City legislative body 
The legislative power of the City, except as reserved by this Charter, shall be vested in a Council of seven Members elected on a nonpartisan basis. Four of the Councilmembers shall be elected on a District basis; three Members shall be elected at-large. The Council shall have the power and authority to adopt such ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise of its powers. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for a body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a).  
Section 7.2 - Qualifications 
Each Councilmember shall be a registered elector in the City and shall have been a resident of the City for one year immediately prior to the final date of filing of nominating petitions. A Council candidate shall be a resident of the District in order to represent a District and shall maintain residency in the district during the term of office. A Councilmember or Council candidate shall not be in default of payment of any tax, assessment or obligation owed to the City. 
(Ref. of 11-4-2008) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter prescribe qualifications of officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Section 7.3 - Council Districts 
There shall be four (4) Districts, the boundaries of which are delineated on the map in the Appendix to this Charter. Following each official United States Census, District boundaries shall be redrawn by the Council as necessary to maintain the population balance between the Districts.  
Section 7.4 - Term of office 
The term of office of Councilmembers shall be four (4) years commencing on the second Monday next following the date of the regular City election at which they were elected. At each regular City election, two (2) District positions shall be elected. Two (2) At-Large positions shall be elected at a regular City election and the other At-Large position shall be elected at the next regular City election. 
(Ref. of 11-7-1995)  
Section 7.5 - Judge of qualifications of members 
The Council shall be the judge of the eligibility and qualifications of its own Members, subject only to review by the courts. If the Council, after investigation and public hearing, determines by the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of Council that a Councilmember is not eligible or qualified, under Section 7.2, above, to hold office, the councilmember's office shall be deemed vacant. 
(Ref. of 11-4-2008) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Section 7.7 - President of the Council 
The Council shall, at its first regular meeting in December of each year, elect one (1) of its Members to serve as President. The President shall preside over the Council and shall be the Mayor pro tem of the City as provided in Chapter VIII.  
Section 7.8 - Vacancies 
When a vacancy occurs on the Council, the Council shall appoint a replacement within thirty (30) days of the vacancy by a majority vote of the Council. Such appointment shall not be subject to mayoral veto. The replacement shall serve until the next regular City election at which time there shall be elected an individual to serve the remainder of the unexpired term, if any. 
State Law reference— Filling vacancy in elective or appointive office, MCL 201.37.  
Section 7.9 - Term limitation, City Council 
City Councilmembers shall be prohibited from seeking reelection to the City Council after having served two full consecutive terms as a member of City Council or having been elected twice to that particular office in consecutive City elections. This limitation shall not prohibit election and serving on the City Council as a write-in candidate at any time or from seeking election after an interval of one term of not serving on the City Council. The terms and limitations provided herein shall apply only to future terms of office that start on the date of or after the passage of this section. 
(Ref. of 11-7-1995)  
Section 7.10 - Felony conviction (new section) 
Upon a Councilmember's conviction of a felony, the Councilmember's office shall be deemed forfeited and vacant. 
(Ref. of 11-4-2008)  
CHAPTER VIII - CITY ADMINISTRATION 
 
Section 8.1 - Administrative responsibility 
The executive and administrative powers of the City, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be vested in, and exercised by, the Mayor and the administrative officers, boards and commissions prescribed or permitted to be created by this Charter.  
Section 8.2 - Elections and term of office 
The Mayor shall be elected to a four-year term. The Mayor shall be a registered elector and a resident of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the final date for filing nominating petitions. The Mayor or a candidate for Mayor shall not be in default of payment of any tax, assessment or obligation owed to the City. The term of office of the Mayor shall commence on the second Monday next following the date of the regular City election at which he or she was elected. 
(Ref. of 11-7-1995; Ref. of 11-4-2008) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the election of a mayor, MCL 117.3(a).  
Section 8.3 - Duties of the mayor 
The Mayor shall be the administrative and executive head of the City The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace and may exercise within the City the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder. The Mayor shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances and regulations of the Council. In addition to these functions, the Mayor shall be charged with the following powers and duties: 
.1  Maintain an office during normal business hours at a place provided by the Council; 
.2  Enforce all laws, and City ordinances and regulations; 
.3  Appoint and remove for cause Department Directors and employees of the city without concurrence of the Council, subject to appeal as may be provided by contract or ordinance; 
.4  Ensure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
.5  Authenticate by signature such instruments and proceedings as required by law or by the Council; 
.6  Prepare and administer the annual budget, maintain a system of accounts which conform to such uniform system as may be required by state law, and keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the City; 
.7  On or before the first day of May in each year, prepare and submit to the Council and the public, a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the City during the prior fiscal year; 
.8  Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as the Mayor may deem necessary or expedient; 
.9  Be responsible for the efficient administration of all Departments of the City government and the allocation of building space to the various Departments of the City; 
.10  Approve administrative rules and regulations of all Departments, boards and commissions of the City government, before such rules and regulations shall become effective, except as otherwise provided by this Charter; 
.11  Be the sole spokesperson for the administration of the City, except for the Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor, insofar as their duties provided by law; 
.12  Exercise and perform all administrative functions of the City which are not imposed by law or ordinance on some other City officer or agency; 
.13  Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, or as may be required by ordinance or by direction of the Council, whether herein specifically enumerated or not; 
.14  Report to the Council concerning the work of the administrative officers and Departments of the City and, to that end, secure such information and periodical or special reports as the Mayor or the Council may deem necessary; 
.15  Exercise a veto of any ordinance or resolution of the Council, except those Council resolutions covered under Sections 7.8, 8.4 and 9.4; 
.16  Recommend to the Council personnel policies and procedures for the City; 
.17  Appoint Boards and Commissions of the City as provided by State law. 
(Ref. of 11-4-2008)  
Section 8.4 - Salary and fringe benefits of the Mayor 
The annual salary and fringe benefits of the Mayor shall be established by the Council, which shall constitute the only compensation for services to the City, and shall not be subject to mayoral veto. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary reasonable expenses incurred on behalf of the City. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Section 8.5 - Mayor pro tempore 
The President of the Council shall be the Mayor pro tem, and, in case of the absence or disability of the Mayor, shall perform the duties of the Mayor. While acting in the capacity of Mayor, the President shall not have the power of veto. The President shall not have the power to remove the Director of any Department until serving for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days as Mayor. Any appointment shall not be permanent until the appointee has served for a period of ninety (90) days.  
Section 8.6 - Vacancy 
When a vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor, the Council by a majority vote shall appoint a replacement within thirty (30) days of the vacancy. The individual shall serve until the next regular City election at which time there shall be elected an individual to serve the remainder of the unexpired term, if any. 
State Law reference— Filling vacancy in elective or appointive office, MCL 201.37.  
Section 8.6A - Felony conviction (new section) 
Upon the Mayor's conviction of a felony, the Mayor's office shall be deemed forfeited and vacant. 
(Ref. of 11-4-2008)  
Section 8.7 - Appointment of administrative officers 
.1  The Clerk, Treasurer, City Attorney, City Planning Consultant, and Auditor shall be appointed by, and serve at the discretion of, a majority of the Council. Nominations from both the Council and the Mayor shall be considered by the Council for such appointments. 
.2  The Assessor shall be an officer of the City and shall be appointed by the Mayor. 
.3  The Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor shall meet the residency provisions of Section 8.14 and such other qualifications as determined by Council. 
.4  The Clerk and Treasurer shall each appoint a Deputy, and the Mayor shall appoint an Assistant. Each appointee shall serve at the pleasure of the Clerk, Treasurer, and Mayor, respectively. 
.5  For any office authorized or required by State law, the appointment shall be made at such time and as provided by State law notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary. However, if not in conflict with State law, the provisions of this Chapter shall be followed. Appointment to Boards and Commissions of the City not established by State law shall be in accordance with the ordinance or resolution of the Council providing for such appointments. 
.6  Any City appointments shall become effective upon the filing of such appointments with the Clerk. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the appointment of certain officers, MCL 117.3(a).  
Section 8.8 - Compensation: Clerk, Treasurer, Department Directors and members of boards and commissions 
The annual salary and fringe benefits for the Clerk, Treasurer and all Department Directors, and the rates of compensation for members of boards and commissions shall be set in the annual budget by resolution of the Council. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Section 8.9 - Administrative Departments 
The existing Departments of the Charter Township of Avon are established as the Administrative Departments of the City, as follows: 
Department of Assessing 
Department of Building 
Department of City Clerk 
Department of Engineering 
Department of Fire 
Department of Planning/Zoning & Administrative Services 
Department of Treasurer 
Department of Water & Sewer/Public Service 
The Council shall have the power to reorganize or eliminate existing Departments and create other Departments, when in its opinion the proper administration of the business and the interests of the City require. Any such reorganization shall not result in any significant overlap of responsibilities between two or more departments. Each Department shall have the duties and responsibilities authorized and prescribed by this Charter, State law, the ordinances of the City, the Council and the Mayor. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for the establishment of a city department, MCL 117.4j(1).  
Section 8.10 - Department of Assessing 
The Director of the Department of Assessing shall be the Assessor. The Assessor shall possess all of the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by State law. In addition, the Assessor shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter, the ordinances of the City, and by State law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of city officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Section 8.11 - Department of the City Clerk 
The Clerk shall be the Director of the Department of the City Clerk. 
The Clerk shall: 
.1  Be the Clerk of the Council and keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language. 
.2  Keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions and actions of the Council. 
.3  Have power to administer all oaths required by State law, this Charter and ordinances of the City. 
.4  Be custodian of the City Seal,, and affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the Seal and shall attest the same. 
.5  Be custodian of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for in this Charter. 
.6  Give the proper officials of the City ample notice of the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts or agreements. 
.7  Issue and sign all licenses granted after the license fee has been paid to the Treasurer, and register the same. 
.8  Certify by signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council. 
.9  Countersign all warrants issued upon the Treasurer. 
.10  Conduct elections in accordance with this Charter and State election law. 
.11  Report and be responsible to the Mayor for the official functions and activities of Clerk's position and for the day-to-day operations of the Department, except as otherwise provided by State law. 
.12  Publish and post notices of the City as required by this Charter, State law and ordinances of the City. 
(Ref. of 11-4-2008) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of city officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Section 8.12 - Department of Treasurer 
The Treasurer shall be the Director of the Department of Treasurer. The Treasurer shall: 
.1  Have custody of all monies of the City, the Clerk's bond, and all evidence of value belonging to the City, or held in trust by the City; 
.2  Receive all monies belonging to and receivable by the City, that may be collected by any official or employees of the City, including license fees, taxes, assessments, utility charges and all other charges belonging to and payable to the City, and in all cases give a receipt therefore [therefor]; 
.3  Keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and report the same in detail to the Clerk; 
.4  Have such powers, duties, and prerogatives as are conferred by law to enforce the collection of State, County, City and school taxes upon real and personal property; 
.5  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity. 
.6  Safely keep all bonds and notes of the City. 
.7  Report and be responsible to the Mayor for the official functions and activities of this position and for the day-to-day operations of the Department of the Treasurer except as otherwise provided by State law. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of city officers, MCL 117.3(d).  
Section 8.13 - Nepotism 
No person shall be employed in any City position if such person is within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity to any elected or appointed officer, including Department Directors, during the term of office of such officer. If the status of an employee changes due to marriage to an officer of the City, such person shall not be disqualified from continued employment. An employee, on the effective date of this Charter, shall not be disqualified from continued City employment due to a relationship specified in this Section. An employee within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity of an officer, but allowed to continue employment pursuant to this Section, shall not be assigned to a position in the Department under the direct responsibility of such officer.  
Section 8.14 - Residency 
Present and future employees of the City shall not be required to become or to remain residents of the City. However, the City shall give hiring preference to residents of the City when two or more applicants have substantially similar qualifications for an available employment position. 
(Ref. of 9-15-1987)  
Section 8.15 - Term limitation, Mayor 
The Mayor shall be prohibited from seeking reelection as Mayor after having served two full consecutive terms as the Mayor or having been elected twice to that particular office in consecutive city elections. 
This limitation shall not prohibit election and serving as Mayor as a write-in candidate at any time or from seeking election after an interval of one term of not serving as Mayor. The terms and limitations provided herein shall apply only to future terms of office that start on the date of or after the passage of this section. 
(Ref. of 11-7-1995)  
CHAPTER IX - ELECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c); Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
 
Section 9.1 - Qualifications of electors 
The residents of the City having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan shall be eligible to vote in the City. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); registration of electors, MCL 168.491 et seq.; qualifications for registration as elector, MCL 168.492.  
Section 9.2 - Election procedure 
The general election laws shall apply to and control all procedures relating to City elections, including qualification of electors, establishment of precincts, verification of petitions, registration of voters, and voting hours. The Clerk shall give public notice of each City election in the same manner as is required by law for the giving of public notice of general elections in the State. 
State Law reference— Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq.  
Section 9.3 - Precincts 
The election precincts of the City shall remain as they existed on the effective date of this Charter unless altered by the City Election Commission in accordance with State law. 
State Law reference— Election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq.  
Section 9.4 - Election Commission 
An Election Commission is hereby created consisting of the Clerk as Chairperson and two other qualified registered electors whom the Council shall designate, such appointment shall not be subject to veto by the Mayor and such persons shall serve for three (3) year terms. The Commission shall be responsible for all activities and duties required of it by the State Election Law and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the Election Commission. 
State Law reference— Boards of city election commissioners, MCL 168.25.  
Section 9.5 - Regular elections 
A regular City election shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday of November in each odd-numbered year. 
State Law reference— Odd year general elections, applicability to home rule city, MCL 168.644j.  
Section 9.6 - Special elections 
Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least sixty (60) days in advance of such election, or as required by law. Any such resolution shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on number of special elections, MCL 117.5(c); special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639.  
Section 9.7 - Elective officers 
The elective officers of the City shall be the Mayor and seven Councilmembers. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for election of certain officers, MCL 117.3(a).  
Section 9.8 - Nomination procedure 
The candidates for elective office shall be nominated from the City by petitions on forms furnished by the Clerk, or such other forms as are allowed by the State Election Law. Each such petitions shall be signed by not less than fifty (50) nor more than seventy-five (75) registered electors of the City, and shall be filed at the Office of the Clerk before four in the afternoon (4:00 p.m.), Michigan time, on the fifteenth Tuesday preceding the odd year primary election 1 [] accompanied by an Affidavit of Identity as required by the State Election Law. 
Electors signing any petition shall add their residential address and the date of signature. No electors shall sign petitions for more candidates for any office than the number to be elected to such office, and should they do so, the signatures bearing the most recent date shall be invalidated. No petition shall be left for signatures in any public place. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. 
(2010 PA 182; 2015 PA 43 ) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that a Charter provides for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
 Modified by 2015 PA 43 changing Election Law to require nominating petitions be submitted before 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday preceding the odd-year primary election. 
 
Section 9.9 - Primary election 
The City primary election shall be held on the odd year primary election date set by State Election Law. 2 [] If there are not more than twice the number of candidates for each office to be filled as there are persons to be elected, the primary election shall not be held, and those persons filing valid petitions shall be declared the nominees. 
(2010 PA 182) 
State Law reference— Public Act 182 (effective 9/30/10) has amended state election law MCL 168.642a (3): After December 31, 2010, a city that adopted a resolution so that its regular election primary is held at the September election shall hold its regular election primary at the odd year primary election. 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
 Modified by 2010 PA 182 changing Election Law to require a city to hold its regular election primary at the odd-year primary election. 
 
Section 9.10 - Approval of petitions 
The Clerk shall accept only nominating petitions which conform substantially with the forms provided by statute and which contain the required number of signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for the respective elective City offices as set forth in this Charter. The Clerk shall forthwith, following the last date for filing of the petitions, notify in writing any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this Section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements. Withdrawal of a candidate's name from consideration on the ballot must be made in writing within the time limit allowed by the State Election Law.  
Section 9.11 - Form of ballot 
The ballots for all City elections shall conform to the printing and numbering of ballots as required by the State Election Law, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear on any City ballot. 
State Law reference— Arrangement of ballot, MCL 168.706.  
Section 9.12 - Canvass of votes 
The City Board of Canvassers shall canvass the votes of all City elections in accordance with the State Election Law. The Clerk shall notify in writing the successful candidates of their election upon receipt of the results from the Board of Canvassers. 
State Law reference— Canvass of returns, MCL 168.323.  
Section 9.13 - Tie vote 
If at any City election two (2) or more candidates for the same office receive an equal number of votes, the determination of the election for that office shall be by lot. 
State Law reference— Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851 et seq.  
Section 9.14 - Recount 
A recount of the votes cast at any City election for any office or proposition shall be requested and conducted in accordance with the State Election Law. 
State Law reference— Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq.  
Section 9.15 - Recall 
Any elected official may be recalled from office as provided by the State Election Law. A vacancy created by such recall shall be filled as provided by the State Election Law. 
State Constitution reference— Recalls, Mich. Const. 1963, art. II, § 8. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for recall of its officers, MCL 117.4i(g); recall generally, MCL 168.951 et seq.  
CHAPTER X - LIBRARY 
 
Section 10.1 - Library 
This Charter acknowledges the existence of the Avon Township Free Public Library created pursuant to Public Act No. 164 of 1877 (MCL 397.201 et seq., MSA 15.1661 et seq.), as amended, and acknowledges that said library shall continue in existence pursuant to Section 10b of said Act (MCL 397.210b, MSA 15.1671(2)) as the City Library. The City shall collect the authorized tax as provided in Section 10a and 10b of said Act (MCL 397.210a, 397.210b, MSA 15.1671(1), MSA 15.1671(2)) and pay [the] same to the library when collected. Directors of the Library Board shall be registered electors of the City. Hereafter, the library shall be known as the City of Rochester Hills Public Library.  
CHAPTER XI - UTILITIES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Constitution reference— Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, §§ 24, 25. 
State Law reference— Permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f. 
 
Section 11.1 - General powers 
The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all powers granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, transportation, and garbage and refuse disposal facilities, or any of them to the municipality and its inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its corporate limits as authorized by law.  
Section 11.2 - Control of utilities 
The Council may enact such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as may be necessary for the care, protection, preservation, control and operation of any public utilities which the City may in any manner acquire, own, or operate and all fixtures, appurtenances, apparatus, building, and machinery connected therewith or belonging thereto, and to carry into effect the powers conferred upon the City by the provisions of this Charter and by State law.  
Section 11.3 - Management of utilities 
All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as a regular Department of the City.  
Section 11.4 - Rates and charges 
The Council shall establish from time to time such just and equitable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the City and others with water or sewage disposal, with electricity for light, heat, and power and with such other utility services as the City may acquire or provide.  
Section 11.5 - Utility charges - collections 
The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of all public utility charges made by the City and for such purpose shall have all the power granted to cities by statute. When any person or persons, or any firm or corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay to the City any sums due on utility bills, which are not covered by deposits, the utility service or services upon which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued and suit may be instituted by the City for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
Section 11.6 - Accounts 
Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, distinct from other City accounts, and in such manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such City ownership or operation, or both, including all assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. These accounts shall show the actual cost to the City of each such public utility, the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements, all expenses of maintenance, the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes, and all operating expenses. They shall show as nearly as possible the value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or to any other City Department. They shall also show a proper allowance for depreciation and insurance. The Council shall annually cause to be made a report showing the financial results of such City ownership or operation, or both, which report shall give for each utility the information specified in this Section, and such further information as the Council shall deem expedient.  
Section 11.7 - Disposal of plants and property 
The City shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way alienate or dispose of the property, easements, income or other equipment, privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may acquire, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been submitted, at a special election held for the purpose in the manner provided in this Charter, to the qualified voters of the City and approved by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision shall be void and of no effect as against the City. The provisions of this Section shall not, however, apply to the sale or exchange of any articles or equipment of any City-owned utility as are worn out or useless, or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on number of special elections, MCL 117.5(c); special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639.  
Section 11.8 - Parks and open spaces 
City-owned parks and open spaces shall be used only for park and open space purposes and shall not be sold, leased, transferred, exchanged or converted to another use unless approved by a majority of votes cast by the electors at an election. 
.1  "Converted to another use" means changing the use of a park or open space, or significant part thereof, from a recreation or conservation use to another use not directly related or incidental to public recreation or conservation. 
.2  This section shall apply to all present and future City-owned property designated as park or open space in the City's Parks and Recreation Master Plan. The designation of parks or open space shall not be removed or changed without voter approval. The existing use of a park or open space on the effective date of this section shall be considered to be a lawful use for the particular property. 
.3  All land acquired by the City with proceeds from the 2005 Millage Proposal to Provide Funding to Permanently Preserve Green Spaces and Natural Features within the City of Rochester Hills shall remain permanently preserved. 
(Amd. 11-8-2011)  
CHAPTER XII - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Section 12.1 - Definitions 
.1  Wherever used in this Charter, the word "State" shall mean the "State of Michigan"; the word "City" shall mean the "City of Rochester Hills"; the word "Council" shall mean the "City Council"; words referring to the several offices where not preceded by the word "City" shall be deemed to mean such offices of the City unless the context implies otherwise. 
.2  The terms "Council" and "City Council" shall be construed as meaning "Commission," "Council," "Common Council," or "Governing Body" for the purpose of such laws of the State as the use of one or the other of such latter terms in referring to the legislative body of the City. 
.3  Words imparting to the singular number only may extend to and embrace the plural, the words imparting the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number. 
.4  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies corporate as well as to individuals. 
.5  The words "written" and "in writing" may be construed to include printing, engraving, typewriting and lithography and to telegraphic communications except that this rule shall not apply to signatures. 
Wherever used in this Charter, the word "advertisement" shall mean the solicitation by any of the usual means of publication in newspapers, by posting or by letter. 
.6  The word "street" as used in this Charter shall include all public highways by whatever name known, except alleys, unless the context indicates otherwise.  
Section 12.2 - Effect of illegality of any part of Charter 
Should any provision or section or portion thereof of this Charter be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such holdings shall not be construed as affecting the validity of this Charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such provision or section, it being hereby declared to be the intent of the Charter Commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any other part of the Charter except that specifically affected by such holdings.  
Section 12.3 - Headings 
The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered to be a part of this Charter.  
Section 12.4 - Violation, punishment 
All violations of this Charter or any ordinance shall be punishable, unless otherwise provided, by a fine not to exceed Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, except that if the authority of the court is extended to levy a higher fine or impose a greater sentence, the court, in its discretion, may do so to the extent it is lawfully permitted under statute or ordinance.  
Section 12.5 - Open meetings 
The meetings of the City Council and all City Boards and Commissions shall be conducted in compliance with the Open Meetings Act[,] Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.), as amended. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide for public meetings, MCL 117.3(l), MSA 5.2073, (l).  
Section 12.6 - Records open to the public 
All records of the City shall be made available to the general public in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.), as amended. All books, papers, records and accounts of any officer, elected or appointed, or of any office or Department of the City, shall be the property of the City and shall at all times be subject to audit, examination, or inspection by any Member of the Council, or by any person employed or designated by the Council for that purpose. All such books, papers, records, files and accounts shall be kept in such place as may be designated by the Council. 
State Law reference— Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(l).  
Section 12.7 - Publication: posting and affidavit 
When by the provisions of this Charter, or the laws of the State of Michigan, notice of any matter or proceedings is required to be published in a newspaper or posted, an affidavit of the publication or posting of the same, annexed to a printed copy of such notice or proceeding, taken from the paper in which it was published, specifying the times of publication, made by the printer of the newspaper in which the same was inserted, or by some person in his employ knowing the facts, if such notice was required to be by publication in a newspaper, or by the person posting the same when required to be by posting, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts therein contained. Such affidavit of publication or posting shall be filed with the City Clerk.  
Section 12.8 - Seal of the City 
The Council shall as soon as possible after the adoption of this Charter adopt an official seal of the City.  
Section 12.9 - Official time 
Michigan Time shall be the official time of the City. Any reference herein to time shall be construed to be according to the official time of the City.  
Section 12.10 - Newspaper 
The Council shall designate and maintain a designation of a newspaper with general circulation within the City as the official newspaper of the City for publication of official notices and publications.  
Section 12.11 - Saturdays, Sundays, holidays or legal holidays 
Whenever the day upon which some action or thing shall be done under the provision of this Charter or the last day of a period within which such action or thing to be done falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, holiday, or legal holiday, then such days shall be excluded in computing time, and such action or things shall be done on the first succeeding City business day.  
Section 12.12 - Amendments to Charter 
This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.), as amended. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Constitution reference— Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22. 
State Law reference— Charter amendment procedure, MCL 117.2 et seq.  
Section 12.13 - Township assets and liabilities 
On the effective date of this Charter, all of the financial and other assets and property of the Charter Township of Avon, including taxes and special assessments levied and all delinquent taxes and other obligations owed to the Township, shall become the assets of the City as the successor to such government, subject to such encumbrances as may exist against the Township including the payment of the principal and interest on any bonds which may have been issued by or in behalf of the said Township and for the payment of any indebtedness incurred by them. Such financial assets shall be available for use of the City. Until funds are appropriated by the City, the expenses of government shall be paid out of the financial assets received from said Township, and shall be deemed to have been appropriated for the purpose of paying such expenses. 
State Law reference— Succession to property and liabilities when city is formed from part of township, MCL 117.14.  
Section 12.14 - Continuation of contracts 
No right, liability, franchise or contract existing at the time this Charter became effective, and no suit or prosecution by or against the Charter Township of Avon shall be affected in any manner by any change resulting from the incorporation of the territory comprising the City, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made and shall run to or against the City, as the case may be, as the successor municipality of the territory in the said Township. 
We[,] the undersigned, the Members of the Charter Commission elected in the Charter Township of Avon on April 26, 1983, hereby submit the foregoing Charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan. 
/s/ _____
Betty Adamo 
/s/ _____
Earl E. Borden 
/s/ _____
William W. Connellan 
/s/ _____
Billie M. Ireland 
/s/ _____
Robert V. Jasinski 
/s/ _____
Eugene S. Nowicki 
/s/ _____
Leah A. Potere 
/s/ _____
John R. Todd 
/s/ _____
Philip K. Trimble 
Dated this 23rd day of February, 1984.  
APPENDIX A - COUNCIL DISTRICT MAP 
CITY OF ROCHESTER HILLS 
  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum/ 
Amendment 	 Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
	 9-15-1987 		8.14 
	11- 7-1995 		7.4 
			7.9 
			8.2 
			8.15 
	11- 4-2008 		7.2 
			7.5 
		      Added 	7.10 
			8.2 
			8.3 
		      Added 	8.6A 
			8.11 
PA 182 	12- 8-2010 		9.8 
			9.9 
	11- 8-2011 	      Added 	11.8 
Amend. of 	 8-11-2014 
	4.2 
PA 43 
2015   		9.8 
  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Rochester Hills, Michigan," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Rochester Hills Code." 
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2).  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
It is the legislative intent of the city council, in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. In the construction of this Code and any amendment to this Code, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan, adopted May 22, 1984, and shall include any amendment to the Charter. 
City. The term "city" denotes the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan. 
City council and council. The terms "council" and "city council" shall be construed as meaning the same as the term "commission," "council," "common council" or "governing body" for the purpose of such laws of the state as the use of one or the other of such latter terms in referring to the legislative body of the city. 
Code. The term "this Code" or "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Rochester Hills, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded; when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of a Sunday or a legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Oakland in the State of Michigan. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, units of government, trusts, estates, joint ventures and other legal entities, as well as to males. 
MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated, respectively, as amended. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and, in like cases the term "sworn" shall be construed to include the term "affirmed." 
Officer, department or other agency. Whenever any officer, department or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate. Whenever, in accordance with the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the city, any specific act is required to be done by any designated officer or official of the city, such act may be performed by any city employee duly authorized to perform that act by such officer or official. 
Person. The term "person" includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, estates, trusts, units of government, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, and other legal entities howsoever operating or named and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
Public Acts. References to Public Acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909. Any reference to a Public Act, whether by Act number or by short title, is a reference to the Act as amended. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes the entire width of any public right-of-way and any property, public or private, to which the public commonly resorts or is invited. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Michigan. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past.  
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections or any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid because of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division.  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-5. - Cross references, state law references and editor's notes. 
Cross references, state law references and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section.  
Sec. 1-6. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the City of Rochester Hills, 1976, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments.  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances saved from repeal; effect of prior offenses, penalties or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code, when consistent with this Code, shall affect the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance affecting the boundaries of the city. 
(2)  Any ordinance relating to any specific local improvement. 
(3)  Any ordinance authorizing, directing or ratifying any purchase or sale. 
(4)  Any ordinance approving or accepting any subdivision or plat. 
(5)  Any ordinance authorizing or directing the issuance of any bonds or other evidence of indebtedness. 
(6)  Any ordinance authorizing or directing the making of any investment. 
(7)  Any ordinance making or otherwise affecting any appropriations. 
(8)  Any ordinance levying or otherwise affecting any taxes, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to franchises. 
(10)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations, including through streets, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(11)  Any ordinance regarding special districts. 
(12)  Any ordinance pertaining to a zoning map amendment or rezoning. 
(13)  Regulations pertaining to personnel. 
(14)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(15)  Any administrative ordinance. 
(16)  Any ordinance pertaining to election precincts. 
(17)  Any ordinance adopted after the adoption of this Code. 
(b)  All such ordinances listed in subsection (a) of this section are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  No offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the adoption date of this Code shall be affected. 
(Code 1976, § 1-01.02)  
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 1-10. - Severability. 
If any provision or section of this Code shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent of the city council that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 1-01.08)  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of chapter _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Rochester Hills, Oakland County, Michigan (or Rochester Hills Code), shall be amended as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(b)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Rochester Hills, Oakland County, Michigan (or Rochester Hills Code), shall be amended by adding section _____, as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full. 
(Code 1976, § 1-01.07)  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly in the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____," (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever that will cause the Code to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-16.  
Sec. 1-14. - Enforcement. 
This Code shall be enforceable by the county sheriff, the sheriff's deputies and/or an ordinance enforcement officer who is designated by action of the mayor, and such officer shall have the authority to issue and serve appearance citations pursuant to Public Act No. 366 of 1984 (MCL 764.9f, MSA 28.868(6)). 
(Code 1976, § 1-01.04)  
Sec. 1-15. - Violations. 
Violations of any of the sections of this Code shall be separate offenses each day they continue and may be independently prosecuted as such. 
(Code 1976, § 1-01.03)  
Sec. 1-16. - Penalty; sanctions; remedies. 
(a)  Presumption of misdemeanor. All violations of this Code or any city ordinance, unless expressly designated to be municipal civil infractions, shall be misdemeanors. 
(b)  Penalty for misdemeanors. Misdemeanor violations of this Code or any ordinance shall be punishable by a sentence of not more than 90 days of confinement to jail or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, in the court's discretion, except where otherwise provided in the Code or ordinance. 
(c)  Sanctions for municipal civil infractions. Sanctions for municipal civil infractions shall be as follows: 
(1)  Civil fine. The sanction for any violation of this Code or any ordinance which is designated to be a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine of not more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense, except where otherwise provided in the Code or ordinance. 
(2)  Repeat offenses. Increased civil fines may be imposed for a repeat offense. As used in this subsection, the term "repeat offense" means a determination or admission of responsibility for a subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of the same Code or ordinance provision committed by the same person within a three-year period, unless a different period is specified in the Code or other ordinance. 
(3)  Enforcement order. In addition to ordering a defendant determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the court may issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin a violation of a city ordinance. 
(4)  Continuing offense. Each violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(5)  Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by city ordinance, any equitable or other remedies available may be sought. 
(6)  Costs. The court may also impose costs, damages and expenses as provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 1-01.05; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 1-17. - Injunctive relief. 
Any continuing violation of this Code is a nuisance per se and, in addition to the penalties provided in section 1-16, may be enjoined by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 1-01.06)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal powers, ch. I; city legislation, ch. II; city administration, ch. VIII; elections, ch. IX. 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(15); administration and enforcement of state construction code, § 18-42; administration and enforcement of electrical work, § 18-136 et seq.; community development, ch. 30; elections, ch. 34; emergency management, ch. 38; ethics, ch. 50; bureau of fire prevention, § 58-26 et seq.; municipal ordinance violations bureau, § 66-31 et seq.; personnel, ch. 82; special assessments, ch. 90; parking violations bureau, § 98-102; utilities, ch. 102; planning fees, § 110-346 et seq.; planning, ch. 130; administration of zoning regulations, § 138-41 et seq. 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City legislative body, ch. VII. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 34. 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Ethics, ch. 50. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-61—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INDEMNIFICATION 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds that the city is best served by encouraging its residents to become public officials of the city and to participate in membership on the city council and on its various boards and commissions. The city council also finds that the city is best served by attracting the most qualified persons for employment with the city. Therefore, in order to attract qualified persons to participate in government, the city council deems it necessary to indemnify city employees and officials from certain claims that may arise against such persons acting for the city and within the scope of their authority. 
(Code 1976, § 1-04.01)  
Sec. 2-92. - Indemnification and defense. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall be subject to section 2-93 pertaining to exceptions. 
(b)  Attorney services. The following attorney services shall be provided: 
(1)  Legal representation. Whenever a civil claim or action is commenced against a former or present city employee or elected or appointed official of the city, including members of city boards and commissions, for an act or omission by such former or present employee or elected or appointed official, while acting within the scope of the employee's or official's authority, the city shall provide legal representation for the employee or the appointed or elected official necessitated by the civil claim or action. 
(2)  Reimbursement for legal expenses. Alternatively, the city may reimburse the employee or elected or appointed official for all legal expenses reasonably incurred by the employee or official in connection with any civil claim or action. 
(c)  Control of litigation. Whenever the city provides for the defense of any action as set forth in this division, the city may assume exclusive control over the representation of the person defended. The city may investigate, compromise, settle and pay the claim before or after the commencement of a civil action. 
(d)  Selection of counsel. The city council shall provide for the defense of a city employee or appointed or elected official by authorizing the city attorney to act on behalf of the person being defended or by employing other counsel of its choice or by asserting the city's rights under any insurance policy which requires the insurer to provide the defense. 
(e)  Prompt notice to clerk. In order to invoke the provisions of this division, prompt notice of any claim or action shall be given to the city clerk by any affected past or present employee or elected or appointed official. 
(f)  Judgment for damages. Whenever a civil claim and/or action results in a judgment for damages, caused by an employee or appointed or elected official while acting within the scope of such person's official employment and within the scope of such person's authority, being awarded against the employee or appointed or elected official, the city shall indemnify the employee or official or shall pay, settle or compromise the judgment. 
(Code 1976, § 1-04.02)  
Sec. 2-93. - Exceptions. 
The city shall not indemnify or provide legal representation to any former or present employee or appointed or elected official in connection with any civil claim and/or action for the following: 
(1)  Outside the scope of employment or authority. That arises from an act or omission which is outside the scope of employment or authority of the employee or official. 
(2)  Willful misconduct or gross negligence. That arises out of the willful misconduct or gross negligence of the employee or official. 
(3)  Intentional tort or fraud. That arises out of an intentional tort or fraud of the employee or official. 
(4)  Use of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. That arises out of any act and/or omission of any employee or official while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. 
(Code 1976, § 1-04.03)  
Sec. 2-94. - Defenses. 
The city retains the right to assert all available defenses to any claim made against it, and nothing in this division shall be construed to be a waiver of any defense, including but not limited to governmental immunity, available to the city or its employees or appointed or elected officials. 
(Code 1976, § 1-04.04)  
Secs. 2-95—2-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor to approve administrative rules and regulations of all boards and commissions, § 8.3.10; mayor to appoint members of boards and commissions as provided by state law, § 8.3.17; appointment to boards and commissions not established by state law shall be in accordance with the ordinance or resolution of the council providing for such appointments, § 8.7.5; compensation of members of boards and commissions, § 8.8. 
Cross reference— Construction board of appeals, § 18-71 et seq.; personnel board, § 82-30; traffic and safety board, § 98-26 et seq.; historic districts commission, § 118-61 et seq.; planning commission, § 130-26 et seq.; sign board of appeals, § 134-36; zoning commission, § 138-76; zoning board of appeals, § 138-106 et seq. 
 
Secs. 2-141—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Budget procedure and general finance, ch. III; taxation, ch. IV; municipal borrowing power, ch. V. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing or directing the issuance of any bonds or other evidence of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(5); any ordinance authorizing or directing the making of any investments saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(6); any ordinance making or otherwise affecting any appropriation saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(7); any ordinance levying or otherwise affecting any taxes not inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(8); tax exempt housing, § 30-26 et seq.; cost recovery for certain emergency responses, § 42-91 et seq.; fees, ch. 54; special assessments, ch. 90; land development regulation fees, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-201—2-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET STABILIZATION FUND 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Created. 
A budget stabilization fund shall be created in accordance with Public Act No. 30 of 1978 (MCL 141.441 et seq., MSA 5.3230(1) et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 2-09.01)  
Sec. 2-227. - Appropriation to the fund. 
(a)  Authority. Each fiscal year the city council may appropriate to the budget stabilization fund, by resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members elected and serving, all or part of a surplus in the general fund resulting from an excess of revenue in comparison to expenses to the fund. 
(b)  Additional taxes prohibited. The city shall not impose additional taxes producing revenue in excess of that needed for its estimated budget in order to provide for money to be appropriated to the fund. 
(c)  Limitations. The amount of money in the fund shall not exceed either 15 percent of the city's most recent general fund budget, as originally adopted, or 15 percent of the average of the city's five most recent general fund budgets, as amended, whichever is less. 
(d)  Investment. The money in the fund may be invested as provided by law with the earnings of the fund to be returned to the city's general fund. 
(e)  Disposition of excess. If the money in the fund exceeds that permitted in subsection (c) of this section, the excess money shall be appropriated in the city's next general fund budget, but shall not be appropriated to the fund. 
(Code 1976, § 2-09.02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.443, MSA 5.3230(3).  
Sec. 2-228. - Appropriation of money from fund. 
(a)  Authority. The city council may appropriate money in the budget stabilization fund by resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members elected and serving. 
(b)  Purposes. Money in the fund may be appropriated to: 
(1)  Cover a general fund deficit, when the city's annual audit reveals such a deficit. 
(2)  Prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the number of employees at any time in a fiscal year when the city's budgeted revenue is not being collected in an amount sufficient to cover budgeted expenses. 
(3)  Prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the number of employees when, in preparing the budget for the next fiscal year, the city's estimated revenue does not appear sufficient to cover estimated expenses. 
(4)  Cover expenses arising because of a natural disaster, including a flood, fire or tornado. However, if federal or state funds are received to offset the appropriations from the fund, that money shall be returned to the fund. 
(c)  Determination of insufficient revenue. In determining whether the city's revenue is not sufficient to cover its expenses, a reduction in the amount of money received for the fiscal year from any source in comparison to the amount of money received for the previous fiscal year, including a reduction in the allocation of state tax money, shall be considered. 
(Code 1976, § 2-09.03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.444, MSA 5.3230(4).  
Sec. 2-229. - Use for capital improvements prohibited. 
The money in the budget stabilization fund shall not be appropriated for the acquisition, construction or alteration of a facility as part of a general capital improvements program. 
(Code 1976, § 2-09.04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 141.445, MSA 5.3230(5).  
Secs. 2-230—2-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Public improvements and contracts, ch. VI. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing, directing or ratifying any purchase or sale saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(3). 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to maximize the purchasing power and value of public funds through a procurement policy that maintains a system of quality and integrity and promotes efficiency, effectiveness and equity in public purchasing. It is the goal of this article to recognize the obligation to the taxpayers to maximize the purchasing power of public funds to gain the best value for our residents. The city will comply with all applicable federal and state laws concerning public purchasing. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.01), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-272. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appropriation means the sum of money from public funds set aside for a specific purpose; legislative authorization to expend public funds for a specific purpose. 
Competitive sealed bid means the method for acquiring goods, services and construction for public use in which award is made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, based solely on the response to the criteria set forth in the bid documents, and does not include discussions or negotiations with bidders. 
Contract means any agreement entered into by the city for the procurement of supplies, materials, equipment, contractual services or construction, but not including collective bargaining agreements. 
Cooperative purchasing means the combination of procurement requirements of two or more public agencies in order to obtain the benefits of volume purchases and/or reduction in administrative expenses. 
Encumbrances means setting aside funds; funds previously committed. 
Professional services means services rendered by members of a recognized profession which involve extended analysis, exercise of discretion, and independent judgment in their performance, and an advanced, specialized type of knowledge, expertise or training customarily acquired either by a prolonged course of study or equivalent experience in the field, and thus are unique and not subject to price competition in the usual sense. 
Purchasing means the act and process of procuring equipment, materials, supplies and services. This includes the process of buying or leasing including determination of need, selection of vendor or contractor, arriving at a fair and reasonable price and terms, preparation of contract or purchase order and followup to ensure timely delivery. Purchasing does not include the regular personnel services and labor of city employees or charges for noncapital public utility expenditures. 
Quality based selection means vendor selection based on demonstrated competence and qualifications followed by contract negotiation with the most qualified firm relative to fair and reasonable compensation. 
Request for proposals means a method for acquiring goods, services and construction for public use in which other factors will be considered in the selection of a vendor in addition to the price, or when there is not sufficient information to prepare a specification suitable for competitive sealed bidding, or when it is expected that negotiations with one or more vendors may be required with respect to any aspect of the requirements. 
Responsible bidder means a prospective vendor who has the capacity in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the experience, integrity, perseverance, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment and credit which will ensure good faith performance. 
Responsible bidder means a prospective vendor who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements stated in the invitation for bids. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.02), 7-28-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-273. - Encumbrance of funds. 
(a)  Emergency; unencumbered fund balance. Except in an emergency, no purchase or contract shall be entered into unless there is sufficient unencumbered balance in the fund from which the purchase or contract is to be paid. 
(b)  Longterm contracts. A contract for supplies, equipment or services may be entered into for up to three years provided that funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of issuance. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds as set forth in the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.03), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-274. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The city may join in cooperative purchasing arrangements with school districts and other government units. The city may accept extended government pricing with appropriate documentation, if it is determined by the mayor to be cost-effective and in the city's best interest. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.04), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-275. - Purchasing authority. 
(a)  Purchases less than $2,000.00. The mayor, if appropriations are approved by the city council in the annual budget, is authorized to make purchases and contracts in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00, without further approval of city council. Such purchases or contracts shall be made utilizing the most practical and reasonable procurement method that maximizes the city's purchasing power. 
(b)  Purchases between $2,000.00 and $25,000.00. The mayor, if appropriations are approved by the city council in the annual budget, is authorized to make purchases and contracts in an amount estimated to exceed $2,000.00, but not to exceed $25,000.00, without further approval of city council. Such purchases or contracts shall require the solicitation of price quotations. This provision shall not apply to purchases or contracts where quotations are impractical. Such purchases or contracts shall contain appropriate documentation. 
(c)  Purchases exceeding $25,000.00. 
(1)  Formal competition required. Purchases or contracts estimated to exceed $25,000.00 shall require formal competition as deemed appropriate, including but not limited to competitive sealed bids, requests for proposals, quality-based selection, negotiated purchases, etc. The award shall be made by the city council. 
(2)  Change orders. Change orders to contracts authorized by the city council, including construction contracts, shall be authorized without further city council approval if there are funds budgeted to cover the change order, and provided that the change order does not alter the scope of the original contract; and provided that the amount of the change order does not exceed ten percent of the original contract amount. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.05), 7-28-1999; Ord. No. 606 , § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 2-276. - Professional services. 
(a)  $50,000.00 or less. Professional services at a cost not to exceed $50,000.00, if appropriations are approved by the city council in the annual budget, shall be procured through a request for proposals or quality-based selection, as deemed practical and reasonable. Award shall be made to the offeror determined to be best qualified based on the evaluation factors set forth in the selection process and negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation, without further approval of city council. 
(b)  More than $50,000.00. Professional services in excess of $50,000.00, if appropriations are approved by the city council in the annual budget, shall be procured through a request for proposals or quality-based selection, as deemed practical and reasonable. Award shall be made to the offeror determined to be best qualified based on the evaluation factors set forth and negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation, with approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.06), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-277. - Purchases or contracts made with funds received as gifts. 
Purchases may be made or contracts awarded for the furnishing of material, equipment or labor, or a combination thereof involving the expenditure of funds received as gifts utilizing the most practical and reasonable procurement method. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.07), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-278. - No division of purchase. 
No contract or purchase shall be artificially divided to circumvent the purchasing procedures in this article. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.08), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-279. - Sale or disposal of personal property. 
Any salvage, surplus material or equipment may be disposed of in a manner which is determined to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.09), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-280. - Emergency purchases. 
Whenever there is an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare of the city or its citizens, the mayor may authorize the award of a contract, utilizing competition as may be practical and reasonable under the circumstances, for the emergency purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, services or construction. Such purchase must be reported to the city council as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.10), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-281. - Waiver by city council. 
The city council reserves the authority to waive any regulations or procedures pertaining to purchasing contained in this article, if the city council deems it in the best interest of the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.11), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-282. - Vendor suspension. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to suspend vendors whose performance of city contracts and purchase orders has been materially deficient. Suspension shall include, but not be limited to, removal from the bidders list, nonconsideration of bids or quotes submitted and cancellation of awards, and other procedures to prevent the suspended vendor from receiving city business. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.12), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-283. - Adoption of purchasing process. 
Based on the purchasing policies in this article adopted by the city council, the mayor is empowered to adopt an amend as necessary any purchasing processes necessary to carry out this article. A copy of the purchasing processes and any subsequent amendments shall be made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1(2-10.13), 7-28-1999)  
Sec. 2-284. - Penalty. 
All violations of this article shall be municipal civil infractions and upon a determination of responsibility therefor shall be punishable by a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 3, 7-28-1999)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Intoxicating beverages in dancehalls and roller rinks, § 10-93; intoxicating beverages on premises for mechanical and electronic amusement devices, § 10-221; businesses, ch. 22; cost recovery for incidents involving drivers operating under the influence, § 42-116 et seq.; offenses concerning underage persons and alcoholic liquors, § 70-321 et seq.; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 74-101; alcoholic beverages on trailways, § 74-214. 
State Law reference— Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 609 , § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2019, repealed § 6-1 entitled "Annual inspections," which derived from: Code 1976, § 3-09.05; Ord. No. 466, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2001; Ord. No. 518, § 1, adopted June 27, 2007; Ord. No. 531, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2009; Ord. No. 591 , § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 2015.  
Secs. 6-2—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Liquor licenses, MCL 436.1501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Purpose. 
(a)  License application review. The city council, having found that the best interest of the city residents is served if the number, location, character and physical facilities of establishments selling alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises are controlled and regulated, establishes a procedure for review of applications for new licenses, or transfer into the city of a license, to sell alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises and the approval or disapproval thereof. 
(b)  Dance and/or entertainment permit requests. The city council hereby establishes a procedure for the review of applications for new dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permits and the approval or disapproval thereof, having further found that: 
(1)  The best interest of the city residents is served if the number, location, character and physical facilities of licensed establishments holding dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permits are controlled and regulated; and 
(2)  Such interest is harmed if the premises are the site of disorderly conduct, are a public nuisance, or are in violation of the city's health and safety ordinances, building and fire codes, or the rules and regulations of the county health department. 
(c)  Renewal objections; revocation requests. The city council, having further found that the best interest of the city residents is harmed if establishments dispensing alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises and/or if such establishments holding dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permits are in violation of the city's health or safety ordinances, are the site of disorderly conduct, or are a public nuisance, hereby establishes a procedure and criteria for objections to renewal of such licenses and requests for revocation of such licenses and permits thereof based on such conditions and a procedure for notice and opportunity for hearing for the license and/or permit holder prior to any objection or request being filed with the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.01; Ord. No. 591 , § 1, 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 6-32. - Reservation of authority by council. 
(a)  Determination of licensee or permittee. No applicant for a liquor license or for a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit has the right to the issuance of such license or permit, and the city council reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of a license or permit. 
(b)  Taking no action. No applicant for a liquor license or for a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit has the right to have such application processed, and the city council further reserves the right to take no action with respect to any application filed with the city council. 
(c)  Issuance of additional licenses. The council reserves the right to maintain a list of all applicants and to review the list when, in its discretion, it determines that the issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interest of the city at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.04.07)  
Sec. 6-33. - Liquor license required. 
No person shall operate an establishment that sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, nor transfer a liquor license into the city, unless the person has been approved for a liquor license, or transfer of a license, by the city as set forth in this article and granted a liquor license by the state. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.02.01; Ord. No. 591 , § 1, 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 6-34. - Permits required. 
(a)  Entertainment or dance-entertainment. An on-premises liquor licensee shall not allow dancing, monologues, dialogues, motion pictures, still slides, closed circuit television, contests, or other performances for public viewing on the licensed premises, unless the on-premises licensee has been approved for an entertainment or dance-entertainment permit by the city as set forth in this article and granted an entertainment or dance-entertainment permit by the state. 
(b)  Dance or dance-entertainment. An on-premises licensee shall not allow dancing by customers or by customers and employees on the licensed premises, unless the on-premises licensee has been approved for a dance or dance-entertainment permit by the city as set forth in this article and granted a dance or dance-entertainment permit by the state. 
(c)  Activities not prohibited. This section shall not prohibit orchestra playing, piano playing, the playing of other types of musical instruments or singing. This does not apply to any publicly broadcast television transmission from a federally licensed station. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.02.02)  
Sec. 6-35. - Application for new license or transfer of license. 
Application for approval of a new liquor license or a transfer of a license to sell beer and wine or spirits shall be made to the city clerk in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a partnership or corporation, and shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant if an individual; if a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; or, if a corporation, the objects for which organized, the names and addresses of its officers and directors, names and addresses of its stockholders, and the name of the manager or agent who will be conducting the business on behalf of the applicant, if such is the case. 
(2)  The citizenship and place of residency of those persons identified in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  A statement of any other business in which the applicant is engaged. 
(4)  A financial statement of the applicant. 
(5)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(6)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person identified in subsection (1) of this section ever has made application for a license to sell beer and wine or spirits other than described in this application, and if so, the year in which the application was made, the location of the business and the disposition of the application. 
(7)  A statement of whether the applicant or any of those persons listed in subsection (1) of this section has ever been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or has ever had a license revoked by the state liquor control commission. 
(8)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States or any city ordinances in the conduct of its business. 
(9)  The name and address of the fee owner of the premises and, if the applicant is not the fee owner, the nature and term of the applicant's right to occupy the premises. 
(10)  A statement of the nature of other activities to be carried on at the premises, including but not limited to food sales, hotel/motel operations, recreational activities, contests involving patrons, and entertainment of any nature. If a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit is required for any of the activities to be carried on at the premises, a separate application for the issuance of a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit shall be made in accordance with this article. 
(11)  A statement of whether any remodeling or new construction on the premises is intended for the use of the license and if so, its description, when work is to be started and when work is to be completed. 
(12)  The application shall be accompanied by building and site plans showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall be sufficient to inform the council of facilities for off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control. 
(13)  A copy of the applicant's conditional land use application required under the zoning ordinance and supporting documents. 
(14)  An applicant for a new license shall attach to the application, in a form to be provided by the city, a completed and signed contract concerning transfer or escrow of a license within three years from date of issuance. The contract may be executed by the city if the requested license is approved. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.03.01; Ord. No. 591 , § 1, 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 6-36. - Applications for dance and/or entertainment permits. 
(a)  Contents. Application for approval of a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit required by this article shall be made to the city clerk in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a partnership or corporation, and shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such permit. 
(2)  A statement that there has been no material change in the facts represented in the licensee's application for a liquor license. If there has been a material change in the facts, the licensee shall provide the city with a revised application for a liquor license form, stating the type and date of such change. 
(3)  A statement of the type of permit being applied for: dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment, and a description of the type of activity to be carried on at the premises, including but not limited to, monologues, dialogues, motion pictures, still slides, closed circuit television, contests, or other performances for public viewing and/or dancing by employees, customers or by customers and employees. 
(4)  A statement of whether any remodeling or new construction on the premises is intended for the use of the permit, and if so its description, when work is to be started and when work is to be completed. 
(5)  If any remodeling or construction on the premises is intended, the application shall be accompanied by building and site plans showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the permit is to be utilized. The plans shall be sufficient to inform the council of facilities for off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control. 
(6)  The hours and days during which entertainment and/or dancing shall occur. 
(b)  Entertainment agreement. The applicant shall attach to such application, on a form to be provided by the city, a completed and signed entertainment agreement that will be executed by the city if the requested permit is duly approved. Such completed entertainment agreement shall be filed with the city clerk, and no application shall be processed unless accompanied by such entertainment agreement. 
(c)  Change in type of activity. If, at any time after the grant of a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit, the type of activity as described in the application is changed, a new permit must be applied for as provided under subsection (a) of this section and a new entertainment agreement shall be filed with the clerk. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-09.03.02—3-09.03.04)  
Sec. 6-37. - Fees. 
At the time of filing an application for a license or permit as required in this article, the applicant shall pay the fees as provided in section 54-91, which shall be nonrefundable. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.02.03; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 6-38. - Processing of applications. 
(a)  City department review. A copy of any application submitted under this article shall be referred by the city clerk to any city department for an investigation relating to its areas of responsibility and a report back to the city council if, in the discretion of the city council, such investigation is in the interest of the city residents or would assist the council in its review. 
(b)  Determination. After receiving the reports of the city clerk and any department from which the city council has requested a report, the city council shall make a decision on the application. It shall determine whether to approve or disapprove the issuance or transfer of a license or the issuance of a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit and shall transmit its decision to the state liquor control commission and give notice of its decision promptly to the applicant, in writing. 
(c)  Council decision. Such decision of the city council to approve or disapprove of an application shall be wholly within its discretion and its determination as to what action will best promote the best interest of the city and its inhabitants. In reaching its decision, the council should consider all pertinent factors, including those listed in this subsection. By listing some of the factors to be considered, this subsection shall not be deemed to accord applicants (For purposes of the review factors listed below, "applicant" shall be considered to include all officers, partners, members and managers of the proposed business or the entity applying for the license.) for liquor licenses any more or greater due process rights than those existing under the laws of the state. The factors considered by the council shall include the following: 
(1)  The possibility of a consequent significant cost burden on the city; 
(2)  The council's perception of the attitude of city residents generally, as well as those in the immediate neighborhood of the premises; 
(3)  Whether the property values or character of the adjoining neighborhood will be adversely affected; 
(4)  Consistency with the building code, zoning ordinance, zoning map, land use plan, master plan and the anticipated impact on nearby businesses and residences; 
(5)  Proximity to residences, schools and churches, with consideration of any adverse effect the proposed establishment may have on such land uses; 
(6)  Whether or not the location of the proposed licensed premises is, when considering the location of licensed locations already in existence, in the best interest of the city; 
(7)  Whether it is in the best interest of the city to approve of the issuance of another liquor license at the time an application is before it for consideration; 
(8)  Whether or not an applicant's business, whether existing or proposed, will generate at least 50 percent of its gross revenues from the sale of food for on-site consumption and whether the applicant's premises are or will be, prior to commencing liquor sales, equipped to serve the required volume of food sales; 
(9)  Whether traffic and parking requirements generated by the proposed licensed premises will cause unnecessary congestion or inconvenience on the public highways; 
(10)  The applicant's experience, if any, in conducting a business holding a license from the state liquor control commission; 
(11)  The applicant's management experience and reputation in connection with the operation of other businesses or facilities; 
(12)  The applicant's moral character, with special consideration given to any convictions for crimes involving moral turpitude, violence or alcoholic liquor violations by the applicant or those who are intended to manage the facility; 
(13)  Crowd control; 
(14)  Pedestrian and vehicle movement; 
(15)  Input from residents and other business owners; 
(16)  Number of similar licensed premises in the city; 
(17)  Concentration and capacity of similar establishments; 
(18)  The adequacy of the applicant's financial resources to establish and operate the proposed establishment; 
(19)  Association or integration with multi-use development; 
(20)  Substantial renovation of existing building or preservation or restoration of historic resources; 
(21)  Public safety and policing requirements; 
(22)  Business history and experience; 
(23)  Proportion of floor area devoted to dining compared with bar area; 
(24)  Size of kitchen; 
(25)  Size of dance floor, if any; 
(26)  Character of the establishment (e.g., night club, hotel, restaurant, dance club); and 
(27)  Non-payment of taxes or other obligations due and payable to the city. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-09.04.01—3-09.04.04; Ord. No. 489, § 1, 5-19-2004; Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-27-2007; Ord. No. 531, § 2, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 591 , § 1, 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 6-39. - Changes in application facts. 
If there is any material change in the facts represented in the application for a license or permit required by this article, the applicant shall promptly notify the city clerk of the change, in writing signed by the applicant. Any material change of the facts represented in the application shall be reviewed by the city council, which may withdraw its decision forwarded to the state liquor control commission, if it deems it appropriate, in its discretion. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.04.05; Ord. No. 591 , § 1, 9-28-2015)  
Sec. 6-40. - Changes in ownership. 
Prior to change in ownership of the premises or the license required by this article, a copy of the application as approved shall be given to the new owner or license holder. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.04.06)  
Sec. 6-41. - Revocation or nonrenewal. 
(a)  Notice of public hearing. Under this article, before filing an objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license or request for revocation of a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit with the state liquor control commission, the city council shall serve the licensee, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to hearing, with notice of a public hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  The nature of the action being considered by the council. 
(2)  Reasons for the action being considered. 
(3)  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
(4)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses. 
(b)  Criteria. The city council shall recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license or revocation of a dance, entertainment, or dance-entertainment permit upon a determination by it that, based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, any of the following exist: 
(1)  A violation of any applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire code; applicable zoning regulations; applicable public health regulations; applicable rules and regulations of the county health department; or any other applicable city Code provision. 
(2)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises. 
(3)  A material change in those conditions, statements or representations contained in the written application by the licensee, upon which the city council based its recommendation for approval, when that change is found to be contrary to the best interest of the city residents, in the judgment of the city council. 
(4)  A holder of a license or permit has been convicted of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance. 
(5)  The premises do not or will not reasonably soon have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise or nuisance control where a nuisance does or will exist. 
(6)  A violation of any section of this chapter or of the rules and regulations of the liquor control commission. 
(7)  For a dance, entertainment or dance-entertainment permit, any breach of the entertainment agreement entered into between the licensee and the city as required in this chapter. 
(8)  Non-payment of taxes or other obligations due and payable to the city. 
(c)  Findings and determination. Following the hearing, the city council shall submit a written statement of its findings and determination to the licensee and the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.06; Ord. No. 591 , § 1, 9-28-2015)  
Secs. 6-42—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Nude activity. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Exposed to view means a person has exposed such portions of the anatomy if such portions are naked, uncovered, less than opaquely covered or, though opaquely covered, are physically discernible due to the application of liquid to the opaque material, such as a wet T-shirt contest. 
Nude or nearly nude activity means that a person appears on the licensed premises in such a manner as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals or any simulation thereof or that a female appears on the licensed premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view the portion of the breast referred to as the areola, nipple, or simulation thereof. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall perform nude or nearly nude activity on the licensed premises. 
(c)  Permitting nude activity on premises. No licensee or any agent or employee of a licensee shall sponsor or knowingly permit any person to perform nude or nearly nude activity on the licensed premises, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-09.07.01, 3-09.07.02)  
Sec. 6-72. - Visual or video representations of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals; 
b.  Buttocks; and 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, the pubic region, the buttocks or the female breast. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall display or show any videotape recording, video motion pictures, still slides, or closed circuit television, which is characterized by an emphasis on matter or scenes depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, for observation by patrons. 
(Code 1976, § 3-09.07.03)  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, SHOWS OR EXHIBITIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Purpose. 
The holding, staging or promotion of any carnival, circus, show or exhibition shall be regulated as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-06.01)  
Secs. 10-27—10-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 10-56. - Required. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, stage or promote any carnival, circus, show or exhibition within the city without first having secured a permit from the city clerk. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. Repeat offenses under this section shall be subject to increased fines as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Code 1976, § 3-06.02.01)  
Sec. 10-57. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit for a carnival, circus, show or exhibition shall file with the city clerk the following: 
(1)  Plan. An application showing the location to be used, the layout of the premises to be used, a description of equipment and utilities to be used. 
(2)  Owner's permission. The application shall also indicate the owner of the premises and written permission for such use. 
(3)  Description of activities. The application shall contain a description of the proposed activities for the purpose of showing such things as noise to be caused; danger of accidents; and effects upon the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-06.02.02)  
Sec. 10-58. - Liability insurance. 
Before any permit for a carnival, circus, show or exhibition is issued under this division, the applicant for a permit shall submit to the city a certificate of insurance with the city named as a certificate holder for public liability insurance coverage in the amount of at least $500,000.00, combined single limits coverage, for injuries to person and property and umbrella liability coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00. No cancellation or material change in insurance may occur without 30 days' written notice to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-06.02.03)  
Sec. 10-59. - Fee. 
(a)  Payment. The fee for a permit for a carnival, circus, show or exhibition shall be as provided in section 54-121, and the permit shall not be issued until the fee has been paid. 
(b)  Waiver. If any carnival, circus, show or exhibition is being promoted by a nonprofit organization for charitable purposes, the mayor may waive such fee. 
(Code 1976, § 3-06.02.04; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 10-60. - Denial. 
If it shall appear to the city clerk from the application and investigation in connection with the application for a permit for a carnival, circus, show or exhibition that the proposed enterprise would or could cause a nuisance to the residents of the area or would be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare or morals of the citizens of the city, the permit shall be refused. 
(Code 1976, § 3-06.02.05)  
Sec. 10-61. - Revocation. 
If a permit for a carnival, circus, show or exhibition is granted under this division and it later appears that the enterprise has caused a nuisance or that its continuance would be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare or morals of the citizens of the city, the permit may be revoked and the operation shall cease. 
(Code 1976, § 3-06.02.06)  
Secs. 10-62—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DANCEHALLS AND ROLLER RINKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Purpose. 
Dancehalls and roller skating rinks shall be permitted and regulated as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.01)  
Sec. 10-92. - Building requirements. 
(a)  Zoning. A dancehall or roller skating rink shall be situated in a location where permitted by chapter 138 pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  Air conditioned building. The building in which such operation is conducted shall be air conditioned or equivalent so that windows need not be kept open in warm weather and thus let undue noise escape. 
(c)  Parking. Adequate parking space for automobiles must be provided as required by chapter 138 pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.02)  
Sec. 10-93. - Alcoholic liquors. 
No alcoholic liquors shall be permitted in the building or parking area of a dancehall or roller rink at any time, nor shall any intoxicated person be permitted on the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.04.01) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6.  
Sec. 10-94. - Disorderly conduct. 
No disorderly conduct of any kind shall be permitted within the building or in the parking area of a dancehall or roller rink. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.04.02)  
Secs. 10-95—10-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 10-121. - Required. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall erect or operate a public dancehall or roller skating rink within the city without having first secured a permit from the city council. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. Repeat offenses under this section shall be subject to increased fines as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.03)  
Sec. 10-122. - Fee. 
The fee for the permit required under this division shall be as provided in section 54-122. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.03.01; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 10-123. - Duration. 
The permit required under this division shall be issued on an annual basis, from April 1 to the following March 31. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.03.02)  
Sec. 10-124. - Revocation. 
The permit issued under this division may be revoked at any time, after a hearing before the city council, for violation of any of the sections of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-03.03.03)  
Secs. 10-125—10-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Activities center means a business or establishment: 
(1)  Dedicated to family, group or individual activities or recreation, entertainment and/or food; 
(2)  Where amusement devices are not the primary attraction or revenue source and are located so as to be used only by patrons who have paid an admission to enter; 
(3)  Where less than ten percent of usable floor area open to the public is devoted to amusement devices; 
(4)  Conducted entirely within an enclosed building; 
(5)  Where less than ten percent of usable floor space open to the public is devoted to pool tables; and 
(6)  Where no alcoholic beverages are served. 
Amusement device means: 
(1)  Any machine or device, mechanical or electronic, containing no automatic payoff device, which may, on insertion of a coin or slug, operate or be operated or used as a game or contest, and which shall: 
a.  Not contain any automatic payoff device for the return or discharge of money, coins, tokens, tickets, or merchandise; 
b.  Be so constructed that it may not be converted to contain such an automatic payoff device; and 
c.  Not provide for any such payoff by any means whatsoever. 
(2)  Also, any machine or device, mechanical or electronic, described in subsection (1) of this definition that is operated without the necessity of inserting a coin or slug into it to make it operate, but for which an admission is charged to use the machine or device or to enter the room or club where the machine or device is located in order to use the machine or device. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, an amusement device that may contain an automatic payoff device, provided that: 
a.  The automatic payoff device returns or discharges only tokens or tickets that may be redeemed for merchandise; 
b.  Each such token or ticket has a cash equivalent value of not more than $0.10; 
c.  No such token or ticket may be redeemed for cash; and 
d.  No item of merchandise that may be obtained by redeeming such tokens or tickets may have a cash equivalent value in excess of $12.00. 
Pool table means any pool or billiard table that is used in an establishment open to the public for the playing of pool or billiards. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.02; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-152. - Purpose. 
Mechanical and electronic amusement devices shall be licensed and regulated as provided in this article for the general welfare of the residents. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.01; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-153. - Inspections. 
Under this article, the establishment of any licensee shall be subject to periodic inspections by the city for the purpose of determining whether its operation is in compliance with this article and other city Code sections. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.04; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Secs. 10-154—10-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-181. - Required. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, control or operate within the city any pool table or amusement device, as defined in division 1 of this article, without having procured a license. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. Repeat offenses under this section shall be subject to increased fines as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-182. - Person required to obtain. 
The person required to obtain a license under this division is the owner or lessee of the premises who is or should be in control and/or supervision of any pool table and/or amusement device located on the premises; it is the person who is directly or should be directly supervising the day-to-day operation of the establishment. The owner and/or lessee of the premises and the owner and lessee of each pool table and mechanical amusement device shall be construed as establishing, maintaining, controlling or operating any pool table and/or amusement device if no license has been procured, but the owner and lessee shall be relieved of that responsibility and the effect of this section if, and only if, the person in charge and responsible for obtaining a license has actually obtained a license. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.01; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-183. - Exceptions. 
No license is required for the operation of any pool table or amusement device in a private home, public institution, church or clubhouse of any legally incorporated association, the use of which is confined to the members only of such association and is incidental to its principal activities. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.06.01; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-184. - Application. 
Application for a license to operate pool tables or amusement devices shall be made to the city clerk, in writing and verified, on a form such as may be determined by the city clerk, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is other than a natural person, the nature of the entity and the names and addresses of all those having an ownership interest in the entity. 
(2)  The address of the proposed establishment where the licensed activity will be maintained. 
(3)  The number of pool tables or amusement devices to be operated in the licensed establishment. 
(4)  The age of the applicant. 
(5)  The length of the applicant's residence within this state. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(7)  If video games will be played or used by patrons, the applicant shall include with the application the applicant's proposed policy concerning whether and how the applicant will observe and enforce the entertainment software rating board's (ESRB) video game ratings. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.02; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-185. - Check of criminal record. 
Each applicant for a license required under this division shall undergo a criminal record check. The city clerk shall order, at the applicant's cost, a criminal record check of any applicant. The clerk shall report to the city council the results of the inquiry. No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.03; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-186. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Age. No license required under this division shall be granted to any person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  Residence. No license shall be granted to any person who has not resided within this state for a period of at least one year prior to application for a license. 
(c)  Types of establishments. 
(1)  Generally. No license shall be issued to establish, maintain, control or operate a pool table or amusement device for the following establishments unless the establishment: 
a.  Has a class C liquor license issued in good standing; 
b.  Is located in a B-1, B-2, B-3 or CI zoning district and has an adult attendant on duty at all times the establishment is open; 
c.  Is licensed under article III, dancehalls and roller rinks, of this chapter; 
d.  Is a bowling alley with at least 20 lanes; 
e.  Is a movie theater with at least four auditoriums, and the amusement device is located where it may be used only by a patron of the theater who has paid the price of admission to the theater and no pool table is available for use; and 
f.  Is an activities center. 
(2)  Location. No license shall be issued to establish, maintain, control or operate a pool table or amusement device, unless the establishment, except for an establishment with a class C liquor license, is to be located in excess of 2,000 feet of another establishment licensed under this division. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-05.03.04, 3-05.06.03; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-187. - Fees. 
(a)  Application. Fees for an application for a license required under this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Initial. At the time of initial application for a license, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable initial application fee as provided in section 54-123. 
(2)  Renewal. At the time of application for renewal of a license, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable renewal application fee as provided in section 54-123. 
(b)  License. Upon approval or renewal of a license, a license fee as provided in section 54-123 shall be paid for each pool table or amusement device to be maintained in the establishment of the applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.05; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-188. - Issuance. 
(a)  Submission to council. The city clerk, upon receiving an application and required information and documents in a form in compliance with this division, shall submit the application, information and documents to the city council at a meeting within 20 days. 
(b)  Requirements for approval. The city council shall approve a license if it finds that: 
(1)  The applicant has met all of the requirements for a license as set forth in this division. 
(2)  The proposed operations would be in compliance with chapter 138 pertaining to zoning. 
(3)  The business establishment, for which a license is requested, would not be a place for loitering and the congregation of persons under the age of 17 years in violation of this article. 
(4)  There is not the likelihood, based upon the particular facts and circumstances involved with the application, of the establishment becoming a nuisance or otherwise being in violation of this article because of hours of operation, the physical location of the amusement devices or pool tables in the place of business, the location of the business establishment in the community or the nature of the business. 
(c)  Conditions and prohibitions. In granting approval, the city council may set conditions and prohibitions for the issuance of the license. 
(d)  Duration and form. Once a license is approved by the city council, the city clerk shall issue the license for a term of one year in a form to be determined by the city clerk. In addition, the following shall pertain to licenses issued by the clerk: 
(1)  Content. Such license shall contain the name, address, and place of business of the licensee; the number of pool tables and/or amusement devices to be maintained at the place of business; and the expiration date of the license. 
(2)  Authentication. Each license shall be authenticated by the signature of the city clerk. 
(e)  Display. The license and a list of the applicable prohibitions of this article and the prohibitions and/or conditions of the issuance of the license shall be prominently displayed at all times within the establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.06; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-189. - Renewal. 
(a)  Same terms and requirements. Any license issued in accordance with this division may be renewed for the same or a different number of pool tables and/or amusement devices by the city clerk, subject to the same terms and requirements that were provided in this division for the original license, without submittal to and approval by the city council. An application for renewal and proof of insurance shall be submitted to the city clerk, and the required fees shall be paid. 
(b)  Different location, terms or requirements. If the licensee desires to change the place of business or the terms or requirements, a new application shall be made by the licensee. This new application, which shall be submitted to and approved by the city council in the same manner as specified in this division for an original application, shall contain the address and name of the new location, but it need not contain other information that was furnished for the license that was in effect for the previous place of business and which is still valid for the new application. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.07; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-190. - Transferability. 
No license issued pursuant to this division shall be assignable or transferable, nor shall any person, excepting the person to which the license was issued, be permitted to do business under the license, either directly or indirectly. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.08; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-191. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Basis for action. Every license issued under this division may be revoked for violation of any of the prohibitions of this article. 
(b)  Written notice. If there are violations, the city clerk shall forward by first class mail to the licensee, at the address specified in the application, whether the license has been temporarily revoked and the nature of the violations, along with notice of the date, time and location of a hearing to be held on such violations. 
(c)  Hearing. The hearing shall be held within 14 days from mailing of such notice. The city council may act as the hearing officer or may appoint some other hearing officer. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether or not a violation of this article has occurred and, if so, what penalty shall be invoked. 
(d)  Penalty. The hearing officer may revoke or suspend any license issued under this division for any violation of this article or state law. 
(e)  Costs. If a violation shall have occurred, the hearing officer may assess costs as administrative expense, fees for the hearing officer and any other expenses incurred in the hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.03.09; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-192. - Variance. 
The city council may grant a variance to certain restrictions or operating requirements of this article upon determining it is reasonable, appropriate and in the public interest to do so in order to alleviate an unnecessary hardship that may result from strict compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Secs. 10-193—10-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-221. - Gambling or alcoholic liquors. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling or alcoholic liquors in any establishment in which there are maintained any pool tables or amusement devices, except alcoholic liquors may be allowed in an establishment holding a liquor license issued by the state. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.01; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6.  
Sec. 10-222. - Payoffs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, control or operate any amusement device or any slot machine or other type of machine containing any automatic or semiautomatic payoff device or which shall be so constructed that the machine or device may be converted into an automatic payoff device for the return or discharge of coins, tokens, slugs, merchandise or checks to operators thereof. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, an amusement device may contain an automatic payoff device, provided that: 
(1)  The automatic payoff device returns or discharges only tokens or tickets that may be redeemed for merchandise; 
(2)  Each such token or ticket has a cash equivalent value of not more than $0.10; 
(3)  No such token or ticket may be redeemed for cash; and 
(4)  No item of merchandise that may be obtained by redeeming such tokens or tickets may have a cash equivalent value in excess of $12.00. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.02; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-223. - Frequenting of premises by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit any person under 17 years of age to remain in or loiter in or about any establishment maintaining pool tables or amusement devices unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(b)  No person under 17 years of age, unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, may remain in or loiter in or about such establishment or falsely represent his age in order to gain admittance into such establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.03; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010) 
Cross reference— Offenses concerning underage persons, § 70-296 et seq.  
Sec. 10-224. - Proof of age. 
Any person allowed to remain in an establishment licensed under this article, who is not with a parent or guardian, shall have in his possession proof of his age, such as a driver's license, birth certificate, school registration, etc. No licensee shall allow a person to remain on the premises who does not have proof of age as required in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.04; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-225. - Minors permitted in certain establishments. 
The prohibition and requirements of sections 10-223 and 10-224 shall not apply, and children under the age of 17 years may be allowed in the establishment and may use amusement devices without a parent or guardian present in the following establishments: 
(1)  Bowling alleys with at least 20 lanes. 
(2)  Public recreation halls licensed under article III of this chapter. 
(3)  If the establishment is located in a B-1, B-2, B-3 or CI zoning district and has an adult attendant on duty at all times the establishment is open, and is in conformity with the following hours: 
a.  Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. 
b.  Sunday, 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m. 
c.  On school days, no one under 17 years of age shall be allowed in the establishment before 3:00 p.m. or after 9:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(4)  Movie theaters with at least four auditoriums, and the amusement devices are located where they may be used only by a patron of the theater who has paid the price of admission to the theater and no pool tables are available for use. 
(5)  Activities centers. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.06.02; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-226. - Nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful to operate pool tables and/or amusement devices or the combination of them so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.05; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-227. - Disorder. 
It shall be unlawful for a person issued a license under this article to allow any disorder to occur on the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.06; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-228. - Overcrowding. 
It shall be unlawful for a person issued a license under this article to allow the licensed premises to become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.07; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-229. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Establishment with liquor license. If an establishment licensed under this article holds a liquor license issued by the state, the hours may be as allowed by the liquor license and state law. 
(b)  Other establishments. It shall be unlawful to operate any establishment in which there are operated any pool tables or amusement devices, except during the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Thursday, 7:30 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  Friday and Saturday, 7:30 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. 
(3)  Sunday, 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight. 
(4)  On school days, no one under 17 years of age shall be allowed in the establishment before 3:00 p.m. or after 9:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.08; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 10-230. - Obscenity. 
No coin-operated or electronic amusement device shall display, expose, produce or emit any motion picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing, song, recitation, speech, music, video game or other matter that depicts or describes nudity, which means uncovered or less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, and human female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purpose of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and areola only are covered. No such device shall depict or describe the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or any other act by a person involving the touching or contacting of the genitals or any sexual acts that are prohibited by law. 
(2)  The touching caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, pubic region or genitals or the stimulation thereof by any device, tool, implement or object. 
(3)  The actual or simulated displaying or exposure or simulations of the pubic hair, pubic region, anus, vulva or genitals of humans, brutes, beasts or animals. 
(4)  The exposure of the postpubertal female breast. For the purpose of this subsection, a female breast is considered exposed if any portion of the breast below a line immediately above the top of the areola is exposed. 
(5)  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 3-05.05.09; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Secs. 10-231—10-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VIDEO CENTERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-256. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Film or video viewing devices means devices that are used for showing films or tapes on a video screen for one or more persons, in a viewing room of a size of less than 120 square feet. 
Video center means a place of business that has for operation by patrons one or more film or video viewing devices. 
Viewing area means an area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film or video viewing device. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-257. - Purpose. 
Video centers and film and video viewing devices shall be licensed and regulated under this article to: 
(1)  Prevent illegal sexual acts by and between patrons of video centers; 
(2)  Provide for issuance, renewal and revocation of licenses according to the requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Avoid public nuisances, disturbances and burdens in connection with video centers. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.01)  
Sec. 10-258. - Inspections. 
A video center of any licensee shall be subject to periodic inspections by the mayor or the county sheriff or his deputies for the purpose of determining whether the operation of the video center is in compliance with this article and this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.05)  
Secs. 10-259—10-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-286. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, control or operate within the city any business in which is located any film or video viewing device, without first obtaining a video center license. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.01)  
Sec. 10-287. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. An application for a video center license shall be made on forms furnished by the city clerk. 
(b)  Contents. Unless otherwise provided in this division, the application shall contain the following information about the applicant, any person financially interested in the business to be licensed, any authorized local agents, and any managing employee of the business to be licensed: 
(1)  The full legal name and any name by which the person is or has been known. 
(2)  The date and place of birth. 
(3)  The driver's license, if available. 
(4)  Fingerprints. 
(5)  A current photograph. 
(6)  Any prior felony or misdemeanor conviction except minor traffic violations. 
(7)  The home and business addresses and telephone numbers. 
(8)  Any revocation or suspension of a license issued pursuant to this division. 
(9)  The name of any local authorized agent who will be managing or operating the video center at the indicated location and proof of his authority to act on behalf of the corporation. 
(10)  When an agent or other authorized representative is making application on behalf of any prospective licensee, the name, address and telephone number of a local agent authorized to conduct daily business shall be required in addition to authority to act on behalf of the prospective licensee. 
(11)  An applicant from out of state shall be required to provide the name of a statutory agent. 
(12)  Except for corporations listed on the major stock exchanges, the names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. 
(13)  Such additional information required by the city clerk to determine the truth of the information required to be set forth in the application as provided in this subsection. 
(c)  Changes. Any change in the information required to be provided in subsection (b) of this section concerning the local authorized agent or the applicant shall be reported to the city clerk's office within ten days of the change. All other information must be updated at the time of the renewal of the license. 
(d)  Additional information. An applicant for a video center license shall provide the city clerk with the number of devices to be located at the licensed location and a floor plan of the location showing the size and number of devices in each room, the identification number of those devices, and the size of each room in which any device will be located. 
(e)  Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee and the first period license fee as follows: 
(1)  Amount. The application fee shall be as provided in section 54-124. 
(2)  Payment in advance. All fees for applications for licenses collected shall be paid in advance and applied to cover the cost of processing applications and for regulation in regard to the film or video viewing devices. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.02; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 10-288. - Action on application. 
The application for a video center license shall be presented to the city council and approved for issuance by the city clerk unless: 
(1)  The applicant fails to meet the requirements of this article; 
(2)  The applicant will not be operating the video center to be licensed in conformance with laws and regulations, zoning, building, safety, or health; 
(3)  The applicant is a corporation and is not qualified to transact business in the state; 
(4)  The applicant has deliberately falsified a material question on his application; 
(5)  A clear and present danger of serious damage or danger to the public would result from granting the license; or 
(6)  The applicant, the owner, any partner, any person financially interested, any managing employee, or any local authorized agent of the applicant has within the past five years been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude which relates to the activity to be licensed or has, within two years preceding the date of the issuance of a license, violated any of the sections of this article while conducting any business regulated by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.04)  
Sec. 10-289. - Fee. 
(a)  Amount. The video center license fee for each film or video viewing device shall be as provided in section 54-124. 
(b)  Refunded for denied application. If the application for a license is denied, the amount paid for the first period license fee shall be refunded to the applicant at the time the application is denied. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.05; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 10-290. - Specific number of devices. 
Each video center license shall be for a specific number of devices, and the number of devices at the licensed location may not exceed the number allowed for in the license. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.06)  
Sec. 10-291. - Additional devices. 
(a)  Declaration and fee. An increase in the number of devices allowed for at the video center location requires a declaration of that and the payment of a new video center license fee for each additional device. 
(b)  Application. An additional application pursuant to this section is not required for each additional machine that a licensee has licensed if the additional machines to be licensed are similar to those already licensed. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.07)  
Sec. 10-292. - Term. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be for a one-year period ending on December 31 of each year. A license issued in the first instance for less than one year shall require the payment of fees for the portion of the year remaining, on a pro rata basis. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.08)  
Sec. 10-293. - Renewal. 
At or prior to the expiration of the video center license, the holder of the license shall apply for a renewal, which shall consist of filing an affidavit that all of the information in the application originally filed is true or a statement as to any changes in the information. Upon it appearing to the city clerk that there has been compliance with all aspects of this article, the city council shall consider and issue a new license unless there is noncompliance with any provisions of section 10-288. Upon issuing a renewal license, the city shall issue a license which shall be effective for the new year. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.10)  
Sec. 10-294. - Termination for nonpayment of fee. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the video center license shall terminate if the licensee fails to pay any license fee owed either when due or by the end of the renewal period. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.11)  
Sec. 10-295. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds. Any video center license issued pursuant to this division shall be revoked or suspended on any one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The licensee or his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with the license as a partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager or any person financially interested has violated any section of this Code in regard to devices licensed under this division or has been convicted of a violation of this Code or state or federal law in regard to devices licensed under this division involving moral turpitude and which relates to the licensed activity. 
(2)  The licensee or his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with the license as a partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager or any person financially interested has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for any license required in this division. 
(3)  The licensee is the holder of a video center license and there exists a clear and present danger of serious damage or danger to the public if the license is not suspended or revoked. 
(4)  The licensee is a corporation and is not or is no longer qualified to transact business in the state. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. To suspend or revoke a license, the city clerk shall notify the licensee in writing at the address as shown on the application or otherwise more recently of record that the license may be suspended or revoked and of a hearing on that before the city council. The cause for such suspension or revocation shall be set forth in the notice. 
(c)  Council action. The council shall conduct a hearing and take such action as appears appropriate under the circumstances. 
(d)  Surrender of license. A suspended or revoked license shall be surrendered to the city clerk on demand. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.12)  
Sec. 10-296. - Refund of fees for revocation, suspension or termination. 
If a video center license is revoked, suspended or terminated or if the business is discontinued after being licensed, no refund of any portion of any of the fees paid for the application or the license shall be made. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.13)  
Secs. 10-297—10-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-326. - Display of license. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this article must be displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment at which the film or video viewing devices are operated. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.03.09)  
Sec. 10-327. - Changes in business. 
The city clerk shall be notified of any change in the floor plan, including changes in the sizes of the film or video viewing devices, submitted as part of the application for the video center license. The changes include but are not limited to changes in the size of rooms where the devices are located and changes in the size, type, or number of devices located in the business. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.04.01)  
Sec. 10-328. - Device tags. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article to place any film or videotape viewing device not tagged pursuant to this section in a video center. 
(b)  The owner of a film or video viewing device must have the machine identified and tagged before it can be placed in a licensed video center. 
(c)  The owner of the machine must submit the following information about the machine to be tagged: 
(1)  The name of the manufacturer of the device. 
(2)  The type of device. 
(3)  The serial number of the device if it has a serial number. 
(d)  Every device shall be tagged for identification purposes by the city, in a conspicuous place on the device, which may be readily seen while the device is in the viewing position. 
(e)  Each tag will be issued for a particular device only. The tags shall not be transferred from machine to machine. 
(f)  If a tagged device is sold, the buyer of the device shall remove the tag if it has not been removed by the previous owner and shall have the device retagged pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.04.02)  
Sec. 10-329. - Viewing areas. 
(a)  Visible and unobscured. All viewing areas in a video center must be visible from a continuous main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(b)  Unlocked when occupied. All viewing areas shall remain unlocked at all times when occupied by a patron. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.04.03)  
Sec. 10-330. - Nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a video center so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.06.01)  
Sec. 10-331. - Disorder. 
It shall be unlawful for the licensee of a video center to allow any disorder to occur on the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.06.02)  
Sec. 10-332. - Overcrowding. 
It shall be unlawful for the licensee of a video center to allow the licensed premises to become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health and safety of the persons therein. 
(Code 1976, § 3-08.06.03)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46; animals in parks, § 74-110; animals on trailways, § 74-203. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt animal control ordinances, MCL 287.290, MSA 12.541; livestock running at large prohibited, MCL 433.11 et seq., MSA 18.789 et seq.; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq., MSA 28.244 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means dogs, cats, livestock, poultry or any vertebrate animal other than man. 
Dangerous dog means a dog that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or a person's dog, cat or livestock. However, when a dog attacks or bites a dog, cat or livestock, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous (i) if no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the dog, cat or livestock as a result of the attack or bite, (ii) if both animals are owned by the same person, (iii) if the attack occurs on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian, or (iv) for other good cause as determined by the court. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking, or inflicting injury on a dog or cat while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
Dog means any canine or canine crossbreed or hybrid. 
Law enforcement officer means the county sheriff and each of his deputies, county animal control personnel, and any person designated as an ordinance enforcement officer for purposes of enforcing this chapter. 
Livestock means horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros, goats, kids and swine and furbearing animals being raised in captivity. 
Owner, when applied to the proprietorship of an animal, means every person having a right of property in the animal and every person who keeps or harbors the animal or has it in his care or custody and every person who permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
Poultry means all domestic fowl, ornamental birds, and game birds possessed or being reared under authority of a breeder's license pursuant to part 427 of Public Act No. 57 of 1995 (MCL 324.42701 et seq.). 
Reasonable control means with a secure leash of suitable strength and length, in the hands of one able to restrain or move the animal if necessary, so as to enable the attendant to bring the animal to the attendant's side immediately on command; in addition, an enclosed vehicle or container or the owner's occupied property shall be deemed reasonable control. 
Vicious dog means a dog that has communicated by its actions or behavior an intention, habit, tendency or propensity to harm a person or animal. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.02; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-2. - Purpose. 
The keeping of animals and their conduct shall be regulated as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.01; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-3. - Impoundment. 
(a)  All animals taken into custody or otherwise coming within the control of a law enforcement officer because of a violation of this chapter shall be impounded with the county animal control authorities and held for such length of time as required by the county impounding authorities. 
(b)  Fees for impounding shall be as set by the county impounding authorities. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-06.05.01, 8-06.05.01(D); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-4. - Authority to destroy. 
(a)  Dogs. A law enforcement officer may kill any dog that he sees in the act of pursuing, worrying, or wounding any livestock or poultry or attacking persons, and there shall be no liability on such officer, in damages or otherwise, for such killing. 
(b)  Dangerous animals. Any law enforcement officer is authorized to destroy any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.05.04; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-5. - Cruelty. 
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way. Any person who inhumanely neglects, abuses, tortures, inflicts pain or suffering, beats, underfeeds, overloads, trains or uses for fighting or baiting, or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.02(A); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-6. - Unclean housing. 
No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome to an extent that it becomes a health problem or nuisance to abutting residences. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.02(B); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-7. - Noise. 
No person shall harbor or keep any animal that disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.02(C); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-8. - Diseases. 
(a)  No person shall allow any domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease to be exposed in any public place where the health of a person or animal may be affected. No such diseased animal shall be transferred or removed from the premises of the owner of the animal, except under the supervision of the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(b)  It is the duty of the mayor to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except when the state veterinarian is empowered to act. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.02(D); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-9. - Running at large. 
(a)  Dangerous animals. No person shall permit a dangerous animal of any kind to run at large within the city. 
(b)  Domestic animals. No person shall permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goat, or poultry to run at large in the city. Any domestic animal running at large in any public place in the city shall be impounded in accordance with county regulations. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-06.04.02(E)(a), (b), 8-06.05.01(C); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-10. - Picketing. 
It shall be unlawful to picket or tie any dangerous or domestic animal in any of the streets of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.02(E)(c); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-11. - Exhibitions or parades. 
Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a Special Events permit from the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.02(F); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-12. - Sanitary disposal of feces. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in control of an animal upon a public property or right-of-way to fail to pick up and remove from such public property or right-of-way such animal's feces, manure or solid waste. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.02(G); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Secs. 14-13—14-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq., MSA 12.511 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Nuisances. 
In addition to any penalty imposed on any owner or other person, any dog found in the city either without a license or running at large under conditions set forth in section 14-43 is declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded at the direction of a law enforcement officer. Any impounding shall be governed by the rules, regulations and fees established by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.05.01(A); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-42. - Disturbing the peace. 
No owner shall permit a dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by barking or making other loud or unusual noises. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.01(A); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-43. - Running at large. 
No person owning, possessing or harboring a dog shall permit the dog to run at large in the city. 
No dog shall be permitted at any time to be on a highway, in a public park, in a public building or in any other public place, except when held securely by a leash of suitable strength and length and under the reasonable control of the owner thereof or other responsible person or when confined in a shipping receptacle or closed automobile. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.01(B); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-44. - Destruction of property. 
No owner at any time shall allow any licensed or unlicensed dog to destroy property or to habitually trespass in a damaging way on property of persons other than the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.01(D); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 561, § 1, adopted Mar. 21, 2011, repealed § 14-44, incorporated this information into § 14-43 and renumbered §§ 14-45—14-48 as §§ 14-44—14-47. Former § 14-44 pertained to confinement in public. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 14-45. - Vicious dogs. 
No person shall permit any vicious dog or dog sick with or liable to communicate hydrophobia or other contagious or infectious disease to be in any public place or to be otherwise exposed to or a threat to any person or property. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.04.01(E); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
Note— See editor's note following § 14-44.  
Sec. 14-46. - Trespass liability. 
Any dog that enters any field or enclosure which is owned by or leased by a person producing livestock or poultry, unaccompanied by its owner or its owner's agent, shall constitute a trespass, and the dog's owner shall be liable in damages. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.05.02; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
Note— See editor's note following § 14-44.  
Sec. 14-47. - Biting. 
(a)  Prohibited. No owner at any time shall allow any licensed or unlicensed dog to attack, molest or bite a person or other animal. 
(b)  Quarantine. Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of the dog shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer, who shall order the dog held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded for a period of two weeks. 
(c)  Examination for rabies. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the two-week period. 
(d)  Release. If at the end of two weeks a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released from quarantine or from the pound, as the case may be. 
(e)  Death. If the dog dies in the meanwhile, it shall be sent to the state department of health for examination for rabies. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-06.04.01(F), 8-06.05.03; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
State Law reference— Persons bitten by dogs, MCL 287.351, MSA 12.544; rules for control of rabies and the disposition of nonhuman agents carrying disease, including rabid animals, MCL 333.5111, MSA 14.15(5111). 
Note— See editor's note following § 14-44.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 14-48. - Determination. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that a dog is a dangerous dog shall make a sworn complaint applying to the district court or magistrate for the issuance of a summons requiring the dog's owner to appear before the district court or magistrate at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If a law enforcement officer successfully makes an application for the issuance of a summons, he shall contact the county animal control officer and inform him of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to his belief that the dog is dangerous. The animal control officer shall confine the dog until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines the owner can confine the dog in a manner that protects the public safety, he may permit the owner to confine the dog until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the dog to produce the dog. If, after hearing the evidence, the court determines the dog is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the dog's owner to comply with the provisions of this section. The procedure for appeal and hearing shall be the same as provided by law for municipal civil infractions. The city shall be required to prove its case by preponderance of the evidence. 
(b)  No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of dog prohibited. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the dog's owner or custodian, (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the dog's owner or custodian, or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the dog, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog at other times. No police dog that was engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog. No dog that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog. 
(c)  If the owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-49. - Dangerous dog registration. 
(a)  The owner of any dog found to be a dangerous dog shall, within 30 calendar days of such determination, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the city clerk for a fee of $200.00, in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law or ordinance. All certificates obtained pursuant to this subsection must be renewed annually by March 1. The city clerk shall provide a copy of the dangerous dog registration certificate and verification of compliance to the county animal control office and State Veterinarian. 
(b)  All dangerous dog registration certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence (i) of the dog's current rabies vaccination, if applicable, (ii) that the dog has been neutered or spayed, and (iii) that the dog is and will be confined in a proper physical enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal unless they present satisfactory evidence that (i) their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; (ii) the dog has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation; (iii) the dog and its owner are enrolled in or have successfully completed the American Kennel Club's Canine Good Citizen Program, or a program deemed by the city clerk to be equivalent. (An owner whose dog has commenced a dog obedience program in a timely manner under this subsection may be issued a registration certificate which will be subject to successful completion of the program); and (iv) the owner has liability insurance coverage with limits of at least $250,000.00 that covers animal bites. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-50. - Confinement and restraint. 
(a)  While on the property of its owner, a dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure or pen of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure or pen shall have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides and shall be designed to provide the dog with shelter from the elements of nature. If the structure or pen does not also have a secure bottom or floor securely attached to the sides, then the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot. A hidden, in-ground electronic, fenceless or invisible fence pet containment system without a physical structure or pen as described in this subsection does not constitute a proper enclosure. 
(b)  While off its owner's property, a dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash no longer than four feet and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the dog or interfere with the dog's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-51. - Notification. 
After a dog has been determined to be a dangerous dog, the dog's owner shall immediately cause the county animal control authority to be notified if the animal (i) becomes loose or unconfined; or (ii) bites a person or attacks another animal; or (iii) is sold, given away, or dies. An owner of a dangerous dog who relocates to a new address shall, within ten calendar days of relocating, provide written notice to the city clerk for the old address from which the animal has moved and the new address to which the animal has been moved. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-52. - Violation. 
(a)  Any owner of a dog is guilty of a misdemeanor if the dog previously determined to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this division, attacks and injures or kills a cat or dog belonging to another person, or bites a person or attacks a person causing bodily injury. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any dog that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, or when the dog is a police dog engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the attack. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog who fails to comply with the requirements of this division, including but not limited to failure to confine the dog in a proper and maintained enclosure, failure to post or maintain clearly visible warning signs, failure to properly leash and muzzle the dog while off the owner's property, failure to successfully complete a dog obedience program, or failure to maintain required insurance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Secs. 14-53—14-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dog license, MCL 287.266 et seq., MSA 12.516 et seq.; authority of city to license dogs, MCL 287.290, MSA 12.541. 
 
Sec. 14-76. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor a dog six months of age or over in the city without first having obtained a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.03.01; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-77. - Application. 
(a)  Conditions. It shall be the duty of any person to apply for a dog license when the person: 
(1)  Owns or harbors a dog before March 1 and on or before any dog becomes six months of age; 
(2)  Forthwith becomes a resident of the city; or 
(3)  Becomes an owner of such dog. 
(b)  Information. The applicant for a dog license shall give his full name and address, if any, and the breed, sex, age and color of the dog. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.03.03; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-78. - Proof of rabies vaccination. 
An application for a dog license shall be accompanied by proof of vaccination of the dog by a valid certificate of vaccination for rabies signed by an accredited veterinarian, and containing the information listed in subsection 14-77(b) and the type and manufacturer of the vaccine used. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.03.04; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-79. - Fees. 
Dog license fees shall be established by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.03.05; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-80. - Issued elsewhere. 
(a)  County license. A county dog license issued either by the county or by another municipality shall be honored and accepted by and within the city. 
(b)  Other municipalities. Other licenses issued by other municipalities shall not be so honored or accepted, and the owner of any dog with a license so issued by another municipality shall apply for and obtain a license issued by this city within 30 days of coming into and residing within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.03.06; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-81. - Issuance. 
(a)  Generally. A license to own or harbor a dog shall be issued by the city treasurer upon application made therefor and upon compliance of the requirements for a license, together with payment of the license fee as promulgated by the county. 
(b)  Duration. The treasurer shall issue a license to own or harbor a dog for the term commencing at the date of such license and terminating on December 31 following. 
(c)  License tag. A dog license tag shall be issued in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Issuance. With each license so issued there shall be delivered to the applicant a tag of metal or other durable material, which shall have stamped or engraved thereon the year when issued, together with the words "License, Oakland County," and number of the license. 
(2)  Replacement. Upon satisfactory proof that the tag issued by the treasurer as provided for in this section has been lost, the treasurer is authorized to issue a duplicate tag without payment of a fee. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-06.03.02, 8-06.03.07; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-82. - Proof of licensing. 
(a)  Tag on dog. The dog license tag shall be affixed to a substantial collar furnished by the owner which, with the tag attached, shall at all times be kept on the dog for which the license is issued. 
(b)  Production on request. A person who owns or harbors a dog shall produce proof of a valid license upon request of a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.03.08; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-83. - Transferability. 
No license or license tag issued for one dog shall be transferred to another dog. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.03.09; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Sec. 14-84. - Impoundment of unlicensed dogs. 
Any dog found unlicensed after March 1 of each year by a law enforcement officer may be seized and impounded by such officer for a period of not less than 72 hours. 
(Code 1976, § 8-06.05.01(B); Ord. No. 561, § 1, 3-21-2011)  
Secs. 14-85—14-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 14-90. - Findings and purpose. 
Increasing complaints about and incidences of deer/vehicle accidents, deer/human interaction, deer-related diseases and damage to private property make it necessary and appropriate to manage the deer herd in the City of Rochester Hills. The city council finds that the intentional feeding of deer contributes to an unnaturally large deer population resulting in traffic hazards, loss of natural fear of humans, risk of disease, and private property damage. By prohibiting deer feeding, the city council intends to manage the deer herd and improve public safety and quality of life in the city by reducing the occurrence of deer/vehicle accidents, deer/human interaction, the likelihood of deer related disease, and damage to private property. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 9-22-08)  
Sec. 14-91. - Deer feeding prohibited. 
No person may place or permit placement on the ground or within five feet of the ground any fruit, berries, grain, vegetables, nuts, salt or other edible material or bait which may reasonably be expected to attract or feed deer unless such materials are covered or protected in a way to prevent deer from feeding on them. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 9-22-08)  
Sec. 14-92. - Exceptions. 
The foregoing prohibition of deer feeding does not apply to: 
(1)  Naturally growing materials, fruit trees, other trees and shrubs, and live crops, plants, flowers and vegetation; 
(2)  Bird feeders; or 
(3)  Veterinarians, animal control officers, federal and state game officials and persons authorized by the city or other public authority in the course of their duties to treat, manage, count, capture or remove deer. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 9-22-2008)  
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; fire prevention and protection, ch. 58; construction in parks, § 74-112; solid waste, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 102; vegetation, ch. 106; floods, ch. 114; historical preservation, ch. 118; land division, ch. 122; natural resources, ch. 126; planning, ch. 130; signs, ch. 134; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is that bond, permit, license and inspection fees for construction shall be established, sound isolation requirements shall be specified, and the design, construction, installation, alteration, operation and inspection of refrigeration systems shall be regulated. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.01)  
Sec. 18-2. - Enforcement. 
The director of building and the director's authorized representatives, which shall specifically include, but not by way of limitation, all inspectors and ordinance enforcement officers in the department of building, are authorized to enforce this article and are specifically authorized to issue and serve municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction notices for any violation of this article, pursuant to the statutes made and provided. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.04; Ord. No. 409, § 2(5-02.04), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 18-3. - License registration for builders and contractors generally. 
Fee. Builder's and contractor's license fees shall be paid as set forth in article V of chapter 54. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.02.03; Ord. No. 584 , § 1, 4-7-2014) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Sec. 18-4. - Residential contractors' license registration. 
All contractors shall register their license with the city before work is commenced. Registration shall be renewed each license year. This fee as provided in section 54-163 shall not be prorated. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.12)  
Sec. 18-5. - Suppression system contractors' license registration. 
Every suppression system contractor shall register his license with the city before work is commenced. Registration shall be valid until the expiration date on the license. The fee for this registration as provided in section 54-197 shall not be prorated. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.07; Ord. No. 584 , § 2, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 18-6. - Plumbing contractors' license registration. 
Every plumbing contractor shall register his license with the city before work is commenced. Registration shall be valid until the expiration date on the license. The fee in section 54-234 shall not be prorated. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.09; Ord. No. 584 , § 2, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 18-7. - Mechanical contractors' license registration. 
Every mechanical contractor shall register his license with the city before work is commenced. Registration shall be valid until the expiration date on the license. The fee in section 54-319 shall not be prorated. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.18; Ord. No. 584 , § 2, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 18-8. - Surety bonds. 
Obscuring walls construction. When obscuring walls are required, they shall be constructed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. If, because of weather conditions or other undue circumstances, the wall cannot be erected before the time of occupancy, a cash or surety bond shall be provided in the amount of $15.00 per lineal foot until construction of the wall. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.02.01; Ord. No. 584 , § 2, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 18-9. - Weekday construction hours. 
Construction or associated construction activity under a validly issued building permit shall only be permitted during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, exclusive of holidays. Anyone who violates this restriction shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided in section 66-37. In addition, the building permit holder shall require compliance with and be deemed responsible for any violation of this section by any contractor, subcontractor or worker. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.02.04; Ord. No. 409, § 2(5-02.02.04), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 18-10. - Sunday and holiday construction hours. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "holiday" shall mean the day on which New Year's Day, Easter, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas is officially celebrated. 
(b)  Permission required. Construction on Sunday or a holiday shall only be permitted by special written permission granted by the mayor where, in his discretion, hardship is shown. Anyone who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided in section 66-37. In addition, the building permit holder shall require compliance with and be deemed responsible for any violation of this section by any contractor, subcontractor or worker. 
(c)  Display of permission. The permission required in subsection (b) of this section, which shall designate the hours during which construction is allowed, shall be obtained in advance, and any such construction or construction activity on Sunday or a holiday shall be conducted only if the written permission granted by the mayor is on site and available for inspection by any building or engineering department representative or county sheriff's deputies. 
(d)  Exceptions. The restriction on Sunday and holiday construction and construction activity shall not apply when: 
(1)  The construction or construction activity is on or in connection with an existing single-family residential home and no complaints are received from neighbors. If a complaint is received, notice shall be given to the building permit holder that no construction or construction activity shall henceforth occur on Sunday or holidays, unless permission is granted as provided in this section. 
(2)  There are no occupied homes located within 1,000 feet of the construction or construction activity. 
(e)  Notice. Building permits shall contain notice of the restriction of Sunday and holiday construction and construction activity in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Posting of notice. On all work sites, except for those specified as exceptions in subsection (d) of this section, the building permit holder shall conspicuously post the notice of construction hour restrictions at each vehicular entrance during the period of construction. 
(2)  Form of notice. The notice shall be legibly and conspicuously printed on contrasting background, with letters at least two inches in height, so as to be readily visible for 50 feet. The notice shall state as follows: 
NOTICE 
WORK PERMITTED ONLY DURING THE HOURS OF 7 A.M. TO 8 P.M., MONDAY THROUGH SATURDAY. SUNDAY & HOLIDAY WORK WITHOUT SPECIAL WRITTEN PERMISSION FROM THE MAYOR IS PROHIBITED BY CITY ORDINANCE. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.02.05; Ord. No. 409, § 2(5-02.02.05), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 18-11. - Building grades. 
The building official may establish the permissible building grade within reasonable limits for the particular site as a condition to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.02.06)  
Sec. 18-12. - Final grading approval. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the final grading has been approved by the building official. When conditions will not permit the required grading to be done, the building inspector may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.02.07)  
Secs. 18-13—18-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-40. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is that the construction, alteration, relocation, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings and structures shall be governed and regulated; also, the installation, replacement, alteration, relocating and use of plumbing systems or plumbing materials shall be governed and regulated. In addition, the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems shall be regulated to safeguard life and property. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-01.01, 5-05.01)  
Sec. 18-41. - Adopted. 
(a)  The State Construction Code, which is in effect in the city, shall be as adopted in this section and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Michigan Building Code. The Michigan Building Code, promulgated by the state construction code commission and filed by the commission originally on May 6, 1974, pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), and as amended and updated by the commission and filed according to such Act, is adopted and in effect in the city. 
(2)  Michigan Plumbing Code. The Michigan Plumbing Code, promulgated by the state construction code commission and filed by the commission originally on November 19, 1974, pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), and as amended and updated by the commission and filed according to such Act, is adopted and in effect in the city. 
(3)  Michigan Mechanical Code. The Michigan Mechanical Code, promulgated by the construction code commission and filed by the commission on October 5, 1979, pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), is adopted by the city for purposes of governing and regulating the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems in the city. 
(4)  Construction provisions of Act. Sections 10, 11, 12 and 13 of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1510 et seq.), which make provisions for building permits, application forms, fees, contents, filing, additional permits, ordinary repairs, examination and approval of applications, issuance, changes in plans, commencement of construction, compliance with applications, suspensions, revocations, cancellations, inspection of construction, consent, time, inspectors' notices of violations, stop orders, injunctions, certificates, and notices of final inspection, are adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this subsection and are declared applicable to the city and enforceable under this article. 
(b)  Availability. Complete printed copies of the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Code and the construction provisions, as amended and updated, shall be available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-01.02, 5-05.02, 5-05.04; Ord. No. 584 , § 3, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 18-42. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Responsibility assumed. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), as provided in section 18-41, throughout its corporate limits. 
(b)  Enforcing agency. Pursuant to the provisions of section 9 of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1509), the department of building is designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(c)  Enforcement. The director of building and his authorized representatives, which specifically include, but not by way of limitation, the inspectors in the department of building, are authorized to enforce this article and are authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices for violations of this article. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-01.03, 5-05.03; Ord. No. 409, §§ 1(5-01.03), 5, 3-5-1997) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 18-43. - Appeal from building department decisions. 
When the building department refuses to grant an application for a building permit or when it makes any other decision pursuant or related to the code, an interested person or his authorized representative may appeal in writing to the construction board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.05)  
Sec. 18-44. - Fees. 
The fees for services and acts performed by the building department and the board of appeals pursuant to this article shall be paid as set forth in article V of chapter 54. 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.08)  
Sec. 18-45. - Prohibited acts. 
A person, including an officer, director or employee of a corporation, who commits any of the following acts shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided in section 66-37: 
(1)  Code violations. Knowingly violates a provision of this article or the code adopted by this article. A person is responsible for a separate offense for each knowing violation of any provision of this article and the code. 
(2)  Building permit condition violation. Knowingly constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a building permit. A person is responsible for a separate offense for each knowing violation of a condition of a building permit. 
(3)  Failure to comply as ordered. Knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by the director of building or the construction board of appeals, pursuant to this article and the code, as follows: 
a.  Stop construction order. A person is responsible for a separate offense for each day that the person fails to comply with a stop construction order validly issued by the building department. 
b.  Other valid orders. A person is responsible for a separate offense for each week that the person fails to comply with any other order validly issued by the building department. 
(4)  False information. Knowingly makes a false or misleading written statement or knowingly omits required information or a statement in an inspection report, application, petition, request for approval or appeal to the building department or the construction board of appeals. A person is responsible for a separate offense for each false or misleading written statement or omission of required information or statement knowingly made in any application, petition, request for approval or appeal to the building department or the construction board of appeals. 
(5)  Inspection entry refusal. Knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to this article and the code. 
(6)  Inspection interference. Unreasonably interferes with an inspection. 
(7)  Invalid permits or licenses. Knowingly issues, fails to issue, causes to be issued or assists in the issuance of any certificate, permit or license in violation of this article, the code or other applicable laws. 
(8)  Conceals violation. Having a duty to report violations of this article or the rules promulgated under this article or under other applicable laws, knowingly conceals such a violation. 
(9)  Construction debris. Allows debris, construction material or any other scrap, refuse, waste, junk or similar material to accumulate during work or construction in such a manner that the debris, etc., may blow, wash or travel onto a street, highway, pathway, alley or adjoining property; may become unsightly; or may adversely affect the health, safety, welfare or property of other city residents in accordance with the following: 
a.  Responsibility. The builder or contractor, as well as the landowner, shall be responsible for properly disposing of debris, etc., and preventing the accumulation of debris, etc., prohibited by this subsection. 
b.  Stop work order. The mayor, upon determining there has been a violation of this subsection, may order the stoppage of work, withholding of inspections and/or staying or revocation of the building permit until the violation ceases. 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.04; Ord. No. 409, § 1(5-01.04), 3-5-1997) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate a violation of the state construction code a municipal civil infraction, MCL 125.1523(3), MSA 5.2949(23), (3).  
Secs. 18-46—18-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Construction board of appeals, MCL 125.1514 et seq., MSA 5.2949(14) et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Created. 
A construction board of appeals is created pursuant to section 14 of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1514, MSA 5.2949(14)). 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.06.01)  
Sec. 18-72. - Composition; qualifications; terms. 
(a)  Appointment. The construction board of appeals shall consist of five members who shall be nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Qualifications. A member of the construction board of appeals shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of the members of the board of appeals. 
(c)  Tenure. The appointments shall be for three years each. 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.06.02)  
Sec. 18-73. - Procedure for hearing appeals. 
(a)  Generally. The construction board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render and file its decision with a statement of reasons therefor with the building department from whom the appeal was taken and not later than 30 days after submission of the appeal. 
(b)  Failure to act. Failure by the board of appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision within the time limit is deemed a denial of the appeal for the purpose of authorizing the institution of an appeal to the state construction code commission. 
(c)  Notice to appealing party. A copy of the decision and statement of reasons therefor shall be delivered or mailed before such filing to the party taking the appeal. 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.06.03(A))  
Sec. 18-74. - Record of decisions. 
A record of decisions made by the construction board of appeals, which shall be properly indexed, shall be kept by the building department and shall be open to public inspection during business hours. 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.06.03(B)) 
State Law reference— Appeal to board, procedure, MCL 125.1514, MSA 5.2949(14).  
Sec. 18-75. - Variances. 
(a)  Authority. After a public hearing, the construction board of appeals may grant a specific variance to a substantive requirement of the code adopted by this article if the literal application of the substantive requirement would result in an exceptional, practical difficulty to the applicant, and if both of the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The performance of the particular item or part of the building or structure with respect to which the variance is granted shall be adequate for its intended use and shall not substantially deviate from performance required by the code of that particular item or part for the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
(2)  The specific condition justifying the variance shall be neither so general nor recurrent in nature as to make an amendment of the code with respect to the condition reasonably practical or desirable. 
(b)  Conditions. The board of appeals may attach in writing any condition in connection with the granting of a variance that, in its judgment, is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Minimum variance. In no case shall more than the minimum variance from the code be granted than is necessary to alleviate the exceptional, practical difficulty. 
(2)  Invalidation. The breach of a condition shall automatically invalidate the variance and any permit, license and certificate granted on the basis of it. 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.06.03(C)) 
State Law reference— Specific variance, hearing, grounds and requirements, MCL 125.1515, MSA 5.2949(15).  
Sec. 18-76. - Appeal from board. 
An appeal may be taken from the construction board of appeals as is authorized by section 16 of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1516, MSA 5.2949(16)). 
(Code 1976, § 5-01.07)  
Secs. 18-77—18-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL WORK[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate electrical work, MCL 338.886, MSA 18.204(6). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 18-106—18-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MICHIGAN ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 18-136. - Adoption. 
The installation, replacement, alteration, relocation and use of electrical systems or material shall be governed by the Michigan Electrical Code promulgated in the Michigan Administrative Code R 408.30801—R 408.30873, which is hereby adopted by reference. Complete printed copies of the code shall be available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 460, § 1, 2-23-2000)  
Sec. 18-137. - Penalty. 
All violations of this article shall be municipal civil infractions and upon a determination of responsibility therefor shall be punishable by a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Ord. No. 460, § 4, 2-23-2000)  
Secs. 18-138—18-395. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Moving buildings or obstructions, MCL 247.188, MSA 9.268. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-396. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind, but does not include tents, awnings or vehicles or mobile homes and factory-constructed housing constructed according to federal and state codes and for transport to a permanent location. 
Building department means the city department of building and its director, inspectors and other employees. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-397. - Purpose. 
Moving of buildings within the city shall be regulated as provided in this article in order to minimize and protect against damage resulting from moving operations, to provide for orderly movement, to lessen the adverse effects of moving operations, to ensure the removal site's restoration, to establish prompt relocation, to ensure compliance with all city ordinances and codes and to promote conformity with other buildings in the area. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.01)  
Sec. 18-398. - Municipal civil infraction. 
The violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction, and the director of building and the director's authorized representatives, including, but not by way of limitation, all inspectors and ordinance enforcement officers in the department of building, are authorized to enforce this article and to issue and serve municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 3(5-03.08), 3-5-1997)  
Secs. 18-399—18-425. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 18-426. - Required. 
No person shall move any building having a floor area greater than 50 square feet or a height greater than 15 feet into, out of, through, or within the city without first obtaining a moving permit from the building department for each building to be moved. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.03.01)  
Sec. 18-427. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. For each building to be moved, an applicant shall submit a separate written application to the building department before a moving permit may be issued. 
(b)  Content. The application shall provide the building owner's name, the description of the building to be moved, its dimensions, the purpose for the move, the locations from which and to which the building is to be moved, the proposed route and such other information the building department deems necessary. 
(c)  Photographs and construction plans. For buildings to be located in the city, the application must include photographs showing each of the building's four side elevations and must also be accompanied by a full set of construction plans for the building as it is proposed to be completed after moving. 
(d)  Submission deadline. Applications must be submitted at least seven business days before the moving day or earlier, if required by the building department in order to make necessary arrangements. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.03.02)  
Sec. 18-428. - Specific plans. 
The plans accompanying the application for a moving permit shall specifically include provisions for the following: 
(1)  The construction of a permanent foundation conforming to current building code requirements; and 
(2)  Additional site improvements as are necessary in order to comply with all applicable code requirements and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.03.03)  
Sec. 18-429. - Utility clearances and other permits. 
The applicant for a moving permit shall also provide to the building department, before the moving day, the following: 
(1)  Written clearances from the electrical, telephone, gas, cable and water utilities stating that all connections have been properly shut off and, where necessary, all obstructions along the proposed moving route will be cleared without delaying the moving operation; and 
(2)  A copy of the moving permit issued by the county or state, where such a permit is required by the county or state. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.03.04)  
Sec. 18-430. - Fee. 
The fee for a moving permit shall accompany the application for a permit and shall be in the amount as provided in section 54-346. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.03.05)  
Sec. 18-431. - Building permit required. 
For a building that is to be located on a permanent foundation within the city, an application shall be filed, the applicable fee shall be paid and a building permit for the placement and completion of the building shall be obtained at the time of obtaining a moving permit. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.03.06)  
Sec. 18-432. - Conditions for approval. 
The building department shall approve a moving permit only if all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Size. The building's size is such that it can be moved without endangering persons or property. 
(2)  Structurally safe. The building is structurally safe and fit for moving. 
(3)  Compliance with city codes. If the building is to be located in the city, the building will comply or be made to comply with all applicable city codes and ordinances. 
(4)  Other permits. The permit applicant has obtained all building, electrical, heating, plumbing and other permits required in order to comply with all applicable city codes and ordinances. 
(5)  Compatibility with buildings in area. If the building is to be located in the city and used for residential purposes, the building shall generally conform to and be compatible with the general characteristics of the buildings in the area to which the building will be moved. If the permit is denied pursuant to this subsection, the procedure shall be as follows: 
a.  Public hearing to resolve denial. A denial based on failure to satisfy this condition alone may be appealed to the city council who shall hold a public hearing and whose decision shall be final. 
b.  Notice mailed to adjacent owners and tenants. A written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be mailed to the owners of all lots or parcels of land lying within 300 feet of the location to which the building is to be moved, and to the occupants of single-family and two-family dwellings within 300 feet. 
c.  Notice sent to addresses on roll. The notice shall be delivered personally or by regular mail addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the addresses given in the last assessment roll. If the name of a tenant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. 
d.  Deadline. Such notice shall be served or mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.03.07)  
Sec. 18-433. - Cash deposits. 
(a)  Payment for damages and inspections. The applicant for a moving permit shall, at the time of the permit's issuance and as a condition thereof, make a cash deposit of $500.00 to guarantee payment for the following: 
(1)  Any damage to public property caused by the moving operations, including any damage to street surfaces, land, trees, bikepaths, streetlights, public buildings or any other damage to public property; and 
(2)  All inspection fees and expenses incurred by the city as a result of the moving operations in accordance with the following: 
a.  The city shall retain the cash deposit for 30 days after the moving operations are completed, during which time it shall be the building department's duty to estimate the amount of damage, if any, to public property resulting from the moving operations and to ascertain whether all materials and debris have been removed from the site from which the building was moved when the removal site is located within the city limits. The building department shall prepare a written report in regard thereto and place the report on file. 
b.  The cash deposit, less inspection fees, less the amount of damage, if any, to public property, and less the city's expense, if any, of removing material and debris shall be returned to the applicant as soon as practicable. 
c.  If damages or removing material and debris expenses exceed the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall pay the city the difference, within ten days after receiving a statement thereof from the building department. 
(b)  Payment to guarantee completion. The applicant for a moving permit shall also make a cash deposit of $2,000.00 to guarantee that the building will be completed according to the plans provided to and approved by the building department, will fully comply with all applicable code and ordinance requirements, and will be fit for occupancy within six months from the date when the moving permit is approved. 
(1)  Cash bonds exempted. Upon filing this cash deposit, the applicant shall not be required to file the cash bonds required in connection with the building permit for the building covered by a moving permit as contained in division 1 of article V of chapter 54. 
(2)  Return of deposit. The city shall return the deposit if, within six months, the building is completed according to the plans and the city has issued a final certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.04)  
Secs. 18-434—18-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 18-461. - Inspection of moving operations. 
(a)  Frequency of inspection. During a building moving operation, the building department shall, at least once each day for the length of time the building department deems advisable, inspect the moving operation and take any steps necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or any undue interference with public travel. 
(b)  Payment of costs. The city shall be paid the cost for the use of all city equipment required to be used or present during the moving operation and, in addition, an amount as set forth in section 54-347 per person per hour or fraction thereof for the services of building department personnel and other city representatives, if any, present for inspecting or guiding the moving process. Building department personnel and other city representatives, if any, shall judge the amount of time necessary for proper inspection or guidance during the moving operation. 
(c)  Notice of move. Written notice shall be provided to the building department at least seven days prior to the moving date, and no building shall be moved at a time earlier than that agreed upon by the applicant and the building department. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.05)  
Sec. 18-462. - Moving operation. 
(a)  Approved route. The person issued a moving permit shall move the building through the city only over the route approved by the building department, after consultation with other city departments. 
(b)  Minimal obstructions. The moving operation shall proceed as expeditiously as possible and in a manner to minimize obstruction to traffic. 
(c)  Building left idle on street. The building shall not be left idle on any street at any time except for an unavoidable occurrence making this necessary in the opinion of the building department. 
(d)  Barriers and lights at nighttime. The permittee shall erect a safe barrier around any part of a street occupied by the building during the nighttime and shall maintain sufficient warning lights or flares thereon during the night hours for the protection of the public. 
(e)  Suitable barriers. Suitable barriers are those that conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted pursuant to section 608 of Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.608, MSA 9.2308). 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.06)  
Sec. 18-463. - Restoration of removal site. 
(a)  Plugging of connections. The applicant for a moving permit shall obtain building department and department of public services approval of the plugging of sewer connections before covering the work at any building removal site located in the city. 
(b)  Filling excavations, capping well and debris removal. The applicant shall promptly fill all excavations resulting from the moving of the building, pump and fill any septic tank, cap any well in an approved manner, and remove all materials and debris from the removal site. 
(c)  Burning prohibited. The burning of materials and debris on the premises is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.07)  
Sec. 18-464. - Final certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Occupancy after completion and issuance. Any building moved for the purpose of being occupied as a residence in the city shall not be occupied during the moving operation nor shall it be occupied until the building has been completed according to plans approved by the building department and a final certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(b)  Final inspection. Before a final certificate of occupancy shall be issued, the building department shall make a final inspection for the purpose of ascertaining whether the building is complete according to the plans on file with the city, whether the building is in full compliance with this Code and city ordinance requirements and whether the building is fit for human occupancy. 
(c)  Failure to obtain. If a final certificate of occupancy is not obtained within six months after the issuance of the moving permit, the cash deposit guaranteeing completion of the building required by subsection 18-433(b) may be declared forfeited to the city, and the city may initiate proceedings pursuant to article V of this chapter to have the building demolished. Any cost in connection with removal of the building and cleanup of the site may be charged against the cash deposit filed pursuant to subsection 18-433(b). 
(Code 1976, § 5-03.08)  
Secs. 18-465—18-489. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.539 et seq., MSA 5.2891(19) et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-490. - Keeping or maintaining prohibited. 
The keeping or maintaining of any building or structure or part thereof which is a dangerous building shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.01)  
Sec. 18-491. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. The term "building" shall specifically include a dwelling as defined and included within the application of Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq., MSA 5.2771 et seq.). 
Dangerous building means a building or structure that has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the city fire code. 
(2)  A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the structure or building is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirements of this article or the building code for a new building or structure, purpose or location. 
(3)  A part of the building or structure is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have materially less resistance to winds than is required for new construction by this chapter or the building code. 
(5)  The building or structure or a part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall or give way. 
(6)  The building or structure or a part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or the building or structure becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act. 
(8)  A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the health officer determines is likely to cause sickness or disease or is likely to injure the health, safety or general welfare of those people living in the dwelling. 
(9)  A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at the door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(10)  A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2501 et seq., MSA 18.425(2501) et seq.). 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "building or structure" includes but is not limited to a commercial building or structure. This subsection does not apply to either of the following: 
a.  A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of the following: 
1.  Notifies the local law enforcement agency that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given to the local law enforcement agency by the owner or agent not more that 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied. 
2.  Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with this chapter or the city building code. 
b.  A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies the local law enforcement agency that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given notice prescribed by this subsection shall notify the law enforcement agency not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subsection, the term "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling such as a vacation home, hunting cabin, or summer home that is occupied by the owner or a member of the owner's family during part of a year. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected and designed for a permanent location on the ground. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Dangerous building defined, MCL 125.539, MSA 5.2891(19).  
Sec. 18-492. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted pursuant to and within the purview of Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq., MSA 5.2771 et seq.) to provide for the regulation and demolition of dwellings and to provide a procedure for the regulation and demolition of dwellings within the provisions of Public Act No. 167. This article shall also apply to all other buildings within the city that are dangerous buildings as defined by section 18-491. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.05)  
Sec. 18-493. - Hearing officer. 
For the purposes of this article, a hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at the mayor's pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters, including but not limited to an engineer, an architect, a building contractor, a building inspector or a member of a community housing organization. An employee of the building department shall not be appointed as hearing officer. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.02(A)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.540(4), MSA 5.2891(20), (4).  
Sec. 18-494. - Municipal civil infraction. 
It shall be a municipal civil infraction for any owner, agent, or lessee thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling, building, or structure or part thereof that is a dangerous building as defined in section 18-491. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.03; Ord. No. 409, § 6, 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 18-495. - Notice. 
(a)  Authority. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the building department shall issue a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building. 
(b)  Persons served. The notice shall be served on the owner of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. 
(c)  Contents. The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building. The person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(d)  Manner of service. The notice shall be in writing and shall be served at least ten days before the date of the hearing in the notice as follows: 
(1)  Upon the person to whom the notice is directed personally; or 
(2)  By certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records; 
(3)  If a notice is served on a person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure; 
(4)  Additional distribution shall be as follows: 
a.  The building department shall file a copy of the notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building with the hearing officer. 
b.  In addition, the building department may file a notice with the county register of deeds to advise of the proceedings pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.01) 
State Law reference— Notice requirements, MCL 125.540, MSA 5.2891(20).  
Sec. 18-496. - Hearing before officer. 
(a)  Hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at the mayor's pleasure. 
(b)  Testimony. The hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. 
(c)  Determination. The hearing officer shall render his decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(d)  Historic districts. The hearing officer's decision and order concerning demolition of a structure located within a historic district established pursuant to chapter 118 shall be subject to the procedural requirements of section 118-169 of this Code. 
(e)  Compliance deadline. If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply therewith. 
(f)  Noncompliance with order. 
(1)  If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall: 
a.  File a report of his findings and a copy of his order with the city council; and 
b.  Request that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure. 
(2)  A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 18-495(d)(1)—(3). 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.02; Ord. No. 441, § 1(5-07.04.02), 7-21-1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541(1)—(3), MSA 5.2891(21), (1)—(3).  
Sec. 18-497. - City council review. 
(a)  Notice of review hearing. The city council shall fix a date, not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in section 18-496, for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 18-495 of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  Show cause. At the hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. 
(c)  Final determination. The city council shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541(4), MSA 5.2891(21), (4).  
Sec. 18-498. - Judicial review. 
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council under section 18-497 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.542, MSA 5.2891(22).  
Sec. 18-499. - Compliance deadline. 
If the city council approves or modifies the order issued under this article, the city council shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this article. For an order of demolition, if the city council determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, or other natural disaster and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state-equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under section 18-497. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541(4), MSA 5.2891(21), (4).  
Sec. 18-500. - Corrective action by city. 
After the order issued pursuant to this article, the city may, through its agents, employees or contractors, demolish or make the building or structure safe. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.06)  
Sec. 18-501. - Compliance cost reimbursement. 
The cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure incurred by the city, to bring the property into conformance with this article, plus an administrative fee of $300.00, shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541(5), MSA 5.2891(21), (5).  
Sec. 18-502. - Notification of compliance costs; failure to reimburse; lien. 
Under this article, the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this section does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541(6), MSA 5.2891(21), (6).  
Sec. 18-503. - Action against owner; lien on property. 
In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to this section. The lien provided for in this section shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
(Code 1976, § 5-07.04.07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 125.541(7), MSA 5.2891(21), (7).  
Secs. 18-504—18-530. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 551, § 1, adopted May 3, 2010, repealed Ch. 18, Art. VI, §§ 18-531—18-536 in its entirety. Former Art. VI pertained to fences. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
Secs. 18-531—18-564. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STREET ADDRESSES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-565. - Purpose. 
There is hereby established a uniform system for numbering principal buildings and structures fronting on all public and private streets in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.01)  
Sec. 18-566. - Record. 
For the purpose of facilitating correct street addresses, a chart, book or other record of all public and private streets within the city, showing the assigned street address number for all buildings and structures fronting upon all public or private streets, shall be kept on file in the building department. This record shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.07)  
Sec. 18-567. - Noncompliance. 
(a)  Notification. If an owner, lessee or occupant of any building or structure fails, refuses or neglects to comply with any section of this article, the building department and/or other department or enforcement officer designated by the city council to enforce this article shall serve written notification on such person, either personally or by mail, advising such person of the applicable section of this article, the manner of noncompliance, the time to remedy the noncompliance, and the penalty for violating this article. 
(b)  Failure to comply. The failure to remedy the noncompliance within ten days following service of such written notice shall constitute a violation of this article, which shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction by a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.08; Ord. No. 414, § 2(4-11.08), 4-23-1997)  
Secs. 18-568—18-595. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ASSIGNMENT 
 
Sec. 18-596. - Base lines. 
(a)  Primary streets. The base lines for assignment of numbers for primary streets shall be as follows: 
(1)  Streets running north-south. Walton Boulevard shall constitute the base line for numbering buildings or structures along streets running generally in a north or south direction. 
(2)  Streets running east-west. Rochester Road shall constitute the base line for numbering buildings or structures along streets running generally in an east or west direction. 
(b)  Others previously established. In areas where other base lines were used prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, street address numbers shall continue to be assigned according to those base lines. 
(c)  Streets crossing base lines. Prefixes for streets crossing the base lines shall be as follows: 
(1)  Running north-south. With respect to streets running generally north-south and crossing Walton Boulevard, that portion of the street lying north of Walton Boulevard shall bear the prefix "North" (N), while that portion lying south shall bear the prefix "South" (S). 
(2)  Running east-west. With respect to streets running generally east-west and crossing Rochester Road, that portion of the street lying east of Rochester Road shall bear the prefix "East" (E), while that portion lying west shall bear the prefix "West" (W). 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.03)  
Sec. 18-597. - Responsibility for making number assignments. 
(a)  Generally. The building department shall, at the time of issuing a building permit, assign in writing a street number to each new principal building or structure requiring a means of separate identification. 
(b)  Conformance to numbering system. Such address shall to the extent possible conform to the numbering system set forth in this article. 
(c)  Nonconformance due to preexistence. Where the numbering of buildings preexisting on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives makes conformance to the numbering system specified in this article impossible or impractical, the building department shall have discretion to assign street address numbers to correspond with the existing numbering. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.01; Ord. No. 414, § 1(4-11.04.01), 4-23-1997)  
Sec. 18-598. - Applicability to preexisting buildings or structures. 
New street address numbers shall be assigned for preexisting buildings and structures only as follows: 
(1)  No previous number. No such designating number has been previously assigned; 
(2)  Previous number nonconforming. A previously assigned number neither conforms to the numbering system created by this article nor to an already existing numbering system on the block or street and the owner consents to renumbering; or 
(3)  Owner's request. The owner of the premises, upon paying the fee prescribed in section 54-376, requests a new street address and the building department determines that the new street address will conform to the numbering system set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.02; Ord. No. 414, § 1(4-11.04.02), 4-23-1997)  
Sec. 18-599. - Extension from base streets. 
(a)  North-south streets. To the extent possible, street address numbers for buildings and structures located on north-south streets shall be assigned on the basis of 1,000 numbers per mile, extending north and south from Walton Boulevard, except for that portion of the city located adjacent to the City of Rochester, and buildings and structures located on Dequindre Road and some north-south streets in sections 1, 2 and 3, where numbering shall correspond as closely as possible to street addresses existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(b)  East-west streets. To the extent possible, street address numbers for buildings and structures located on east-west streets shall be assigned on the basis of 1,000 numbers per mile, extending east and west from Rochester Road, except for that portion of the city located adjacent to the City of Rochester where numbering shall correspond as closely as possible to addresses existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.03)  
Sec. 18-600. - Numbering sequence. 
Beginning with zero at the applicable base line, street address numbers shall be assigned, to the extent possible, practical and consistent with existing numbering, at the sequence of one whole number for every 5½ lineal feet of street frontage. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.04)  
Sec. 18-601. - Multiple-family residential buildings. 
(a)  Common element. A multiple-family residential building shall be designated with one street address number if all of the dwelling units are accessed through a common element. 
(b)  Separate entrances. A multiple-family residential building where any dwelling unit has a separate entrance shall be assigned a street address number for each separate entrance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.05)  
Sec. 18-602. - Nonresidential multitenant buildings. 
(a)  Common element. A multitenant commercial, office or industrial building shall be designated with one street address number if all of the tenant spaces are accessed through a common element. 
(b)  Separate entrances. A multitenant commercial, office or industrial building where any tenant space has a separate entrance shall be assigned a street address number for each separate entrance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.06)  
Sec. 18-603. - Interior units of multiple-family/tenant buildings. 
Within buildings having one street address number, further numbering or designation of interior units or tenant spaces may be required consistent with the purposes of this article, in the discretion of the building department. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.07)  
Sec. 18-604. - Streets not intersecting base street. 
All buildings or structures fronting on streets not extending through to the base line established in this article shall be assigned the same relative number as if the street did, in fact, extend to the applicable base line. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.04.08)  
Secs. 18-605—18-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISPLAY 
 
Sec. 18-631. - Duty to affix number. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee and occupant of every principal building or structure situated on a parcel of property within the city fronting on a public or private street, not including garages, barns and other accessory buildings or structures which are part of the same property with a numbered house or building, to affix on every such building or structure its proper street address number in the time and manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.02)  
Sec. 18-632. - Time to display newly assigned numbers. 
(a)  New construction. The assigned street address number shall be properly displayed on any new principal building or structure prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Preexisting buildings and structures. Where a new street address number has been assigned to a preexisting building or structure, the new number shall be properly displayed within 30 days following written notification of the new number assignment from the building department. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.05)  
Sec. 18-633. - Manner of display. 
Every building or structure, both new and preexisting, shall have displayed the proper street address number, whether newly assigned or previously issued, in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Angling of digits. Street address number shall be expressed by digits, placed on a horizontal line or a diagonal line no more than 45 degrees from horizontal so as to read properly from left to right. For those owners, lessees or occupants who prefer to display their street address numbers vertically or diagonally at an angle greater than 45 degrees, they may do so provided there is additional placement as prescribed in subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)  Size of digits. The digits used for street address numbers shall be at least three inches in height and made of durable and clearly visible material, which shall contrast with the background. 
(3)  Conspicuousness. Digits shall be conspicuously placed so that the street address number is plainly visible from the street from which the address is derived. Generally, digits shall be placed immediately above, on or adjacent to the main entrance of each building. 
(4)  Additional placement. Whenever any one-family or two-family dwelling is situated more than 75 feet from the traveled portion of the street, or as required in subsection (1) of this section, in addition to placement of the street number on the building as required in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the number shall also be displayed on a separate sign, post or mailbox. The additional display shall have an area of not more than two square feet and shall be placed by the driveway or main vehicular entrance to the property at least one foot above the ground so as to be plainly visible from the street and shall otherwise comply with all requirements of this Code. 
(5)  Multiple-family residential buildings. 
a.  Common element. A multiple-family residential building where all units must be accessed through a common element shall display the street address number at the entrance facing the street from which the address is derived, and every entrance shall have a directory indicating interior unit designations. 
b.  Separate entrances. A multiple-family residential building with separate entrances shall display each assigned street address number in conformance with subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(6)  Nonresidential multitenant buildings. 
a.  Numbers. Multitenant commercial, office or industrial buildings shall display the assigned street address number at the entrance facing the street from which the address is derived, and in addition each building that has a front and rear entrance shall display the correct street address number immediately above, on or adjacent to both the front and rear entrances. The display of street address numbers shall conform with subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
b.  Name. In addition to the street address number, each such building shall be clearly identified in the front, and also in the rear if there is parking in or access from the rear, by displaying the name of the owner, lessee, occupant or business or the name of the building. Unless otherwise visibly displayed, the name shall be clearly printed on the main door with letters no less than one inch or not greater than three inches in height, with a total area of not more than two square feet, and shall otherwise comply with all requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-11.06)  
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; license registration for builders and contractors generally, § 18-3; licensing and registration of electrical contractors, § 18-196 et seq.; cable communications, ch. 26; community development, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 42; fees, ch. 54; franchises, ch. 62; peddling, soliciting or advertising in parks, § 74-109; peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants, ch. 78; commercial and residential refuse control, § 86-26 et seq.; motor carrier safety, § 98-261 et seq.; utilities, ch. 102; B-1 local business districts, § 138-476 et seq.; B-2 general business districts, § 138-521 et seq.; B-3 shopping center business districts, § 138-566 et seq.; B-4 freeway service business districts, § 138-611 et seq.; B-5 automotive service business districts, § 138-656 et seq.; CI commercial improvement districts, § 138-701 et seq.; O-1 office business districts, § 138-751 et seq.; I-1 light industrial districts, § 138-796 et seq.; I-2 heavy industrial districts, § 138-841 et seq.; R-O research-office districts, § 138-886 et seq.; SP special purpose districts, § 138-931 et seq.; ORT office, research, technology districts, § 138-976 et seq.; supplementary district regulations, § 138-1066 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MASSAGE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Massage means a method of treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
Massage parlor means any Turkish bath parlor, steam bath, sauna bath, magnetic healing institute or any room, place, establishment or institution where treatment of any nature for the human body is given by means of massage and where a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, physiotherapy, manipulation of the body or similar treatment is given. 
Massage school means a school which requires for admission students with a tenth grade education or its equivalent; which employs one or more competent licensed massagists as instructors; and which has minimum requirements of a continuous course of study and training and consisting of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics and practical massage. For the purposes of this article, a correspondence school shall not be construed to be a recognized school. 
Massagist means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
Student means any person who, under the guidance of an instructor in a massage school, is being trained or instructed in the theory, method or practice of massage. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-27. - Purpose. 
Massage parlors, massagists, massage schools, sauna baths, and similar businesses shall be licensed and regulated as provided in this article to prevent illegal sexual acts by and between those employed by such businesses and their patrons; to provide for the issuance, renewal and revocation of licenses according to the requirements of this article; and to prevent and abate public nuisances, disturbances and burdens created in connection with massage parlors, massage schools, sauna baths and similar businesses. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.01)  
Sec. 22-28. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described in this article, whether the described activities were established before or after July 4, 1986, and including any person whose application is under consideration or investigation by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.08.01)  
Sec. 22-29. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Licensed professionals. Medical doctors, doctors of osteopathic medicine, doctors of chiropractic medicine, physical therapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, and family counselors, who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed in the state; clergymen; and certified members of the American Massage and Therapy Association, the International Myomassethics Federation and the associated bodywork and massage professionals. 
(2)  Nurses. Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who administer massage in the normal course of nursing duties. 
(3)  Athletic trainers. A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(4)  Barbers and beauticians. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state and who administer massage in the normal course of their duties. 
(5)  Seminar participants. Participants in growth seminars or sensitivity sessions, provided such seminars or sessions are conducted by a member of one of the exempted professions defined in this section. 
(6)  Licensed businesses with professionals. Any office or establishment in which the persons described in this section practice their respective professions. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.09; Ord. No. 415, § 1, 5-7-1997)  
Sec. 22-30. - Inspections. 
(a)  Access for inspectors. Every establishment ostensibly being operated as a massage parlor or massage school shall be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of any city department concerned with the licensing and supervision of such establishment during operating hours for the purpose of enforcing any of the sections of this article or other city ordinances or regulations relating to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Refusal of entry. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry by city representatives, for the purpose of making lawful inspections, to premises in which a massage parlor or massage school is ostensibly being operated. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.05)  
Secs. 22-31—22-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 22-56. - Required. 
(a)  Operation of business establishment. No person shall practice, engage in, carry on or operate the business of a massagist or conduct, operate and carry on a massage parlor, massage school, or similar business within the city without first having applied for and obtained the required license and complying with all regulations and requirements of this article. 
(b)  Employment as massagist. No person shall employ as a massagist any person who does not hold a current unrevoked license as required by this division. 
(c)  Massage for compensation. No person shall practice massage for compensation without obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as a massagist as required by this division. 
(d)  Duties of owners, operators and licensees. It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business to ensure that each person employed or engaged by him in the business as a massagist shall have first obtained a valid massagist license pursuant to this division. Any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business who employs a person performing as a massagist not in possession of a valid massagist license or who allows such an employee to perform, operate or practice within a massage parlor shall be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-12.03.01, 3-12.03.02)  
Sec. 22-57. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business or to perform massage services shall make application to the city clerk. 
(b)  Investigation fees. Investigation fees shall be submitted as follows: 
(1)  Business license. An application to obtain a license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be accompanied by an investigation fee as provided in section 54-406, no part of which shall be refundable. 
(2)  Massagist license. Each applicant for a license to allow an individual to perform massage services shall be accompanied by an investigation fee as provided in section 54-406, no part of which shall be refundable. 
(3)  Payment of fees. The application fees required in this subsection shall be payable to the city treasurer at the time the application is filed, and the application fee shall be in addition to any other license or fee required in this Code. 
(c)  Contents. Any applicant for any of the licenses required in this division shall submit the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence. 
(3)  A description of service to be provided. 
(4)  The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the corporation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. 
(7)  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(8)  The individual applicant's height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair. 
(9)  One portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, which shall be taken by the county sheriff's department. 
(10)  Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(11)  A certificate from a medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease. 
(12)  The history of an applicant in the operation of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business or occupation, including but not limited to whether or not such person, in previously operating in this city or another municipality or another state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(13)  All criminal convictions other than civil traffic infractions and the reasons therefor. 
(14)  The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(15)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified in this subsection as required to be set forth in the application. 
(16)  In addition, the following additional information shall be contained in an application for a license to conduct a massage parlor: the number of employees and the names and qualifications of all persons who are intended to give massages in the proposed parlor. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.03; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.08), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 22-58. - Processing of application. 
(a)  Application to clerk. Any applicant for a license required pursuant to this division shall present to the city clerk the application containing the information described in section 22-57. 
(b)  Investigation by sheriff and staff. The application shall be referred to the sheriff's department and city staff, who shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the sheriff's department and city staff shall render a recommendation to the city clerk as to the approval or denial of the license. 
(c)  Inspection of premises. The city's building department, planning department, fire department and the county health officer shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the massage parlor, massage school or similar business and shall make within a reasonable time separate recommendations to the city clerk concerning compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable sections of this Code. 
(d)  Past record. In reviewing an application, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  Penal history. The applicant's convictions, the reasons therefor and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to the applicant's release. 
(2)  License history. The license history of the applicant, whether such person in previously operating in this city or state or in another municipality or state under a license has had such license revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
(3)  Basis for denial. The sheriff's department and city staff shall recommend denial of an application for a license if the character, reputation, moral integrity, or physical or mental condition of the applicant or the applicant's employees is inimical to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.04)  
Sec. 22-59. - Establishment facilities. 
No license to conduct a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Sign. A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage parlor or massage school, provided that all such signs shall comply with the city sign requirements. 
(2)  Lighting. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the state construction code and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 60 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(3)  Sterilizing equipment. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(4)  Water. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(5)  Storage cabinets. Closed cabinets shall be provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
(6)  Bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities. Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower; one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked; as well as a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin shall be provided by every massage parlor. However, if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing rooms, separate massage rooms, separate dressing rooms and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
(7)  Cleanliness. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(8)  Towels and linens. Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment or each patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(9)  Washbasins. A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage parlor for the use of employees of any such establishment. The basin shall be provided with soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(10)  Privacy. No massage shall be performed in a massage parlor or a massage school in a private room that is completely closed to the view of other persons; however, reasonable measures may be used to offer privacy to patrons such as partitions, stalls, curtains and the like. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.04)  
Sec. 22-60. - Report and recommendation. 
(a)  Forwarding to council. The city clerk, upon receiving all information and making such additional investigation as deemed necessary under this division, shall forward a report and recommendation to the city council which shall approve or deny a license. 
(b)  Approval. A license shall be approved for an establishment if all requirements for a massage parlor, massage school or similar business described in this article are met. 
(c)  Denial. A license shall be denied for an establishment if the city council determines there has not been compliance with the requirements of this article and other sections of this Code or the establishment has or will have an adverse effect upon the public health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.05)  
Sec. 22-61. - Annual fee. 
The city clerk shall issue a license approved by the city council to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business authorized by this article to administer massages upon paying to the city treasurer the annual fee as provided in section 54-406. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.07(A))  
Sec. 22-62. - Issuance for persons performing massages. 
If a license is granted for an establishment under this division, the city clerk shall issue a license to all persons who have applied to perform massage services therein, unless it appears that: 
(1)  Any such person has deliberately falsified the application; or 
(2)  The record of any such person reveals a conviction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude or the person otherwise violates this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.06)  
Sec. 22-63. - Duration. 
The license year for any license issued under this division shall be the period from the date of license issuance to December 31 next, inclusive, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.07(B))  
Sec. 22-64. - Expiration. 
Under this division, all licenses issued for the license year shall expire on December 31, unless suspended or revoked prior to that time. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.07(C))  
Sec. 22-65. - Transferability. 
(a)  Generally. All licenses issued under this division shall be nontransferable; provided, however, a change of location of a massage parlor or similar business may be permitted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Change of location. A change of location of any of the premises may be approved by the city clerk and planning director, provided the requirements of the city and state law are complied with and the change of location fee, as provided in section 54-406, is paid to the city. 
(c)  Sale or transfer. Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, the license shall be null and void. A new license may be obtained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  New application required. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage parlor, massage school or similar business. Section 22-57 shall apply to any person applying for a massage establishment license for premises previously used as such establishment. 
(2)  Inspection and facility compliance. Any sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment shall require inspection and shall require compliance with section 22-59. 
(3)  Fee. A fee as provided in section 54-406 shall be payable for each application involving extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-12.03.08, 3-12.03.11, 3-12.03.13; Ord. No. 414, § 1(1-08.02.08), 4-23-1997)  
Sec. 22-66. - Renewal. 
(a)  Time limits. The license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, as well as a massagist license, shall be renewed at least 15 days prior to the date of expiration. 
(b)  Sworn affidavit. The license shall be renewed by the city clerk, provided the applicant submits a sworn affidavit that the matters contained in the original application are correct and indicating any changes necessary. 
(c)  Statement from doctor. In addition to the affidavit, the applicant shall submit a signed statement from a medical or osteopathic doctor that the applicant for a massagist license has been examined within the prior 90 days and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease that is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage. 
(d)  Final decision by city council. If the city clerk believes, after receiving reports from the sheriff or city staff and any other investigation, that there has not been compliance with this article and this Code or there are other reasons not to renew a license, the renewal shall be submitted to the city council whose decision shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.09)  
Sec. 22-67. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Hearing required for revocation. No license issued pursuant to this division shall be revoked until after a hearing shall be held before the city council to determine just cause for such revocation. 
(b)  Suspension pending hearing. The mayor may order any license suspended pending such hearing required by subsection (a) of this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a massagist or to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, depending upon the particular type of license, until it has been reinstated by the city council. 
(c)  Grounds. Any revocation or suspension of a license issued under this division shall be based upon noncompliance with the standards or requirements of this article and this Code. 
(d)  Hearing on suspension. Upon suspension, a licensee may request a hearing in writing addressed to the city clerk. A hearing shall be held within seven days in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Contents of notice. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such license or against the business carried on by the licensee at the establishment and shall state the time and place where such hearing shall be held. 
(2)  Service of notice. The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the notice to such person or by leaving the notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license holder cannot be found and the service of such notice cannot be made in the manner provided in this subsection, a copy of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his place of business or residence at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.12)  
Secs. 22-68—22-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 22-96. - Display of license. 
Every person to whom or for which a license shall have been granted pursuant to division 2 of this article shall display the license in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where the massage, bath or treatment is given. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.03.10)  
Sec. 22-97. - Hours of operation. 
No massage parlor or massage school shall be open to the public for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.06.01)  
Sec. 22-98. - Employees. 
(a)  Duty to ensure licensing of massagists. It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the license for the massage parlor or the employer of any person purporting to act as a massagist to ensure that each person employed as a massagist shall first have obtained a valid license pursuant to division 2 of this article. 
(b)  Emergency employee. If the holder of a license to operate a massage parlor is required to use an emergency employee because of illness or incapacity of a regular licensed employee, the use of an emergency employee shall be permitted, provided that such emergency employee shall be required to make application for a valid license as required in this article within three days from the date of beginning work. The term "emergency employee" shall be defined to mean an individual who possesses a current unrevoked massagist license issued by another city or township in the state, who works not more than three days per year in the city and who does not possess a valid city license. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-12.06.02, 3-12.06.03)  
Sec. 22-99. - Wearing apparel. 
Uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massagists or employees while attending patrons. Such uniforms or garments shall be made of washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. The sleeves of the uniform or garment shall not reach below the elbow. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.06.04)  
Sec. 22-100. - Unlawful activities. 
(a)  Illegal purpose. It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person or give or administer any bath or give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this article for illegal purposes or to have any contact with a person's breasts, genital area or buttocks in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desire. 
(b)  Attending opposite sex. Serving or attending in a massage parlor of patrons of the opposite sex is prohibited. However, this subsection shall not apply when such service or attending is under the supervision of any person licensed to practice medicine under article 15 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.16101 et seq., MSA 14.15(16101) et seq.). 
(c)  Rooms open to view. No massage shall be performed in a massage parlor or a massage school in a private room that is closed to the view of other persons. 
(d)  Grounds for revocation of license. Any violation of this section shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the license granted under division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.07.01)  
Sec. 22-101. - Patronage of business by minors. 
No person licensed as a massagist shall massage or treat any person under the age of 17 years upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. However, if the person under the age of 17 years is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.07.02) 
Cross reference— Offenses concerning underage persons, § 70-296 et seq.  
Sec. 22-102. - Name of business. 
No person licensed as provided in this article shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation not specified in his license. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.07.03)  
Sec. 22-103. - Advertising. 
No massage parlor, massage school or similar business or a massagist granted a license under division 2 of this article shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement that is known or, through the exercise of reasonable care, should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. 
(Code 1976, § 3-12.07.04)  
Secs. 22-104—22-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TOBACCO PRODUCT VENDING MACHINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Selling, giving or furnishing tobacco products to person under 18 prohibited, MCL 722.641, MSA 25.281. 
 
Sec. 22-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tobacco product means any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or other personal use, including but not limited to cigars, cigarettes, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco and snuff. 
Tobacco product vending machine means any automated, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses any type of tobacco product. 
(Code 1976, § 3-13.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-132. - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds the U.S. Surgeon General and other medical authorities have linked the use of tobacco products to numerous and serious health problems, and state law prohibits the sale, giving or furnishing of tobacco products to minors. Yet, despite this prohibition, the availability of tobacco products to minors continues to be a major problem, and tobacco product vending machines are often located in unattended and unmonitored areas allowing for the unlawful purchase of tobacco products by minors. Restricting tobacco product vending machines in the city to specified locations that are not generally accessible to minors will reduce the availability of tobacco products to minors and promote the public health, welfare and safety as a result. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to restrict tobacco product vending machines in the city to specified locations that are not generally accessible to minors. 
(Code 1976, § 3-13.01)  
Sec. 22-133. - Enforcement. 
Compliance with this article shall be enforced by the mayor, the city building department, the county sheriff's department, and other enforcement officers as the mayor may designate. 
(Code 1976, § 3-13.04)  
Sec. 22-134. - Restriction to specific locations. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or proprietor of any premises in the city to offer or sell tobacco products through a tobacco product vending machine except in the following specified locations: 
(1)  Access by minors to premises prohibited. A tobacco product vending machine may be placed or located wholly within premises or portions thereof to which access by minors is expressly prohibited either by law or by policy of the owner of the premises. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial buildings. A tobacco product vending machine may be placed or located wholly within a commercial building or industrial plant or a portion thereof where the general public is prohibited from entering by appropriate signs, where the tobacco product vending machine is intended strictly for the use of employees, and where minor employees are not usually admitted. 
(3)  Unattended and unmonitored areas. Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, no tobacco product vending machine shall be placed or located closer than 20 feet to any entrance or exit or within a restroom, coat room, outer waiting area, unmonitored hallway or any other area that is not constantly supervised or monitored during the hours the tobacco product vending machine is available for use, nor shall a tobacco product vending machine be placed or located in an area where it may be accessible to the public when the premises where it is located are closed. 
(Code 1976, § 3-13.03)  
Secs. 22-135—22-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 22-161. - Marihuana establishments prohibited. 
Pursuant to Section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, the City of Rochester Hills completely prohibits marihuana establishments, as defined in the Act, within the city's municipal boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 608 , § 1, 12-3-2018)  
Secs. 22-162—22-185. - Reserved.  
Chapter 26. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; franchises, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 102. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-26. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, any subsequent ordinance provisions or Code sections dealing with cable communications, any franchise agreement between the city and a cable communications company, and any application or proposal submitted, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning: 
Access cablecasting means services provided by a cable television system on its access channels. 
Access channels means channels that are dedicated to the public, educational and governmental interests. 
Applicant means a person or company submitting a proposal for the franchise of a cable communications system. 
Authority means the Intergovernmental Cable Communications Authority established by the Intergovernmental CATV Agreement of 1981, effective July 20, 1981, as may be amended from time to time. 
Basic service means all subscriber services provided by the grantee, including the delivery of broadcast signals, covered by the regular monthly charge, if any, paid by all subscribers, excluding optional services for which a separate charge is made. 
Cable communications service means the business, in whole or in part, of receiving directly or indirectly over the air and amplifying or otherwise modifying signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more signals, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air, and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to members of the public. 
Cable communications system, cable system, CATV and system means a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors or fiber optical cables and equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off of the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off of the air. 
Cablecast means to distribute programs, both from broadcasting sources and original programs, through the community system by means of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors or fiber optical transmitters. 
Community specific cablecasting means programming or channel allocation which selectively cablecasts to individual communities to meet their unique needs or interests. The term "community" refers to any unit with common needs or interests such as individual cities or neighborhoods, school districts or groups with common characteristics. 
Connection means the attachment of the drop to the first radio or television set of the subscriber. 
Converter means an electronic device that converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all basic subscriber signals included in the basic service delivered at designated converter dial locations. The converter may also allow reception of additional programming and/or services at extra cost to the subscriber. 
Drop means the cable that connects the subscriber terminal to the nearest feeder cable of the cable system. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
Feeder means the intermediate line of a cable system that carries signals from the trunk line to drops. 
Franchise means the rights of a grantee to construct and operate a cable system in the city, subject to state law, this article, and the franchise agreement. 
Franchise agreement means the agreement between the cable operator and the city setting specific rights and responsibilities of each for construction and operation of a cable system. 
Fraud or deceit shall not be limited to common law fraud and deceit, but shall include the meaning of those words under federal securities law. 
Grantee means a person to whom a cable communications franchise has been granted. 
Gross revenues means all compensation, in whatever form, exchange or otherwise, received by the grantee from subscribers for the provision of cable services over the cable system in the city. This term includes copyright fees but does not include any other sales, excise or other taxes collected by the grantee on behalf of any state, city or other governmental unit or an amount collected to pay an access charge to owners of multiple residential dwellings. The term shall be net of bad debt of subscribers, refunds to subscribers, advertising revenues and home shopping revenues. 
Head end means the equipment at the antenna site in a master antenna or cable system; the point of origination that collects all the signals (from broadcast stations, cable stations, and satellite stations) and sends them to the subscribers. 
Hub means one of two or more elements in a large cable system from which trunk lines originate, from which programming and data are sent out via trunk lines, and where upstream messages are received and where switching is accomplished. Large systems have multiple hubs linked to each other and/or to a master head end. 
Installation means the connection of the system from feeder cable to the point of connection. 
Interactive system means a two-way operational system. See also Two-way capability. 
Interconnect means to link cable head ends, so that subscribers to different cable systems can see the same programming simultaneously. 
Local origination means programs produced locally, the content of which may be original or produced elsewhere and sold or licensed to a grantee for use. 
Lockout device means a device that prevents reception of one or more channels at an individual drop. 
Loop means a completely interactive closed-circuit net connecting specified municipal, educational, medical or commercial facilities within a system which should also have the capacity to be interconnected to the main cable system. 
Outage means, for purposes of section 26-222, a service interruption affecting two or more subscribers. 
Pay TV means cable channels that require an additional subscriber fee. 
Point to point transmission means a signaling path provided by a system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the system. 
Producer means a user providing input services to the cable system for receipt by subscribers. 
Proposal means an applicant's response to RFP; a proposed franchise agreement submitted by an applicant. 
Public property means any real property, other than a street, owned by the city. 
Representative means an individual or the authority who is delegated certain responsibilities by the city council under this article or a franchise agreement. 
RFP means a request by the city for a proposal from applicants for a cable system franchise. 
Security system means optional two-way service offered to cable subscribers which may alert authorities and/or subscribers of potential emergencies in the subscriber's home, or a public or private building. 
Senior citizen means a person 62 years old or older. 
Service interruption means, for purposes of section 26-222, any loss or distortion of picture and/or sound on one or more channels. 
Street and highway mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of-way held by the city or over which the city has jurisdiction and control. 
Subscriber means a person who pays an installation charge and/or monthly fee to a cable system operator for connections to the system and for programs and services carried on the cable. 
Subscriber problem means, for purposes of section 26-222, a service interruption affecting a single subscriber. 
Subscriber service drop. See Drop. 
Trunk and trunk line mean the main line of cable system that carries signals from a head end to extremities of the cable system. 
Two-way capability means the ability of the cable system to conduct signals to and from a head end. See also Loop. 
User means a person or organization utilizing a system channel as a producer, for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, or as a subscriber, for purposes of receipt of material. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.02; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.02), 6-3-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-27. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote and encourage the furnishing of a high quality but economical cable communications service to the residents of the city and to regulate such service in the public interest. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.01; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.01), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-28. - Administration. 
(a)  Mayor. The mayor shall be responsible for the continuing administration of the cable system franchise on the part of the city. 
(b)  Delegation of authority by city. The city council reserves the right to delegate from time to time any of its rights or obligations under the franchise to the city representative. Any such delegation shall be effective upon written notice thereof to the grantee. Upon receipt of such notice, the grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions of the delegation not in conflict with the franchise agreement. Any such delegation or revocation thereof, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed to be an amendment to the franchise agreement or require the grantee's consent. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.10; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.10), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-29. - Required. 
No person shall own or operate a cable system in the city, except by franchise granted by the city, which franchise shall comply with all the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.01; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.01), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-30. - Liquidated damages. 
(a)  Daily violations. The city representative may assess liquidated damages of up to $100.00 per day, or a higher amount if provided in the cable system franchise agreement, against the grantee for each day the grantee is in violation of this article upon receipt of written notice of violation and failure to cure in accordance with the franchise agreement. Such assessment may be levied against the security fund specified in section 26-93 or any letter of credit, performance bond, or other security provided for in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Other rights or remedies not waived. Assessment of liquidated damages shall not constitute a waiver by the city of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise agreement or applicable law, including the right to recover from the grantee actual and reasonable costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, that are incurred by the city on account of the grantee's violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.23; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.23), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-31. - Evaluation of violations. 
(a)  Grounds. The violation of this article by the grantee or the grantee's agents, employees and/or independent contractors employed or retained by the grantee shall be grounds for evaluating the following: 
(1)  The grantee's compliance with any existing agreement and with applicable law; 
(2)  The quality of the grantee's service and whether it has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
(3)  The technical ability of the grantee to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in an operator's proposal for future or renewed cable services; and 
(4)  The reasonableness of the grantee's proposal to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests of the residents and cable television consumers of the city. 
(b)  Considerations for renewal. These evaluations shall be proper and germane for the city to consider formally when reviewing a proposal for renewal of any agreement to provide cable services within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.24; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.24), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-32. - Remedies available. 
If the city determines that the grantee has violated this article, the city may order appropriate rebates to subscribers as provided in section 26-228 and/or assess liquidated damages against the grantee as provided in section 26-30. In addition, the city may pursue any additional or other legal or equitable remedies available to it under the franchise agreement or any applicable law. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.25; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.25), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-33. - Appeal process. 
(a)  Submission of written appeal. If a grantee is aggrieved of an action of the city representative or an authority authorized in the cable system franchise agreement and the matter affects the city individually, a grantee may appeal any such action to the city council by submitting a written appeal within 21 days from the date of the action to which the grantee objects as follows: 
(1)  Review of action and setting of hearing date. Upon such appeal, the city council shall conduct a de novo review of the action appealed and shall set a hearing date within 60 days of the date of receipt of the appeal. 
(2)  Presentation of evidence. The grantee may present any information, data, or other evidence to the city council either prior to or at the time of the hearing. 
(3)  Stay of further action. The appeal shall stay any further action on the matter appealed until the appeal has been decided by the city council. 
(b)  Hearing open to public. Hearings shall be open to the public, and members of the public and the city representative or the authority may also present any evidence or information pertinent to the matter appealed. 
(c)  Determination by council. The city council shall then determine whether to uphold, reverse, or modify the action. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.26; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.26), 6-3-1998)  
Secs. 26-34—26-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SELECTION OF FRANCHISEE 
 
Sec. 26-61. - Requirements of award. 
The city council may award a cable system franchise to an applicant only after a public hearing on the application and proposal, notice of which hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing. The city council may reject any or all applicants. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.02; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.02), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-62. - Application. 
(a)  Nonrefundable fee. All proposals for a cable system franchise shall be submitted in writing and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for $6,000.00. 
(b)  Request for proposal. All proposals shall contain the information requested by the city in the manner prescribed, and the following: 
(1)  Information regarding the identity of the applicant. 
(2)  Biographical data of the applicant's principal owners and proposed management, including the experience of such persons in the cable communications field. 
(3)  Audited financial statements for the applicant's last fiscal year. 
(4)  A detailed description of the system and facilities proposed for the city in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(5)  A detailed timetable for the construction and commencement of operation of the system in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Verification; additional information. The city shall be entitled to verify any information furnished by the applicant regarding the applicant and the applicant's affairs. The city may exercise such right by requiring reports from the applicant or from third parties having knowledge of the applicant or by conducting such other kinds of investigation as the city may deem proper. 
(d)  False statements and omissions. No applicant nor any person on behalf of any applicant shall make any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a fraud upon the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.03; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.03), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-63. - Criteria for selection. 
The award of a cable system franchise to an applicant shall be based upon the information contained in the applicant's proposal and such other relevant information as may be obtained by the city regarding such applicant and the proposal. Such award shall be based upon the following criteria together with such other factors as the city may deem relevant: 
(1)  The experience of the applicant in the cable communications field and the credentials of its owners and managers. 
(2)  The applicant's financial resources, including both present financial condition and the availability of funding to finance the applicant's proposed system. 
(3)  The applicant's system design including channel capacity and ability to provide a broad range of services in conformity with the highest quality standards of the cable industry. 
(4)  The applicant's response to specific local concerns or needs, whether formulated by the city and made known to applicants or whether ascertained by the applicant. 
(5)  The extent to which the applicant meets community needs, including such factors as enhancing competition and customer choice. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.04; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.04), 6-3-1998)  
Secs. 26-64—26-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; GRANT OF FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 26-91. - Franchise agreement. 
(a)  Form and contents. The cable system franchise agreement shall be in such form and shall contain such terms and provisions as shall be approved by the city council. 
(b)  Adoption and amendment by council. The agreement shall be adopted, on behalf of the city, by resolution of the city council. Any amendment shall be by agreement of the city and the grantee. 
(c)  Term. The franchise agreement shall provide for a nonexclusive franchise for a term of not less than ten years, which term shall commence as of the date set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Fee. The franchise agreement shall provide that, throughout the term of the franchise, the grantee shall pay the city a franchise fee within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year of the grantee, or more often as provided in the franchise agreement. The fee shall not be less than three percent of the grantee's gross revenues for each year. The grantee shall take any action with respect to any federal or state agency that may be necessary or appropriate to make the payment and receipt of such fees lawful. Acceptance of any payment by the city shall not be construed as a release of or as an accord and satisfaction regarding any claim the city may have for further and additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee under this article or the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Acceptance; amendments. The franchise agreement shall contain the following express undertakings that the grantee: 
(1)  Agrees to and accepts all sections of this article and waives any claim that any section of this article is unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid or void. 
(2)  Recognizes the right of the city to make amendments to this article during the term of the franchise pursuant to the terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement. 
(f)  Negotiated provisions. The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the city and the grantee, except that no such conditions or provisions shall conflict with any section of this article or provision or other law. If such conflict occurs, the sections of this article or provisions or other law shall prevail over the conflicting provision of the franchise agreement. 
(g)  Rights reserved by city. The following rights shall be reserved by the city: 
(1)  Revocation. Any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to the right of the city, by resolution of the city council, to revoke the franchise for just cause. The term "just cause" shall include, without limitation, the following: 
a.  A material violation by the grantee of any provision of the franchise agreement or this article where such violation shall remain uncured pursuant to the terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement. 
b.  Any attempt by the grantee to dispose of any of the facilities or property of the system in contravention of the franchise agreement. 
c.  The commission of any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(2)  Applicabality of other provisions. Any franchise granted under this article shall be subject to all applicable provisions of other sections of this Code made pursuant to the police power of the city and any amendments thereto, whether made prior to or after the inception of the franchise. 
(3)  Additional requirements. Any franchise granted under this article shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Establishment of proper and adequate extension of the plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement; 
b.  Establishment of reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and provisions to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
c.  Establishment of continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
d.  Imposition of such other regulations as may be determined by the city council to be conducive to the health, safety and welfare; 
e.  Through its appropriately designated representatives, inspection of all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and this article, and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise, this article and other pertinent provisions of law; 
f.  At the expiration, termination or cancellation of the term of the franchise, unless the franchise is renewed or extended, the grantee shall remove at the grantee's sole expense any and all portions of the overhead system from the public ways within the city, except that the grantee may abandon its facilities in place only with the city's written consent in advance; 
g.  The grantee shall not remove underground facilities without the city's consent in advance; and 
h.  The grantee shall safeguard and keep private all individual home subscriber information. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.05; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.05), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-92. - Procedure for award. 
(a)  Generally. A grantee shall be awarded a cable system franchise pursuant to section 26-61 of this article, either by resolution of the city council or by any other means authorized or required by law. 
(b)  Written notice. The grantee shall be promptly notified of the award by the city by written notice thereof, sent by registered or certified mail, which notice shall be accompanied by one or more copies of the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Execution of agreement by grantee. The franchise agreement shall be properly executed and delivered to the city by the grantee on or before 15 days after the date the city sends written notice of the award to the grantee, which 15-day period may be extended by the city council for good cause. However, the franchise agreement shall not become effective until that specific date set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(1)  Acceptance fee. At the time of delivery of the executed franchise agreement by the city to the grantee, the grantee shall pay to the city all costs incurred by the city in the franchise process as provided in the franchise agreement. 
(2)  Delivery of monies, documents, instruments and other payments. At the time of delivery of the franchise agreement as provided in this subsection, the grantee shall also deliver all other funds and all documents and instruments required by this article or by the franchise agreement, at that time. 
(d)  Execution of agreement by city. Upon timely receipt by the city from the grantee of the properly executed franchise agreement, together with the acceptance fee and other funds as may be required in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the city shall execute the agreement and, upon execution thereof, shall deliver one fully executed copy to the grantee, within 30 days of receipt of the executed franchise agreement and all other funds and documents. 
(e)  Revocation of award. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from revoking the award of the franchise prior to delivery of an executed copy of the franchise agreement to the grantee. If any such revocation occurs, which shall be accomplished in the same manner as that used in granting the award, any funds and all documents and instruments delivered by the grantee to the city in connection with the grantee's acceptance of the award shall be returned forthwith to the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.06; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.06), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-93. - Security fund. 
(a)  Cash deposit as security. Within ten days after the execution of a new cable system franchise agreement by both parties or the transfer, extension, or renewal of an existing franchise, the grantee thereunder shall furnish the city and shall thereafter maintain with the authority, throughout the term of the franchise, a cash deposit of $25,000.00 as a security fund for the following: 
(1)  The faithful performance by it of all the sections of this article and provisions of the franchise; 
(2)  Compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of any agency, commission, board, or department of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise; and 
(3)  The payment by the grantee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the city that arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the system. 
(b)  Reimbursement after withdrawal by grantee. Within ten days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund by the city, the grantee shall restore the security fund to its original value. 
(c)  Withdrawals by city. The city may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any additional charges, from the security fund if the grantee fails to: 
(1)  Pay to the city any fees within the time fixed in this article; 
(2)  After 30 days' written notice, pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; 
(3)  Repay the city, within such 30 days, any damages, costs, or expenses which the city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with a franchise; or 
(4)  After three days' notice of such failure, comply with any provisions of the franchise that the city reasonably determines can be remedied by a withdrawal from the security fund. 
(d)  Funds held by city. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section, including all interest thereon, if any, shall be held by the city if the franchise is rescinded or revoked by reason of the default of the grantee. The following shall be returned to the grantee: 
(1)  Return of fund. The grantee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund or such portion thereof as remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. 
(2)  Return of interest. Any interest earned by the investment of the security fund shall become part of the security fund and, unless consumed by the payment of liquidated damages, fees, or other charges under this article, shall be returned to the grantee at the expiration of the franchise term, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. 
(e)  Maintenance in separate account; investment. The city shall maintain the security fund in a segregated account and shall not commingle the fund with any other monies of the city. The city may, but shall not be required to, invest the security fund so as to earn interest thereon and shall not be liable to the grantee on any claim based upon the lack or insufficiency of interest earned by such fund. 
(f)  Additional rights reserved to city. Payment from the security fund shall not constitute a cure of any violation or any act of noncompliance by the grantee. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this article or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(g)  Additional security. The security fund provided for in this section shall not be required if the franchise agreement expressly requires the grantee to provide a cash security fund, letter of credit, or other form of security that is mutually agreeable to the city and the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.22; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.22), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-94. - Termination or cancellation. 
(a)  Generally. Any termination or cancellation of the cable system franchise prior to the expiration of the term thereof shall be made by resolution of the city council only after a public hearing thereon. 
(b)  Written notice of hearing. The grantee shall be entitled to 30 days' written notice of such hearing, and the notice shall specify with reasonable particularity the grounds upon which the contemplated termination is based. 
(c)  Requirements and limitations. Any such termination shall be subject to federal and state law and any limitation contained in the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.07; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.07), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-95. - Contravention of franchise. 
Any breach by the grantee of the cable system franchise agreement, in addition to constituting a breach of contract, shall constitute a violation of this article. The costs of any litigation, including attorney's fees, incurred by the city to enforce this article or the franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be reimbursed to the city by the grantee in respect of such litigation or part thereof in which the city is the prevailing party. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.03.08; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.03.08), 6-3-1998)  
Secs. 26-96—26-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN OF SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 26-121. - Channel capacity. 
(a)  The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the cable system franchise at least the number of channels specified to be initially activated in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  The grantee shall continually upgrade the system's facilities, equipment, and service pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.01; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.01), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-122. - Signal quality and technical requirements. 
(a)  Picture. The cable system shall produce a picture upon each subscriber's television screen in black and white or color, depending upon whether color is being telecast and provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture, which is undistorted and free from ghost images, without material degradation of color fidelity. 
(b)  Sound. The system shall produce a sound that is undistorted on a properly operating standard receiver of a subscriber. 
(c)  Interference-free transmission. The system shall transmit or distribute signals to all television and radio receivers of all subscribers without causing cross-modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems or the reception of other television or radio receivers. 
(d)  Minimum Federal Communications Commission standards. The system shall at all times meet not less than minimum technical standards of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(e)  Continuous operation. The system shall be designed for and operated on a 24-hour-a-day continuous operation basis. 
(f)  Technical capability testing. The grantee's proposal shall specify the procedure for initially and subsequently testing the technical capacity of the system. Representatives of the city may be present during testing. All expenses for all such tests shall be paid by the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.02; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.02), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-123. - Two-way capacity. 
(a)  Required. The cable system franchise grantee shall provide the capacity to maintain an operational two-way system (audio, video and data impulse). 
(b)  Permission required. The grantee will not install or permit the installation of any equipment that will permit transmission of two-way services utilizing audio, video or digital signals without obtaining documented permission of the subscriber. 
(c)  Exclusions. This section is not intended to prohibit the transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of the system performance or utility meter reading. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.03; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.03), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-124. - Special channel and access requirements. 
(a)  Broadcast stations. The cable system franchise grantee shall carry broadcast stations in accordance with Federal Communications Commission rules as from time to time revised. 
(b)  Receiving equipment and charges. The grantee's proposal shall describe, in detail, the utilization of converters or other special equipment that subscribers are to receive and any charges for them. 
(c)  Emergency channel. The grantee shall designate an emergency channel to be operated by the city or the grantee in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(d)  Access channels. The grantee shall provide adequate channels as provided in the franchise agreement for access. All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall also receive all access channels at no additional charge. These access channels shall be activated within 12 months of the system activation and shall thereafter be maintained as needed. Rules and regulations for the use of access channels shall be as provided in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Other offerings. The grantee's proposal shall describe all other channel offerings. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.04; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.04), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-125. - Service to public buildings. 
The cable system franchise grantee's proposal shall designate all publicly owned and leased buildings in the city (city hall, sheriff's department, fire department, schools, library, etc.) to which the grantee intends to provide service. The provisions for such service shall be described and shall be provided without charge. The grantee's proposal shall include in such designation plans for existing as well as future publicly owned or leased buildings. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.05; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.05), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-126. - Interconnection. 
(a)  Required. The grantee shall interconnect origination and access channels of the cable system with any or all other systems in adjacent areas, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. Interconnection of systems may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method. 
(b)  Procedure. Upon receiving the directive of the city to interconnect, the grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected systems in order that costs may be shared equitably for both construction and operation of the interconnection link. 
(c)  Relief. The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the city may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by the grantee to the city. The city shall grant the request if it finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the systems of the proposed interconnection or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates. 
(d)  Cooperation with agencies. The grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or city, county, state and federal regulatory agency that may be established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.06; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.06), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-127. - Community specific cablecasting. 
The cable system franchise grantee's proposal shall describe the means and manner of providing community specific cablecasting, if any, over the system and the time of activation and points of delivery. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.07; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.07), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-128. - Computer services. 
The cable system franchise grantee shall design and construct a cable system, serving residential and institutional users, that will accommodate interactive data communications. Further, the system shall accommodate interactive communications of point to point, point to multipoint, and multipoint to multipoint communications between subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.08; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.08), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-129. - Emergency alert. 
(a)  Availability of system. If any emergency or disaster occurs, the grantee shall make its cable system available, without charge, to the city or to any other governmental or emergency operations agency that the city may designate. The emergency alert system shall be in accordance with all Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(b)  Audio. The system shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system to allow authorized officials to override automatically the audio signals on all channels and to transmit and report emergency information. 
(c)  Visual. The system shall also have the capability for visual transmission of emergency messages. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.09; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.09), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-130. - Local origination and cablecasting. 
The cable system franchise grantee's proposal shall include detailed information on plans, if any, for local origination, origination cablecasting, automated channels carrying information from local sources, variety of origination programming, review of and incorporation of the needs and reports of the city, channel allocations, estimated programming hours, equipment, personnel and other resources committed to local origination production. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.10; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.10), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-131. - Services and programming. 
The cable system franchise grantee's proposal shall state the extent of its commitment, if any, to provide for the following: 
(1)  A variety of origination programming. 
(2)  Automated channels carrying information from local sources. 
(3)  Local access programming. 
(4)  A home security package, with mechanisms to decrease incidents of false alarms. 
(5)  Access support including color broadcast studio and location production equipment. 
(6)  Post-production equipment, access promotion plans, and use of video facilities. 
(7)  Plans accommodating growth of access, and production centers. 
(8)  A system to accommodate data, audio and video transmissions between institutions. 
(9)  Expanding distant signal offerings as Federal Communications Commission rules allow. 
(10)  Broadcast station signals in late night and early morning hours. 
(11)  An FM service with individual station processing. 
(12)  Needs of schools and other learning institutions. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.04.11; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.04.11), 6-3-1998)  
Secs. 26-132—26-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION OF SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 26-161. - Initial service area. 
(a)  Completion dates. The cable system franchise grantee's proposal shall include the date by which system engineering and design shall be completed and dates on which each stage of system construction shall be completed. Any revisions to the schedule shall be given to the city promptly on an ongoing basis. 
(b)  Installation of energized cable. The energized cable shall be extended substantially throughout the city within such time specified in the franchise agreement. All persons along the route of the energized cable who desire them shall have individual drops installed within the same period of time. 
(c)  Map and development schedule. A map prepared by the grantee reflecting the areas within the city initially served by the system, along with the schedule for development of the system, shall be included in the grantee's proposal. The grantee shall provide service to all areas within the city that have at least 35 homes per street mile. 
(d)  City assistance. The city shall cooperate with the grantee in the development of its proposed service area by making all maps, data and other statistical information, then in possession of the city, needed for the preparation of a map defining the initial service area, available to the grantee for copying. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.05; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.05), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-162. - Facilities. 
(a)  Location and plan for implementation. The cable system franchise grantee's proposal shall describe the location of its head end, hubs, distribution system, studios, equipment and other facilities and a plan for implementing the construction, utilization and maintenance of those facilities. 
(b)  Construction timetable. The grantee's construction timetable as set forth in the franchise agreement shall reflect the specific method and schedule of construction of the system. The plan of the grantee shall reflect the following: 
(1)  Location of all facilities including studios, head ends, microwave receivers and senders and all hubs and wiring; and 
(2)  A timetable reflecting when each area within the initial service area will be served. 
(c)  Permits, licenses and authorizations. Within 60 days after the commencement of the franchise term, the grantee shall apply for all necessary permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations that are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any joint use attachment agreements; microwave carrier licenses; or any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable communications systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(1)  Termination for delay. If, after six months from the commencement of the franchise term, the grantee has not received the permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations described in this subsection, the city may assess penalties pursuant to the franchise agreement without regard to fault for delay in obtaining such permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations. 
(2)  Notifications; extension. The grantee shall promptly notify the city of all delays known or anticipated in the construction of the system. The city may extend the construction timetable if the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.06; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.06), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-163. - Construction and maintenance standards. 
(a)  Compliance with codes, rules and regulations. The cable system franchise grantee shall comply at all times with the following codes, rules, regulations, as amended, and any others supplemental to or in substitution thereof: 
(1)  National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
(3)  Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and 
(4)  Applicable Federal Communications Commission and other applicable federal, state and local regulations and sections of this Code. 
In any event, the installation, operation or maintenance of the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city. 
(b)  Record. The grantee, prior to construction, shall make a record of all underground construction and other specifically designated areas as provided in the franchise agreement. Such records shall be preserved for three years after completion of the applicable construction. 
(c)  Minimum system wiring requirements. The grantee's plans for constructing its system and the construction of the system shall be in accordance with the franchise agreement. However, the grantee shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Construction underground. The grantee shall construct underground in any area where both the electrical and telephone lines have been installed underground. 
(2)  Change from aerial to underground. The grantee shall change from aerial to underground, at its own expense, in any area where both the telephone and electrical utilities are changed from aerial to underground. 
(3)  Written notice by city. To enable the grantee reasonable opportunity to change its wiring from aerial to underground and also to allow it to prewire all new subdivisions or new development areas, the city shall provide the grantee with written notice of the following, but without liability for failure to provide such notice: 
a.  Any underground trenching that may be pending; and 
b.  All changes in sections of this Code affecting the wiring of the system. 
(d)  Property and facilities of grantee. 
(1)  Noninterference with city traffic. All wires, conduits, cables, and other property and facilities of the grantee shall be so located, constructed, installed, and maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic, and travel upon or other use of the streets and public property of the city. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and installed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. 
b.  All wires, conduits and cables shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. 
c.  Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
(3)  Maintenance in good condition. The grantee shall keep and maintain all of its property in good condition, order and repair so that the property shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. 
(4)  City's right of inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect and examine, at all reasonable times and upon reasonable notice, the property owned or used, in part or in whole, by the grantee. 
(5)  Maps and records. The grantee shall keep accurate maps and records of all of its wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities located, constructed and maintained in the city. Further, the grantee shall furnish copies of such maps and records from time to time as requested by the city without charge. 
(6)  Removal or relocation at city's request. Whenever the city shall undertake any public improvement that affects the grantee's equipment or facilities, the city, with due regard to reasonable working conditions and with reasonable notice, may direct the grantee to remove or relocate its wires, conduits, cables and other property located in streets or on public property. The grantee shall relocate or protect its wires, conduits, cables and other property at its own expense. 
(e)  Disturbing surface of public property. 
(1)  Digging permit. The grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any streets or public property without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(2)  Location determined by city. The lines, conduits, cables and other property placed in the streets and public property, pursuant to such permit, shall be located in such part of the street or public property as shall be determined by the city. 
(3)  Restoration and maintenance. The grantee, upon completion of any work requiring the opening of any streets or public property, shall restore the streets or public property, including the pavement and its foundations, to as good a condition as formerly and in a manner and quality approved by the city and shall exercise reasonable care to maintain the streets or public property thereafter in good condition. 
(4)  Reimbursement of city for restoration. Such work shall be performed with diligence and due care. If the grantee shall fail to perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and rubbish and to put the street or public property back into the condition required by this subsection, the city shall have the right to put the streets or public property back into such condition at the expense of the grantee. The grantee shall pay, upon demand, to the city the cost of such work done. 
(f)  Restoration of private property. The grantee, upon completion of any work on private property or easements thereon, shall restore the property, including any and all landscape features, plantings, turf, buildings, pipes, overhead and underground wires, pavements, sidewalks, foundations or other features whatsoever, to as good a condition as existed before construction. 
(g)  Conditions on use. 
(1)  Interference with public utilities. The grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the poles or fixtures will interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixture or water hydrant or main. 
(2)  Raising and lowering of lines. The grantee, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit and with not less than ten days' advance notice, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires, conduits and cables. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires, conduits and cables shall be paid by the person requesting the removal, raising or lowering, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. 
(3)  Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, to the extent the city has authority to grant it, to trim trees upon or overhanging any street or public property so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, conduits and cables of the grantee. All trimming shall be done under the direction of the city and at the expense of the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.07; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.07), 6-3-1998)  
Secs. 26-164—26-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - OPERATION OF SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 26-191. - Service. 
(a)  Grant of authority. The cable system franchise grantee shall have authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise and to ensure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers, provided such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of the franchise, this Code and laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  Notice to subscribers. 
(1)  Instructions. Each subscriber shall be provided with instructions on filing complaints or otherwise obtaining information or assistance from the grantee. 
(2)  Changes. All items described in subsection (a) of this section and this subsection shall be provided to each new subscriber at the time a contract is entered or service begun and to all existing subscribers forthwith upon any changes therein. 
(c)  Interruption of service. 
(1)  During minimum use periods. Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service, the grantee shall do so during the periods of minimum use of the system. 
(2)  Reasonable notice. Unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, the grantee shall give reasonable notice thereof to subscribers. 
(3)  Pro rata credit. All costs incurred in repairing the system shall be paid by the grantee, and if service is interrupted or disconnected, rebates and/or reductions in charges will be made pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
(4)  Prompt restoration of service. The cause for any such interruption shall be removed and service restored as promptly as reasonably possible. 
(d)  Complaints. All complaints from the city, subscribers, or other interested persons regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction, billing disputes, and any other matters relative to the system shall be investigated and responded to by a service representative of the grantee within 24 hours. If reasonably possible, the grantee shall promptly rectify the cause of all valid complaints. 
(e)  Termination of service. 
(1)  Disconnection. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or outlet. 
(2)  Discontinuance of service. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee or any other proper fee or charge when due, the grantee may discontinue service to such subscriber; provided, however, the grantee may not remove any of its equipment until after the later of the following: 
a.  Thirty days after the due date of the delinquent fee or charge; or 
b.  Ten days after delivery to the subscriber of written notice of the intent to disconnect. 
If a subscriber pays before expiration of the later of subsection (e)(2)a. or (e)(2)b. of this section, the grantee shall not disconnect. 
(3)  Reconnection. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent fee or charge and the payment of a reconnection charge, the grantee shall promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable service. 
(4)  Refund of prepaid fee. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the end of a prepaid period, a proportionate portion of any prepaid subscriber service fee, using the number of days as a basis, shall be refunded to the subscriber by the grantee. 
(f)  Failure to provide service. Refunds to subscribers shall be made or determined in the following manner: 
(1)  Services then being offered. If the grantee fails, upon request by a subscriber, to provide any service then being offered, the grantee shall promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for the service in question by the subscriber. This subsection does not alter the grantee's responsibility to subscribers under any separate contractual agreement or relieve the grantee of any other liability. 
(2)  In accordance with franchise. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service because of failure of the grantee to render the service in accordance with the franchise, the grantee shall refund to such subscriber the proportionate share of the charges paid by the subscriber for the services not received. This subsection does not relieve the grantee of liability established in other provisions of the franchise. 
(3)  Termination and refund. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the end of a prepaid period, a proportionate portion of any prepaid subscriber service fee, using the number of days as a basis, shall be refunded to the subscriber by the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.08; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.08), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-192. - Use of channels. 
(a)  Political advertising. Advertising on the cable system for any candidate for political office or for parties sponsoring such candidates shall be in accordance with federal law. 
(b)  Subliminal advertising prohibited. The grantee is expressly prohibited from transmitting any form of subliminal advertising at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.09; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.09), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-193. - Information availability. 
(a)  Books and records. Throughout the term of the cable system franchise, the grantee shall maintain books and records in accordance with normal and accepted bookkeeping and accounting practices for the cable communications industry and, subject to applicable laws regarding subscriber privacy, shall allow for inspection and copying of the books and records at reasonable times. The books and records to be maintained by the grantee shall include the following: 
(1)  A record of all requests for service; 
(2)  A record of all subscriber or other complaints and the action taken; 
(3)  A file of all subscriber contracts, except information that is protected as private; 
(4)  The grantee's policies, procedures and company rules; and 
(5)  Financial records, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Inspection by city. Upon the city's giving the grantee at least five business days' notice, the grantee shall provide the city the opportunity for inspections of any books or records of the grantee. 
(c)  Periodic filings. The grantee shall file with the city, at the time of its payment of the franchise fee, the following: 
(1)  A quarterly financial statement, certified by the grantee as correct, showing in such detail as provided in the franchise agreement the gross operating revenues of the grantee for the quarter to which the fee relates and such other financial information as is required by the franchise agreement; 
(2)  An annual certified financial statement prepared by the chief financial officer of the grantee's corporation who is a certified public accountant showing in such detail, as required in the franchise agreement, the gross operating revenues of the grantee for the period to which the annual fee relates and such other financial information as is required by the franchise agreement; 
(3)  A current list of names and addresses of each officer and director and other managerial and supervisory personnel, as well as each shareholder having legal or beneficial ownership of one percent or more of the grantee's stock if changed from a prior filing; 
(4)  A copy or a list of each document that is material and relevant to the operation of the franchise in the city filed with all federal, state and local agencies during the preceding fiscal year and not previously filed with the city. The city may request and receive a copy of any document, at no charge to the city; 
(5)  A statement of its current billing practices if changed from a prior filing; 
(6)  A copy of its current rules if changed from a prior filing; and 
(7)  A copy of its current subscriber service contract if changed from a prior filing. 
(d)  Audits. The city, its agents and representatives shall have authority to arrange for and conduct an audit of and copy the books and records of the grantee; provided, however, that all books and records so audited shall remain the sole and exclusive property of the grantee. The grantee shall first be given ten days' notice of the audit request; the description of and purpose for the audit; and the description, to the best of the city's ability, of the books, records and documents it wishes to review. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.11; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.11), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-194. - Fraudulent connections and sales prohibited. 
No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system, may intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment, or apparatus of the grantee or commit any act with an intent to cause such removal or damage; tap, tamper with or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment and apparatus or appurtenances of the grantee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system without authorization from or compensation to the grantee; or obtain cable television or other communications service or sell, rent, lend, offer or advertise for sale, rental or use any instrument, apparatus, device or plans, specifications or instructions for making or assembling such to connect to the grantee's cable system with intent to cheat or defraud the grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.12; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.12), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-195. - Landlord and tenant relationship. 
(a)  Principal objective. The city declares that this article has, as one of its principal objectives, the lawful public purpose of rapidly developing and maximizing the educational, community service, cultural and public safety potential of cable television in order to benefit all of the residents of the city. 
(b)  Multiple unit residential use guaranteed. The city further finds that the public interest is enhanced if owners of multiple unit residential dwellings permit any resident of such dwelling to receive cable communications service installation, maintenance, and services from a grantee operating under a valid franchise issued by the city in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Negotiated agreement. In order to provide the opportunity for the residents of any multiple unit residential dwelling to obtain service from a grantee, such grantee may negotiate an agreement with the owner of that dwelling; or 
(2)  Exercise of power of eminent domain. Failing agreement, such grantee may request that the city exercise its power of eminent domain for the necessary public purpose of enabling the grantee to serve residents of that multiple unit residential dwelling. 
a.  Condemnation proceedings. Upon request of such grantee, the city may commence condemnation proceedings in accordance with applicable law. 
b.  Considerations for just compensation. If such proceeding occurs, in preparing its good faith offer of just compensation, the city may consider the following: 
1.  The amount and fair market value of space occupied by the grantee's cable and related facilities. The fair market value of the space shall be assessed in light of the prior use, if any, of that space, together with any evidence of nonspeculative alternative uses; 
2.  The present value of any funds that the owner will reasonably expend over time in ensuring that the grantee conforms to all laws, regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to ensure the safety, convenient functioning, and appearance of the multiple unit residential dwelling; 
3.  The continued physical availability of other space on the premises for the installation of alternative modes of television program reception or delivery; 
4.  As an offset to the amounts set forth in subsections (b)(2)b.1 and (b)(2)b.2 of this section, any increase in the fair market value of the multiple unit residential dwelling attributable to the availability of the grantee's service to the property's tenants; and 
5.  Any other reasonable, nonspeculative factors that the city may find relevant. 
c.  Indemnification of city. The requesting grantee shall indemnify the city for all expenses and costs incurred by the city in the condemnation proceedings as well as for the full amount of the condemnation award made to the owner if such condemnation proceedings are completed or otherwise settled. 
(c)  Additional charge. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this article or the franchise agreement, the grantee shall be permitted to charge each resident of a multiple unit residential dwelling an additional charge, above and beyond the service rate for a single-family dwelling as specified in the franchise agreement, solely to defray the exact additional per-resident cost to the grantee of compensating the owner for access to the multiple unit residential dwelling. 
(d)  Justifiable withholding of service. Notwithstanding any other subsection of this section or any other section in this article, the grantee shall not be obligated to provide service to any multiple unit residential dwelling so long as the owner of that dwelling demands compensation from the grantee in an amount that is unreasonable or imposes financial or other conditions that would, in the grantee's reasonable business judgment, render provision of service to that dwelling uneconomical. 
(1)  Condemnation not required. The grantee shall not be obligated, in such circumstances, to request the city to institute condemnation proceedings. 
(2)  Installation charges. If the grantee subsequently agrees to render service to such multiple unit residential dwelling, there shall be no installation charges to the residents of such dwelling beyond those allowed in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Prohibitions for owner. Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable communications service from a company operating under a valid and existing cable communications franchise issued by the city. 
(f)  Resale prohibited. No person shall resell, without the express written consent of both the grantee and the city, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a grantee operating under a franchise issued by the city. 
(g)  Conformance to laws. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable communications system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning and appearance. 
(h)  Indemnity for damage. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a grantee from agreeing to indemnify the owner or his agents or representatives for damages or for liability for physical damages caused by installation, operation, maintenance, or removal of cable television facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.13; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.13), 6-3-1998)  
Secs. 26-196—26-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - CONSUMER PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 26-221. - Customer service. 
(a)  Provision of facilities, equipment and personnel. The cable system franchise grantee shall maintain a local office that provides the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply, under normal operating conditions, with the customer service standards set forth in subsection (b) of this section. For purposes of this section, the term "normal operating conditions" embraces all conditions that are within the control of the grantee, including special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system, but excluding conditions outside the grantee's control, such as natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and extreme weather. 
(b)  Customer service standards. Standards for customer service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adequate representatives and phone lines. On a monthly basis, the grantee shall provide sufficient customer service representatives and toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to ensure that a minimum of 90 percent of all calls will be answered within 30 seconds, and 90 percent of all calls for service will not be required to wait more than 30 seconds after such call has been answered before being connected to a service representative. All incoming customer service lines shall not be simultaneously busy more than three percent of the total time the cable office is open on any business day. 
(2)  Emergency staffing of phone lines. The grantee shall provide staffed emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a 24-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. 
(3)  Emergency system maintenance and repair crews. An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing system malfunctions on a 24-hour basis, shall be provided. 
(4)  Adequate installation staff. An installation staff, capable of furnishing standard installation to any subscriber within seven days after receipt of a request, shall be provided. The term "standard installations" shall mean those located up to 150 feet from where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. Drops shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Drop burial time limit. The grantee, at its sole expense, shall cause all drops required to be buried to be properly buried within 15 days of installation of service unless conditions during such period make burial impractical, in which case the drop shall be buried within 15 days after physical conditions reasonably allow for such burial. 
b.  Resolution of drop burial disputes. If any dispute occurs between the grantee and the subscriber as to when conditions permit burial of the drop, such dispute shall be resolved by the decision of the city's building official or other official designated by the city to resolve such disputes. 
(c)  Written instructions and information. The grantee shall provide written instructions and information at the time of installation and reinstallation, and at least annually thereafter, to all subscribers on products and services, prices and options, installation and service maintenance policies, instructions for using the system, and billing and complaint procedures as follows: 
(1)  Grantee information. Such instructions and information shall include the grantee's business address, applicable phone number, and the name of the appropriate official or department of the grantee to whose attention the subscriber should direct a request for service, request for billing adjustment, or complaint. 
(2)  Failure to respond in timely manner. Such instructions and information shall also include the name, business address, and telephone number of the designated city representative to whom the subscriber can call or write for information regarding the terms, conditions, and provisions governing the grantee's franchise if the grantee fails to respond within a reasonable period of time to the subscriber's complaint or request for installation, service, or billing adjustment. 
(3)  Grantee to furnish revisions promptly. The grantee shall promptly furnish revised written instructions and information to each subscriber whenever the previously provided instructions and information have been changed. 
(4)  Review. The written instructions and information provided for in this subsection shall be subject to the review by the city. 
(d)  Local office. For purposes of this section, the office that the grantee is required to maintain shall be a "virtual office" consisting of the following: 
(1)  A local or toll-free telephone number that all subscribers in the city may access from their homes 24 hours a day, seven days a week to register complaints or questions concerning the cable system and request repairs and adjustments; and 
(2)  A local office or acceptable alternative, as provided in the franchise agreement, where subscribers at no charge may pay their bills and arrange for delivery and/or pick up of converter boxes, remotes and similar equipment provided by the grantee. 
Notice of this information shall be provided to all new subscribers at the time of subscription and to existing subscribers annually. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.14; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.14), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-222. - Cable system service. 
(a)  System service interruptions. The cable system franchise grantee shall interrupt system service only with good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after periodic cablecasting notice of service interruption for two days prior to the anticipated interruption. Services may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance, and repair, without notification, except on Saturday, Sunday, Monday, holidays or the day after a holiday. 
(b)  Log of subscriber complaints. The grantee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, of all service complaints as follows: 
(1)  Content. Such log shall list the date and time of such complaints, identifying the subscribers and describing the nature of the complaints, and when and what actions were taken by the grantee in response thereto. 
(2)  Location, duration and availability. Such log shall be kept at the grantee's local office, if any, and shall promptly be made available by the grantee to the city, reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least three years. 
(3)  Summary submitted quarterly to city. The grantee shall submit a summary of such complaints quarterly to the city for its review. 
(4)  Billing complaints. The grantee shall resolve all billing complaints when they occur without any undue delay. The grantee shall give the city notice of any billing complaint that is not resolved within 30 days, along with an explanation of the nature of the complaint and the efforts underway to resolve it. 
(c)  Response to subscriber problem or outage. Under normal operating conditions as specified in section 26-221, the grantee shall maintain a sufficient repair force of competent technicians so as to respond effectively to any subscriber problem or outage within the following time periods, unless the applicable period is extended at the request of the subscriber or extended pursuant to the requirements of any applicable law or regulation: 
(1)  Subscriber problem. Same-day service, seven days a week for all requests for service received prior to 12:00 noon each day. In no event shall the response time for notice received after 12:00 noon exceed 24 hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time the grantee receives notice of the problem. 
(2)  Outage. Within two hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time the grantee discovers or receives notice of the outage. 
(d)  Appointment window for service. Upon receipt of a request for service, the grantee shall establish a four-hour appointment window with the subscriber or adult representative of the subscriber. The grantee shall respond to the request for service within such established appointment window. 
(1)  Subscriber not home upon arrival. If access to the subscriber's home is not made available to the grantee's technician when the technician arrives during the established appointment window, the technician shall leave written notification stating the time of arrival and requesting that the grantee be contacted again to establish a new appointment window. In such case, the required response time for the request for service shall be within seven days from the time the grantee is contacted to establish the new appointment window. 
(2)  Failure to grant access when contacted. Notwithstanding subsection (d)(1) of this section, if the grantee's technician telephones the subscriber's home before or during the appointment window and is advised that the technician will not be given access to the subscriber's home during the appointment window, the technician shall not be obliged to travel to the subscriber's home or to leave the written notification referred to in subsection (d)(1) of this section, and the burden shall again be upon the subscriber or adult representative of the subscriber to contact the grantee to arrange for a new appointment window, in which case the required response time for the request for service shall again be within seven days from the time the grantee is contacted to establish the new appointment window. 
(e)  Response for service completed with work. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, the grantee, under this section and section 26-221, shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service, a subscriber problem, or an outage only when sufficient technicians arrive at the service location, begin work on the request for service or remedial work, as the case may be, and proceed diligently to complete such work. 
(f)  Basis for service charges. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless the problem giving rise to the service request can be demonstrated by the grantee to have been: 
(1)  Caused by subscriber negligence; 
(2)  Caused by subscriber malicious destruction of cable equipment; or 
(3)  A problem previously established as having been noncable in origin. 
(g)  Service personnel and vehicle identified. All service personnel of the grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who have contact with the general public as part of their normal duties shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. The grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of the grantee shall be clearly identifiable by the public as such a vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.15; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.15), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-223. - Grantee's bills and communications. 
The cable system franchise grantee's bills to its subscribers shall be clear, concise, and understandable and shall be itemized as to each charge reflected thereon. The bill and any accompanying communication from the grantee to its subscribers and any other communication from the grantee to its subscribers shall not contain any false or misleading statement. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.16; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.16), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-224. - Termination and downgrade of service. 
(a)  Charge for disconnect or downgrade. The cable system franchise grantee shall make no charge to any subscriber on account of either complete discontinuance of service or net downgrade of service whereby the subscriber requests a lower tier of basic service and/or a net reduction in premium service. 
(b)  Disconnection for nonpayment, abuse and theft. The grantee may only disconnect a subscriber if at least 45 days have elapsed after the due date for payment of the subscriber's bill and the grantee has provided at least ten days' written notice to the subscriber prior to disconnection specifying the effective date after which cable services are subject to disconnection. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee may disconnect a subscriber at any time if the grantee in good faith and on reasonable grounds determines that the subscriber has tampered with or abused the grantee's equipment or is or may be engaged in the theft of cable services. 
(c)  Disconnection at subscriber's request. The grantee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests disconnection as follows: 
(1)  No period of notice prior to requested termination of service may be required of subscribers by the grantee. 
(2)  If the subscriber fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the effective date shall be deemed to be the day following the date the disconnect request is received by the grantee. 
(3)  No charge shall be imposed upon the subscriber for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the disconnect request. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.17; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.17), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-225. - Late payment charges. 
(a)  Fair and reasonable. Late payment charges imposed by the cable system franchise grantee upon subscribers shall be reasonably related to the grantee's cost of administering delinquent accounts. 
(b)  Minimum time elapsed before arrearage. No late payment charge shall be imposed upon a subscriber, and a subscriber shall not be deemed to be in arrears on a bill unless at least 30 days have elapsed after the due date specified on the bill. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.18; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.18), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-226. - Notice of programming or channel change. 
(a)  To subscribers and city representative in writing. The cable system franchise grantee shall provide at least 45 days' written notice to subscribers (30 days if there is more than one grantee operating in the city) prior to discontinuing any channel or programming service or to realigning any channel and shall provide written notice of such discontinuance to the city representative no later than the grantee's notice to subscribers. 
(b)  Right to contest or prohibit. Subsection (a) of this section shall not preclude the right of the city to contest or prohibit any such action by the grantee if and to the extent such right exists. 
(c)  Applicability to nonaffiliated provider. The notice required in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply when a programming service is discontinued because a nonaffiliated provider thereof discontinues furnishing the service to the grantee on less than 45 days' notice (30 days if there is more than one grantee operating in the city) to the grantee. In any such case, the grantee shall nevertheless furnish notice to its subscribers and the city representative promptly upon the grantee receiving notice of the discontinuance of the programming service from such nonaffiliated provider. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.19; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.19), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-227. - Price increases or reduction of service. 
(a)  Written notice to subscribers and city. The cable system franchise grantee shall provide at least 45 days' written notice to subscribers (30 days if there is more than one grantee operating in the city) prior to implementing any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in subscriber services and shall provide written notice of such increase or reduction to the city representative no later than the grantee's notice to subscribers. 
(b)  Right to contest or prohibit. Subsection (a) of this section shall not preclude the right of the city to contest or prohibit any such action by the grantee if and to the extent permitted by law. 
(c)  Communications furnished to city. Prior to or simultaneously with any communication made by the grantee to the general public or to the grantee's subscribers announcing or explaining any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in programming services, the grantee shall furnish a copy of such communication to the city representative. 
(d)  Reports furnished by grantee. The copy of the communication or the information so furnished by the grantee to the city representative under this section shall also be deemed to be a "report" under all applicable provisions of the franchise agreement relating to reports. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.20; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.20), 6-3-1998)  
Sec. 26-228. - Subscriber rebates. 
(a)  The cable system franchise grantee shall provide a customer with a full-day credit or a rebate for a service outage exceeding four hours in duration beyond the time that the customer notified the grantee of such outage. No credit or rebate shall be required where the outage was caused by matters beyond the immediate control of the grantee, such as, by way of example and not limitation, service outages caused by storms or other natural disasters. In no event shall the customer incur a charge for the portion that exceeds 48 hours of outage. The full-day credit specified in this subsection shall be equal to 1/30 of the subscriber's total monthly bill for all services and equipment other than pay-per-view; provided, however, if such monthly bill includes a charge for a pay-per-view program subject to such outage or significant impairment, the credit shall be increased by the amount of such charge. 
(b)  If a violation of this article by the grantee results in a subscriber not receiving cable programming service or receiving only significantly impaired service, the city, after notice to the grantee and an opportunity to be heard, may order and direct the grantee to issue a rebate to such subscriber in a reasonable amount determined by the city to provide monetary relief to the subscriber substantially equal to the subscriber's unliquidated detriment or loss resulting from such violation, not to exceed the subscriber's monthly bill. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a subscriber from requesting and receiving from the grantee a rebate greater than that provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 6-13.21; Ord. No. 432, § 1(6-13.21), 6-3-1998)  
Chapter 30 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 102; historical preservation, ch. 118; land division, ch. 122; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; housing cooperation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; economic development corporations act, MCL 125.1601 et seq.; downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.; empowerment zone development corporation, MCL 125.2563 et seq.; enterprise community development, MCL 125.2603 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPT HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-201 et seq. 
State Law reference— General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq.; state housing development authority act, MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the state housing development authority act, Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.). 
Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing project representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
Authority means the state housing development authority. 
Federally aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(1)  A below-market interest rate mortgage insured, purchased or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
(2)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and augmented by a program of rent supplements; 
(3)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
(4)  A mortgage on a housing project to which the authority allocates low income housing credits under section 22b of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1422b, MSA 16.114(22b)); or 
(5)  A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate income housing, consistent with the act. 
Housing development means a development that contains a significant element of housing for persons of low or moderate income and elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities which the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low or moderate income. 
Housing for the elderly means housing occupied by a family in which the head of the household is 55 years of age or older. 
Low income or moderate income persons and families means persons and families who cannot afford to pay the amounts at which private enterprise, without federally aided mortgages or loans from the authority, is providing a substantial supply of decent, safe, and sanitary housing and who fall within income limitations set in the act or by the authority in its rules. Among low income or moderate income persons, preference shall be given to the elderly and those displaced by urban renewal, slum clearance or other governmental action. 
Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and electrical service, which are paid by the housing development. 
(Code 1976, § 1-02.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 125.1411, MSA 16.114(11).  
Sec. 30-27. - Purpose. 
The act provides for tax exemptions for certain housing developments that are federally aided or state authority aided, and certain powers are allowed by the act to the city council as to whether the exemption should be allowed or whether a service charge in lieu of taxes should be charged and the amount of the charge. It is determined that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for low income persons, particularly older citizens who need a more supportive environment in their later years. A tax exemption and the setting of service fees in lieu of taxes for certain housing developments shall be provided. 
(Code 1976, § 1-02.01)  
Sec. 30-28. - Class of housing developments. 
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes, as provided in this article, shall be housing for the elderly, which is financed or assisted pursuant to the act. 
(Code 1976, § 1-02.03)  
Sec. 30-29. - Rochester Retirement Residence (a/k/a Cliffview). 
(a)  Generally. On December 31 of the year in which construction is completed and in which the completed affidavit form certified by the authority has been filed with the city assessor, as provided in Section 15a(1) of the Act (MCL 124.145a(1), the housing development known as Cliffview (parcel #70-15-03-326-004) and the property on which it is located is determined to be a housing development qualifying for tax exemption and shall be exempt from all property taxes. This section is intended to evidence and constitute a contract between the city and Cliffview LDHALP, with the authority as third party beneficiary, to provide tax exemption and accept service charges in lieu of taxes, as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Service charge imposed. No annual service charge in lieu of taxes shall be charged, except that if Cliffview is sold to Cliffview Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership ("Cliffview LDHALP") and Cliffview LDHALP, or any successor or assign, fails to achieve 80 percent low income tenancy for any given tax year, a service charge shall be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that portion of the housing development in excess of 20 percent that is occupied by other than low income persons or families in order that the service charge paid for that portion shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes that would be paid on that portion of the development if the development was not tax exempt. For purposes of computing the service charge, if any, the percentage of low income persons or families shall be determined as of December 31 of the preceding year. 
(c)  Payment of service charge. Any service charge in lieu of taxes shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before December 1 of each year. 
(d)  Duration. The provisions for Cliffview shall remain in effect for as long as the federally aided or authority aided mortgage or advance or grant from the authority remains outstanding or the authority has any legal interest in the housing development, but not beyond the duration permitted under the Act, MCL 125.1415a(3). 
(Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-18-2003; Ord. No. 488, § 1, 10-1-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 483, § 1, adopted June 18, 2003, repealed § 30-29, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 30-29 pertained to Rochester Retirement Residence and derived from Code 1976, § 1-02.04; and Ord. No. 437, § 1(1-02.04), adopted Dec. 25, 1998.  
Sec. 30-30. - Mercy Bellbrook. 
(a)  Generally. On December 31 of the year in which construction is completed and in which the completed affidavit form, certified by the authority, has been filed with the city assessor, as provided in section 15a(1) of the act (MCL 125.1415a(1), MSA 16.114(15a), (1)), the housing development identified as Mercy Bellbrook (parcels # 70-15-22-151-017 and 70-15-22-151-018) and the property on which it is located is determined to be a housing development qualifying for tax exemption and shall be exempt from all property taxes. 
(b)  Service charge imposed. An annual service charge in lieu of taxes shall be charged, which shall be equal to four percent of the annual shelter rents. If Mercy Bellbrook fails to achieve 80 percent low income tenancy for any given tax year, an additional service charge shall be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that portion of the housing development in excess of 20 percent that is occupied by other than low income persons or families in order that the service charge paid for that portion shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes that would be paid on that portion of the development if the development were not tax exempt. For purposes of computing the annual service charge, annual shelter rents and the percentage of low income persons or families shall be determined as of December 31 of the preceding year. 
(c)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before December 1 of each year. 
(d)  Duration. Unless modified by an amending ordinance, the provisions for Mercy Bellbrook shall remain in effect for as long as the federally aided or authority aided mortgage or advance or grant from the authority remains outstanding, but not for more than 50 years. 
(Code 1976, § 1-02.05; Ord. No. 437, § 1(1-02.05), 12-25-1998)  
Sec. 30-31. - Waltonwood. 
(a)  Generally. The housing developments known as Waltonwood (parcel # 70-15-07-476-008) and Waltonwood II (parcel # 70-15-07-476-007) and the property on which they are located are determined to be housing developments qualifying for tax exemption and shall be exempt from all property taxes, commencing on December 31, 1990, and December 31, 1997, respectively. 
(b)  Service charge imposed. An annual service charge in lieu of taxes shall be charged, which shall be equal to four percent of the annual shelter rents. If Waltonwood or Waltonwood II fails to achieve 80 percent low income tenancy for any given tax year, an additional service charge shall be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that portion of the housing developments in excess of 20 percent that is occupied by other than low income persons or families in order that the service charge paid for that portion shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes that would be paid on that portion of the developments if the developments were not tax exempt. For purposes of computing the annual service charge, annual shelter rents and the percentage of low income persons or families shall be determined as of December 31 of the preceding year. 
(c)  Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before December 1 of each year. 
(d)  Duration. Unless modified by an amending ordinance, the provisions for Waltonwood and Waltonwood II shall remain in effect for as long as the federally aided or authority aided mortgage or advance or grant from the authority remains outstanding, but not for more than 50 years. 
(Code 1976, § 1-02.06; Ord. No. 437, § 1(1-02.06), 12-25-1998)  
Sec. 30-32. - Danish Village. 
(a)  Generally . On December 31 of the year in which a completed affidavit form certified by the authority has been filed with the city assessor, as provided in Section 15a(1) of the act, MCL 125.1415a(1), the housing development known as Danish Village (Parcel No. 70-15-08-376-002) and the property on which it is located is determined to be a housing development qualifying for tax exemption and shall be exempt from all property taxes. This section is intended to evidence and constitute a contract between the city and Lutheran Social Services of Michigan, owner of Danish Village, with the authority as third party beneficiary, to provide tax exemption and accept service charges in lieu of taxes, as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Service charge imposed . An annual service charge in lieu of taxes shall be charged, which shall be equal to four percent of the annual shelter rents. If Danish Village fails to achieve 80 percent low income tenancy for any given tax year, an additional service charge shall be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that portion of the housing development in excess of 20 percent that is occupied by other than low income persons or families in order that the service charge paid for that portion shall be equal to the full amount of taxes that would be paid on that portion of the development if the development were not tax exempt. For purposes of computing the annual service charge, annual shelter rents and the percentage of low-income persons or families shall be determined as of December 31 of the preceding year. 
(c)  Payment of service charge . The service charge in lieu of taxes shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before December 1 of each year. 
(d)  Duration . The provisions for Danish Village shall remain in effect as long as the federally-aided or authority-aided mortgage or advance or grant from the authority remains outstanding, or the authority has any legal interest in the housing development, but not beyond the duration permitted under the act, MCL 125.1415a(3). 
(Ord. No. 501, § 1, 8-24-2005)  
Chapter 34. - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, ch. IX. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance pertaining to election precincts saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(16); administration, ch. 2; city council, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 34-26. - Purpose. 
Under chapter VII, section 7.3 of the Charter, the city council is required to redraw the boundaries of the city's four council districts following each official United States census. In redrawing the boundaries of the districts, the council shall follow the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 1-06.01)  
Sec. 34-27. - Reapportionment of districts. 
(a)  Generally. Within a reasonable amount of time following the date of the official release of the census figures for each United States decennial census, however, not to be later than 30 days after state law allows for precinct boundary changes, the city council, by resolution, shall reapportion the four districts of the city from which city councilmembers are elected. 
(b)  Effective duration. The apportionment plan adopted as provided in this article shall be in effect for the city's primary and general election following adoption of a reapportionment plan and until a new reapportionment plan is adopted after the next decennial census. 
(c)  Elections held according to Charter. After adoption of any reapportionment plan, councilmembers shall be elected from districts approved in the reapportionment plan, at such time and in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. 
(Code 1976, § 1-06.02)  
Sec. 34-28. - Population balance between districts. 
(a)  Generally. City council district boundaries shall be redrawn by the council as necessary to maintain the population balance between the districts. 
(b)  Factors considered. In carrying out the requirement of the Charter to maintain population balance between the districts, the council shall consider the following additional factors, giving importance to them in the order stated: 
(1)  Contiguous and compact. The districts shall be as contiguous and compact as possible. 
(2)  Quadrants of city recognized. Insofar as possible, the four districts shall recognize in separate districts the four quadrants of the city. 
(3)  Reasonable plan for election precincts. Insofar as possible, the drawing of district lines shall promote a reasonable and efficient plan for election precincts. 
(Code 1976, §§ 1-06.03, 1-06.04)  
Sec. 34-29. - Referral to council committee. 
Upon receipt by the city of the official United States census data, a committee of the city council composed of the three councilmembers elected at large and the city clerk shall convene, analyze census data, and, not later than the date set by state law to change precinct boundary lines, recommend to the city council a plan for reapportionment of the city council districts. 
(Code 1976, § 1-06.05)  
Sec. 34-30. - Official reapportionment plan. 
(a)  Adoption of resolution. Upon adoption of a resolution approving a reapportionment plan for redrawing of the city council districts, a certified copy of the resolution and the plan shall be filed and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Publication. The resolution and the plan shall be published once, within 30 days of adoption, in the city's official newspaper. 
(Code 1976, § 1-06.06)  
Chapter 38. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 42; fire prevention and protection, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq., MSA 3.4(1) et seq.; emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.2824(11) et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or manmade cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snow, ice or windstorm, tornado, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, hostile military or paramilitary action or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots or civil disorders. 
Disaster relief forces means all agencies of the city government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this chapter or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this chapter. 
Disaster relief volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the emergency management coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency management activity. 
District coordinator means the state police emergency management division district coordinator or his authorized representative. 
Emergency management has a broad meaning to include preparations for and relief from the effects of natural and manmade disasters, as defined in this section, and includes civil defense. 
Emergency management coordinator means the person appointed to coordinate emergency planning and services within the city as prescribed in this chapter. In the absence of an appointed person, the term "emergency management coordinator" means the mayor. 
Emergency operations plan means the city emergency operations plan which has been prepared under subsection 38-11(c) to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the city. 
Emergency situation means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined in this section, including but not limited to civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and a buildup of activities prior to an actual disaster. 
Local state of emergency means a declaration by the mayor pursuant to this chapter that activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the city emergency operations plan and authorizes the deployment and use of any city forces to which the plan applies. 
State of disaster means an executive order or proclamation by the governor under the provisions of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.) that activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the state, local and interjurisdictional emergency operations plans applicable to the counties or municipalities affected. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 30.402, MSA 4.824(12).  
Sec. 38-2. - Purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an organization that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency and disaster. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.01)  
Sec. 38-3. - Suspension of conflicting provisions. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.05)  
Sec. 38-4. - Responsibilities of officials. 
This chapter shall not relieve any elected officials or city departments of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.04.06)  
Sec. 38-5. - Liability of governmental functions. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. As such, neither the city nor city agents and representatives nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association nor councilmember nor any of the agents thereof acting in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of such activity. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.07.01) 
State Law reference— Liability for personal injury or property damage, MCL 30.411, MSA 4.824(21).  
Sec. 38-6. - Liability of property owners granting use of properties. 
Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of the real estate or other premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or during an authorized practice disaster exercise, together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for negligently causing death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or permission or for loss or damage to the property of such person. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.07.02) 
State Law reference— Immunity from liability of real estate owner, MCL 30.411, MSA 4.824(21).  
Sec. 38-7. - Office of emergency management. 
(a)  Agency authorized. The city office of emergency management shall be the coordinating agency responsible for citywide emergency preparedness; it shall provide the means through which the city council and the mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this chapter and Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.). 
(b)  Organization created. The mayor, with the approval of the council, is authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the city. The organization for providing emergency management shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Office established. An office of emergency management shall be established within the city government. 
(2)  Administrative head. It shall have an administrative head appointed who will be known as the emergency management coordinator. 
(3)  Assistants and employees. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-05.03.01, 2-05.03.02)  
Sec. 38-8. - Emergency management coordinator. 
(a)  Appointment. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint an emergency management coordinator who shall be a person with the personal attributes, experience, and training needed to coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments, and individuals within the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
(b)  Powers. The emergency management coordinator shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency management activities in the city. He shall maintain liaison with county, state, and federal authorities and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. 
(c)  Duties. Duties of the emergency management coordinator shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Disaster plans. Development of the city emergency operations plan and any other appropriate disaster plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower, and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Volunteers. Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency purposes. 
(3)  Information programs. Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property if a disaster occurs. 
(4)  Alerts. Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the city emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the city with emergency regulations, procedures, and operations. 
(5)  Activities of emergency agencies. Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs. 
(6)  Properties and shelters. Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
(7)  County and adjacent municipalities. Coordinating municipal emergency management activities with those at the county level and adjacent municipalities. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.03.03) 
State Law reference— Municipal emergency management coordinator, municipalities with 25,000 or more population, MCL 30.409(2), (5), MSA 4.824(19), (2), (5).  
Sec. 38-9. - Assistant emergency management coordinators. 
Assistant emergency management coordinators shall be designated to work with the emergency management coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant emergency management coordinators shall be selected and shall serve as follows: 
(1)  Each department. There shall be one such assistant emergency management coordinator appointed from each city department as designated by the department head, with the approval of the mayor, as part of the disaster relief forces. 
(2)  Duties. Assistant emergency management coordinators shall assume the duties of the emergency management coordinator whenever he is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations in the order of designation by the mayor, acting upon the recommendation of the emergency management coordinator. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.03.04)  
Sec. 38-10. - Emergency power and authority of mayor. 
(a)  Generally. The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this section. Whenever a situation requires or is likely to require that the mayor invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the city council to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands and shall report to the city council relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the council unless specifically provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Interim authority. When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the mayor may, until the council convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works; entering into contracts; incurring obligations; employment of temporary workers; rental of equipment; purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities; and expenditure of existing funds. The council is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(c)  Declaration of local state of emergency. Under the following circumstances, the mayor may declare a local state of emergency exists in the city and may assemble and utilize the disaster relief forces in accordance with the city emergency operations plan, and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such disaster relief forces: 
(1)  Disaster or emergency. Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation in the city or state is imminent. 
(2)  Duration. During any period of disaster in the city or state and thereafter as long as he shall deem it necessary. 
(d)  Declaration of state of disaster. Whenever the mayor deems that any condition in the city is beyond the control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, he may request the governor to declare a state of disaster exists in the city by instructing the emergency management coordinator to contact the district coordinator in accordance with section 14 of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.414, MSA 4.824(24)). 
(e)  Powers. The mayor, with the approval of the council, is empowered and has the authority to: 
(1)  Expenditures for disaster. Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster purposes. 
(2)  Health and safety assistance. Provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. 
(3)  Disaster relief. Assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the city relating to firefighting; engineering; rescue; health, medical, and related services; police; transportation; construction; and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the city. 
(4)  Foreign attack. If a foreign attack occurs upon this state, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work; entering into contracts; incurring of obligations; employment of permanent and temporary workers; utilization of volunteer workers; rental of equipment; purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials, and facilities; and appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(f)  Governmental succession. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(g)  Regulations. The mayor, with the approval of the council, may make regulations permitting the emergency management coordinator to assemble and utilize the disaster relief forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.04.01(A)—(F)) 
State Law reference— Municipalities with appointed coordinators, power and authority, MCL 30.410, MSA 4.824(20).  
Sec. 38-11. - Disaster relief forces. 
(a)  Director. The mayor, as executive head of the city government, shall be the director of the disaster relief forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the emergency management coordinator. 
(b)  Personnel, equipment and facilities. The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for or adaptable to emergency management activities may be designated as part of the total disaster relief forces. Such designations shall be by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(c)  Emergency operations plan. All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and other agencies of the city designated by the mayor, with the approval of the council, as disaster relief forces shall cooperate with the emergency management coordinator in the formulation of the emergency operations plan, and they shall assist the emergency management coordinator in all matters pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Rights of city employees. City employees assigned to duty as a part of the disaster relief forces pursuant to this chapter shall retain all of the rights, privileges, and immunities of city employees and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-05.04.01—2-05.04.03, 2-05.04.05) 
State Law reference— Powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities of disaster relief forces while on duty, MCL 30.411, MSA 4.824(21).  
Sec. 38-12. - Volunteers. 
(a)  Authority to appoint. Each city department, commission, board, or other agency may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such department, commission, board, or agency in time of emergency. 
(b)  Subject to rules and regulations. Such individuals shall be enrolled as disaster relief volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, commission, board, or agency head for such volunteers. 
(c)  Duties. The emergency management coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the city has no counterpart or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in emergency activities. 
(d)  Formal records. The emergency management coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for worker's compensation purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.04.04) 
State Law reference— Powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities of disaster relief forces while on duty, MCL 30.411, MSA 4.824(21).  
Sec. 38-13. - Willful obstruction or action prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any disaster relief forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.06.01)  
Sec. 38-14. - Misrepresentation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the city disaster relief forces unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. 
(Code 1976, § 2-05.06.02)  
Chapter 42 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; emergency management, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Emergency services authority, MCL 124.601 et seq.; emergency medical services, MCL 333.20901 et seq.; local government unit ambulance or life support operations, finances, regulatory ordinances, MCL 333.20948. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 515, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2006, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 42-26—42-65, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 
State Law reference— Alarm systems, MCL 338.1083 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system. A detection device or an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention or to which police, firefighters, paramedics and/or other public safety personnel are expected or requested to respond. The term includes any system that can electronically cause an expected response by a law enforcement agency or fire/emergency services agency to a premises by means of the activation of an audible signal, visible signal, electronic notification, or video signal, or any combination of these signals. The term "alarm system" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following types of devices: "automatic holdup alarm," "burglar alarm," "local alarm," "intrusion alarm," "holdup alarm," "panic alarm." Alarm systems designed solely to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located shall not be regulated by this article, unless such alarm systems employ an audible signal emitting sounds, or flashing lights or beacons, or "silent" signals to emergency officials or monitoring agencies, designed to signal persons outside the premises. 
Alarm system contractor. A person engaged in the installation, maintenance, repair, alteration or servicing of alarm systems or who responds to an alarm system. The term "alarm system contractor" shall not include a business that only sells or manufactures alarm systems unless the business services alarm systems, installs alarm systems, or monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. 
Alarm user . The person, partnership, corporation, company, or other entity who requested the installation of the alarm system, or who has either an ownership interest in the premises, a leasehold interest, or who occupies the premises, or who has dominion and control over the premises, where the alarm system is installed or operating. In the event the premises are owned or occupied by a partnership, corporation, or other entity, each owner, officer, partner, or operator shall be deemed to be an alarm user. For purposes of prosecuting violations of this article, and for purposes of collecting fees incurred for false alarms, the person or entity whose name appears as being associated with the property protected by the alarm system on the most current city tax roll and/or the person whose name appears on the alarm registration permit list on file with the sheriff's department, shall be presumed to be the alarm user. 
Cost of police response. The amount reasonably calculated by the sheriff's department and the finance department to recover all or a portion of the actual cost to the city for police response to false alarms and related investigation. The cost of police response may include costs for the use of sheriff's department equipment, the expenditure of sheriff's department resources, the cost of contracted assistance or services, and the wages and benefits for each sheriff's deputy who responds or assists with the response to the false alarm in accordance with lawful and established police response protocol. 
False alarm . The activation of an alarm system causing a sound or visual signal through mechanical failure, faulty equipment, malfunction, improper installations, and/or lack of prudent maintenance, or the negligence of the alarm user or of his, her, or its employees, agents, guests, residents, or invitees. False alarms that are intentionally activated shall not constitute a false alarm for purposes of this article, but may be prosecuted as criminal offenses. An alarm triggered by a household or domesticated animal shall constitute a false alarm. A false alarm shall be presumed when an alarm is tested without prior written notice to the city, and when a police investigation reveals no evidence of criminal activity, an illegal entry or an attempt thereof. The term "false alarm" does not include the following: 
(1)  Activation by tornado, storm, earthquake, or other violent condition beyond the control of the alarm user; 
(2)  False alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of telephone or public utility company facilities; 
(3)  Utility pole accidents; 
(4)  Testing of the alarm system after prior notification has been received by the sheriff's department; or 
(5)  Intentional and non-malicious activation of an alarm or emergency response system due to a real or perceived need for police assistance, regardless of whether assistance was actually necessary. 
Police response. A response to an alarm by the sheriff's department or other law enforcement agency or other public safety personnel. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-27. - Purpose. 
(a)  The prohibition of false alarms and regulation of alarm systems is necessary in order to preserve peace and tranquility in the community and to reduce the frequency and to defray the cost of repeated response to false alarms by law enforcement personnel. 
(b)  Further, elimination of false alarms will allow public safety personnel to be more available and respond more readily to alarms requiring immediate attention. 
(c)  To encourage alarm users throughout the city to maintain operational reliability and properly use alarm systems in a manner which will reduce false alarm responses by the sheriff's department and other public safety personnel, thereby reducing and preventing the misuse of sheriff's department resources at taxpayer expense. 
(Ord No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-28. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforceable by the county sheriff and the sheriff's deputies, who shall have authority to issue and serve appearance citations. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-29. - License required for alarm system contractor. 
Unless licensed pursuant to the Private Security Guard Act of 1968, 1968 PA 330 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.), a person shall not engage in the business of alarm system contractor in the city. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-30. - Automatic telephone alarms. 
No person shall operate, install or direct the installation of an alarm system that when activated will, by telephone or by mechanical, electronic, or any other means, automatically call, dial or connect to any law enforcement agency, fire department, or any city department, office or official for the purpose of delivering a prerecorded message. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-31. - Alarm duration. 
(a)  Limit of 15 minutes. No person shall operate, install or direct the installation of any alarm system that emits an audible or visible signal for a period exceeding 15 minutes. 
(b)  For sale systems. An owner or lessee of an alarm system shall bring alarm systems offered for sale in the city into conformance with this section. 
(c)  Alarm shut-off. Alarm systems equipped with audible signals, e.g. bells, horns, sirens, shall be fitted with a shut-off device that automatically silences the audible signal within 15 minutes of activation. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-32. - Registration of persons to deactivate system. 
The owner or lessee of a new alarm system shall immediately upon installation and the owner or lessee of an existing system shall provide notification that the property is served by an alarm system and provide the sheriff's department with the name, address and telephone number of one or more persons who can be called upon to deactivate the alarm system at any time. However, it shall not be considered a violation of this article if such persons are not available to deactivate the alarm system when called upon to do so. 
(Ord. No 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-33. - Alarm system permit. 
(a)  Registration permit. Within ten business days of installation of an alarm system, the alarm user shall register their alarm with the sheriff's department. 
(b)  Notice of registration. All alarm providers shall advise all alarm users with whom they do business that the alarm user must obtain register their alarm system with the sheriff's department. 
(c)  Registration renewal. By January 30 of each year, all alarm users shall renew their alarm user registration permit with the sheriff's department. 
(d)  Failure to pay fees and penalties owing. Annual alarm registration permit will not be renewed until any alarm fees or penalties assessed under this article are paid or properly waived by the city as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-34. - Alarm reporting. 
(a)  Verify alarm. Alarm system contractors shall attempt to verify an alarm signal, except for duress, hold up or medical emergency alarms. When reporting alarms to the sheriff's office or dispatch center, the alarm system contractor shall indicate whether verification was made. 
(b)  Alarm cancellations. The alarm system contractor shall notify the dispatch center of all verified alarm cancellations. No false alarm fees shall be charged for cancelled calls. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Secs. 42-35—42-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FALSE ALARMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— False Alarms, MCL 338.1085. 
 
Sec. 42-61. - Prohibited. 
False alarms are prohibited. Each occurrence shall be considered a separate offense chargeable to the owner or lessee of the alarm system. A person who violated this section shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-62. - Alarm user liability. 
Alarm users shall be jointly and severally responsible for violations of this article, including owner(s), co-tenants or lessor(s) and lessee(s). The payment of false alarm response costs, fines, or fees shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge, or reduce any civil or criminal liability of the person or entity billed for the response costs, except to the extent that such responsibility arises out of this article. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-63. - Alarm system contractor liability. 
Alarm system contractors are responsible for the proper installation, maintenance, repair, alteration, and/or service of alarm systems. Any violation of this article caused by a contractor's improper installation, maintenance, repair, alteration, and/or service of alarm systems constitutes a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalty actions set forth against alarm users in this article. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-64. - Authority to abate nuisance. 
False alarms are deemed to be a public nuisance. In addition to authority to abate the public nuisance provided by city ordinance or city charter and impose penalties as set forth in this article, the sheriff's department, or other public safety personnel responding to a false alarm shall have authority to undertake reasonable measures to deactivate the alarm system, where necessary, in order to stop the audible or visible signal being emitted by the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-65. - Violations; penalties; fees. 
(a)  The occurrence of a false alarm shall constitute a violation of this article. To ensure that all alarm systems are properly maintained in good operating order and to minimize the cost to the city for false alarms, alarm users and alarm system contractors shall be held responsible as provided in this section. Notwithstanding any penalties provided for a violation of this article, and notwithstanding the fact that a prosecution for a violation of this article has or has not been commenced, alarm users shall pay to the city a fee or fine as provided in this section, for each false alarm, and shall also be held responsible as follows: 
(1)  First false alarm requiring a police response within a calendar year: warning notice pursuant to subsection (g), with no fine or fees. 
(2)  Second, third, fourth, and fifth false alarm requiring a police response within a calendar year shall be assessed fees as provided in section 54-436. 
(3)  Subsequent false alarms requiring six or more police responses within a calendar year shall be considered a municipal civil infraction and upon determination of responsibility therefor shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.00 and assessed an administrative fee as provided in section 54-436. 
(4)  Any false alarm that occurs after March 31, 2007, on an alarm system that has not been registered as required by section 42-33 shall be subject to an additional fee as provided in section 54-436. 
(5)  Where the occurrence of a false alarm is in premises that are leased or otherwise not occupied by the owner, the notice of infraction for the false alarms in subsections (g) and (h) shall be sent to both the owner(s) and the person who occupies the leasehold premises. 
(b)  Exceptions. No fine or fee shall be assessed for an alarm which was activated by criminal activity, attempted criminal activity, or a verified medical emergency for which the alarm was intended. 
(c)  Shut-off fee. Alarm systems equipped with audible signals that are not fitted with a shut-off device shall be subject to deactivation by representatives of the sheriff's department. The alarm user shall be subject to a shut-off fee as provided in section 54-436, in addition to any false alarm fees, which may be associated with the summons of an emergency police response. 
(d)  Payment due. Payment of the false alarm fee shall be paid to the city within 30 days after the city's mailing of an invoice for the fee to the address where the alarm system is located. The amount of the invoice shall constitute a debt in favor of the city and the obligation of the alarm user. The invoice shall also include the following provision: "A person aggrieved by this false alarm determination may submit a letter of appeal to the sheriff's department for review of the determination or penalty being appealed, as provided in section 42-66 of the City Code of Ordinances." 
(e)  Failure to pay. A person or entity liable for the payment of a police response fee who fails to make payment in full to the city within 30 days of the invoice date shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be responsible for fines up to $500.00, and for full payment of the fee, and for a five percent late payment penalty to reimburse the city for a portion of its administrative costs incurred for pursuing and processing the overdue invoice. This provision shall be tolled in the event that the alarm user appeals pursuant to the appeal provisions of this article, but such payment shall be due to the city within ten business days of the date of the appeal decision. 
(f)  City recourse. When payment of the city's invoice is not timely made, the city shall have the following recourse: 
(1)  The city may commence a civil action against a person who is liable for the payment of the cost of police response and who fails to make payment in full to the city as required by this article. The city shall be entitled to recover the collection expenses, statutory interest, court costs, and reasonable attorney fees incurred for pursuing the civil action. 
(2)  False alarms are deemed a public nuisance, and therefore any invoice, including the late payment penalty, which remains unpaid for 90 days from the invoice date, and which is not being reviewed pursuant to the appeal provisions of this article, shall constitute a lien against the premises to which the sheriff's department responded. The mayor or mayor's authorized representative may certify the delinquency to the city assessor and in such case the fee shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a lien against the premises which shall be collected and enforced in the same manner with the same interest and penalties as general property taxes against such premises. An additional $20.00 fee shall be added and certified to the tax assessing officer for collection. 
(3)  The city may cite the alarm user for a municipal civil infraction pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  First false alarm notice. For a first false alarm requiring a police response within a calendar year, the sheriff's department alarm compliance officer shall mail a false alarm warning notice to the alarm user at his, her, or its last known address by first class mail following the false alarm occurrence. The notice shall indicate the occurrence of the false alarm and the potential penalties, as set forth in this article, for future false alarm occurrences. The letter shall also include the following provision: "A person aggrieved by this false alarm determination may submit a letter of appeal to the alarm compliance officer, within ten business days, for review of the determination or penalty being appealed, as provided in section 42-67 of the City Code of Ordinances." 
(h)  Subsequent false alarms action. The occurrence of six or more false alarms requiring a police response within a calendar year is deemed to be a public nuisance. After the occurrence of a sixth such false alarm within a calendar year, the city attorney may seek abatement of the nuisance in conjunction with prosecution in the district court for a violation of subsection (a) of this section. In the event that the district court action does not result in an order requiring abatement of the nuisance, the city council may authorize the city attorney to initiate civil proceedings in the Oakland County Circuit Court for court-ordered abatement of the nuisance. 
(i)  Presumption as to "alarm user". For purposes of prosecuting violations of the penal provisions of this section, and for purposes of collecting the fees incurred because of excessive false alarms, "alarm user" is presumed to be that person whose name appears on the most recent assessment roll approved by the board of review, as updated, associated with the real or personal property protected by the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-66. - Waiver of fee. 
(a)  Notice of false alarm. The sheriff's department alarm compliance officer shall notify the alarm user, in writing, of each instance where a false alarm has been recorded. The alarm user shall have the opportunity within ten business days from the date of mailing or personal delivery to submit a report for the purpose of showing cause as to whether circumstances exist to warrant voiding the false alarm recordation, and shall include all documentation supporting the request. The alarm compliance officer shall review the alarm user's report and/or meet with the alarm user and issue a written determination to the alarm user as to whether or not the false alarm record will be voided. 
(b)  Maximum of two waivers. No more than two false alarms per calendar year shall be waived due to malfunction, maintenance, equipment failure, or user error. 
(c)  Waiver. The alarm compliance officer may waive the false alarm fee under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Alarm system malfunction. The fee may be waived if, prior to submittal of the waiver request, corrective measures to repair an alarm system malfunction causing the false alarm have been instituted, provided the alarm system owner or lessee presents documentation that repair service to correct the malfunction has been performed by an alarm system contractor licensed under the provisions of the Private Security Guard Act of 1968, Public Act No. 330 of 1968 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.), as amended. 
(2)  Extenuating circumstances. The fee may be waived where in the alarm compliance officer's discretion cause is shown that the false alarm was attributable to extenuating circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the alarm system owner or lessee and did not result from neglect, disrepair, lack of maintenance or improper installation. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-67. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. In the event the request to waive the false alarm fee or other fee assessed by this article is denied by the alarm compliance officer, the alarm user may appeal the decision by submitting a written notice of appeal to the alarm compliance officer within ten business days of the denial. The alarm compliance officer shall forward the notice of appeal and all supporting documentation along with the sheriff department's file on the waiver request to the alarm appeal panel. 
(b)  Alarm appeal panel. The alarm appeal panel shall be a three-member panel comprised of: one representative appointed by the city council, one representative appointed by the mayor, and one representative of the sheriff's department. 
(c)  Decision. The alarm appeals panel shall review the alarm compliance officer's decision, the alarm user's report and/or meet with the alarm user and issue a written determination to the alarm user as to whether or not the false alarm record will be voided. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-68. - Defective alarms; inspection. 
(a)  An alarm system signaling more than five false alarms within a calendar year shall be inspected and modified to be less susceptible to false alarms. Upon written notice, the owner or alarm user of the building or residence shall have the alarm system inspected and modified, at the owner or user's expense, by a licensed alarm system contractor within ten business days of the date of the notice, and shall forward to the sheriff's department the contractor's report of the probable cause of the false alarms and the measures instituted to eliminate same. 
(b)  Failure to have an alarm system inspected after the written notice is issued pursuant to subsection (a) shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, punishable as provided by ordinance. 
(c)  Exemptions. Severe weather, power outages, transmission line malfunctions, malicious acts of person(s) not under the control of the alarm user, or any other cause clearly beyond the reasonable control of the alarm user may be considered in determining whether or not enforcement action will be taken against the alarm user as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 42-69. - No liability of city. 
The city assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of any security or fire alarm system, for any failure or neglect of any person associated with the installation, operation or maintenance of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect of any alarm user, for the transmission or receipt of alarm signals or any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm from any source. In the event that the city finds it necessary to revoke an alarm registration permit or to otherwise provide for the disconnection of any alarm system, the city shall have no liability for such action. No special duty other than that owed to the general public shall be created by virtue of this article or by virtue of the issuance of an alarm registration permit. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Secs. 42-70—42-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COST RECOVERY FOR CERTAIN EMERGENCY RESPONSES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Fees for emergency services authorized, MCL 41.806a. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 42-91—42-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INCIDENTS INVOLVING DRIVERS OPERATING UNDER THE INFLUENCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 42-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency response means: 
(1)  The dispatch, provision or utilization of police, firefighting, emergency medical and/or rescue services by the city or by a law enforcement agency or private individual or entity operating at the request or direction of the city, in connection with an accident involving one or more motor vehicles where one or more of the persons involved was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of or impaired by alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof or while having an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content; or 
(2)  An incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest of a person who was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of or impaired by alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof or while having an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content. 
Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city or by a law enforcement agency or private individual or entity operating at the request or direction of the city while making an emergency response to the accident or incident, including the costs of providing law enforcement, firefighting, emergency medical and/or rescue services at the scene. These costs shall further include but not by way of limitation the following: 
(1)  The salaries and wages of personnel responding to the incident; 
(2)  The salaries and wages of personnel engaged in investigation, supervision, and report preparation; 
(3)  Costs associated with chemical testing; and 
(4)  The costs of prosecution. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-117. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and accidents that occur in the city involve persons who have operated a motor vehicle while under the influence of or impaired by alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof or while having an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content. 
(b)  The city council also finds there is a high incidence of personal injury and property damage relative to traffic accidents involving persons who operate motor vehicles while under the influence of or impaired by alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof or while having an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content. 
(c)  Consequently, a significantly greater operational and financial burden is placed upon law enforcement, firefighting, emergency medical and rescue services by persons who operate motor vehicles while under the influence of or impaired by an alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof or while having an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content. 
(d)  Therefore, the purpose of this division is to require responsible persons to pay the cost of such services. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19.01)  
Sec. 42-118. - Person responsible for expense. 
(a)  Liability. A person is responsible and shall be liable for the expense of an emergency response if, while under the influence of or impaired by alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof or while having an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content, that person's operation of a motor vehicle proximately creates or causes any incident or accident resulting in an emergency response. 
(b)  Operation of motor vehicle and convicted. For the purpose of this division, a person is considered to have operated a motor vehicle while under the influence of or impaired by alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof or while having an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content, if the person is convicted of the following: 
(1)  Operating motor vehicle while impaired. A violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), (5) or (6) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5) or (6), or section 98-64; or 
(2)  Felonious driving, etc., while impaired. Felonious driving, negligent homicide, or manslaughter, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle while the person was impaired by or under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance or had an unlawful blood alcohol level or bodily alcohol content. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19.03.01)  
Sec. 42-119. - Charge against person responsible. 
The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person responsible for the expenses under this division. The charge shall constitute a debt of that person and shall be collectible by the city in the same manner as a debt or obligation arising under a contract. Additionally, the district court is authorized to collect the debt for the city and may impose an administrative service fee for such collection in an amount to be mutually agreed upon by the court and the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19.03.02)  
Sec. 42-120. - Expense schedule. 
The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of an emergency response under this division. This schedule shall be kept on file with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19.03.03)  
Sec. 42-121. - Billing. 
The city clerk may, within 30 days after conviction of the person responsible under this division for the expense of an emergency response, mail or deliver to that person a bill for that expense. The bill shall be fully payable within 30 days from the date of billing. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19.03.04)  
Sec. 42-122. - Failure to pay expense. 
(a)  Default. Any neglect or failure by a person responsible under this division for the expense of an emergency response to fully pay the bill within 30 days of billing shall be considered to be a default. 
(b)  Possible violation of probation. The failure to pay may further be considered a violation of probation if the payment was ordered by the court at the time of sentencing. 
(c)  Recovery through civil proceedings. The city may commence civil proceedings to recover the expenses and all other costs authorized by law. 
(Code 1976, § 7-19.03.05)  
Secs. 42-123—42-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 42-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous material means any substance or material which, in the determination of the city fire chief, is dangerous or harmful to the environment or human or animal life, health or safety or that constitutes a danger or threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, irritating material, etiologic material, radioactive material, corrosive material, liquified petroleum gas, or any other hazardous substance or material as defined under the Fire Prevention Code (MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.) or part III of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 pertaining to hazardous waste management (MCL 324.11101 et seq., MSA 13A.11101 et seq.). 
Hazardous material incident means a fire, explosion, spill, leak or other accidental, negligent, improper or dangerous discharge or release of a hazardous material. 
Responsible party means any person who owns, possesses or controls a hazardous material involved in a hazardous material incident, and any person whose transportation, storage, handling, sale, use or processing of a hazardous material causes or results in a hazardous material incident. 
(Code 1976, § 8-09.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-152. - Declaration and purpose. 
Hazardous material incidents, as defined in section 42-151, are declared to be a public nuisance. Therefore, the purpose of this division is to require the reporting of hazardous material incidents; to provide for the removal, lawful disposal and cleanup of hazardous materials that are accidentally, negligently, improperly or dangerously discharged or released; and further to require responsible parties to reimburse the city for the city's cost incurred in responding to or abating such incidents. 
(Code 1976, § 8-09.01)  
Sec. 42-153. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. A responsible party who violates any requirement of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Enforcement authority. This division shall be enforceable by the county sheriff, the sheriff's deputies, the city fire chief, and the city fire chief's authorized representatives, who shall have authority to issue and serve appearance citations. 
(Code 1976, § 8-09.06)  
Sec. 42-154. - Reporting and cleanup. 
(a)  Reporting of hazardous material incident. A responsible party shall immediately and fully report to the city fire department the known details regarding the occurrence of a hazardous material incident. 
(b)  Cleanup of hazardous material. Except in regard to a hazardous material incident which, in the fire department's determination, creates, causes or may result in a dangerous or emergency condition, the responsible party shall immediately, fully, safely and lawfully clean up, remove and dispose of the hazardous material involved in the hazardous material incident and fully restore the area to its prior condition. 
(c)  Dangerous or emergency conditions. In regard to a hazardous material incident which, in the fire department's determination, creates, causes or may result in a dangerous or emergency condition, the fire department may take any necessary steps and prescribe any necessary restrictions and requirements to protect persons and property until the dangerous or emergency condition is abated. 
(Code 1976, § 8-09.03)  
Sec. 42-155. - Reimbursement of city's cost. 
(a)  Liability. Where, due to a responsible party's neglect, failure or inability to immediately, fully or properly fulfill the requirements of section 42-154, or, due to the existence of a dangerous or emergency condition, it is necessary for the fire department to inspect, investigate, clean up or otherwise respond to or take action to abate a hazardous material incident, the responsible party shall be liable to and shall reimburse the city, within 30 days of billing, for the city's costs incurred. 
(b)  Costs included. The city's costs to be reimbursed under subsection (a) of this section shall include the following: 
(1)  Labor. Actual labor costs of city personnel, including worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits and administrative overhead; 
(2)  Equipment operation. The cost of equipment operation; 
(3)  Materials. The cost of materials obtained or used; 
(4)  Contracts. The cost of any contracted labor and materials; and 
(5)  Other. Any other costs reasonably incurred by the city in connection with the inspection, investigation, cleanup, or other response or action undertaken to abate a hazardous material incident. 
(Code 1976, § 8-09.04)  
Sec. 42-156. - Failure to reimburse. 
If a responsible party neglects or fails to reimburse the city as required in section 42-155, the city, in addition to criminal prosecution under section 42-153, may institute appropriate civil legal action to recover the city's costs. 
(Code 1976, § 8-09.05)  
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; dangerous buildings, § 18-491 et seq.; community development, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 74; noise on trailways, § 74-210; noise by charitable solicitors, § 78-97; noise by itinerant merchants, § 78-202; solid waste, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 102; vegetation, ch. 106; weed control, § 106-121 et seq.; floods, ch. 114; historical preservation, ch. 118; land division, ch. 122; natural resources, ch. 126; performance standards, § 126-101 et seq.; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq.; smoking in public places, MCL 333.12601 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BLIGHT PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 46-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brush means cut or broken branches. 
Building materials includes but is not limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, structural or miscellaneous steel, nails, or any other materials used in construction. 
Junk includes parts of machinery or motor vehicles; unused stoves, refrigerators or other appliances stored in the open; remnants of wood; metal; or any other material or castoff material of any kind, whether or not such could be put to any reasonable use at some future time. 
Junk automobile includes any motor vehicle that is kept, parked or stored, other than in a completely enclosed building, and is not in operating condition, is not properly licensed or is incapable of performing the transportation function for which it was manufactured. The term "junk vehicle" does not include a motor vehicle ordinarily used, but temporarily out of running condition. 
(Code 1976, § 8-04.02; Ord. No. 404, § 1(8-04.02), 12-18-1996) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-27. - Purpose. 
Blight, potential blight, certain environmental causes of blight, or blighting factors that exist or that may exist shall be prevented, reduced, or eliminated, consistent with the letter and spirit of Public Act No. 344 of 1945 (MCL 125.71 et seq., MSA 5.3501 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 8-04.01; Ord. No. 404, § 1(8-04.01), 12-18-1996) 
State Law reference— Rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq., MSA 5.3501 et seq.  
Sec. 46-28. - Enforcement authority. 
This article shall be enforced by such person as may be designated by the mayor. 
(Code 1976, § 8-04.05; Ord. No. 404, § 1(8-04.05), 12-18-1996)  
Sec. 46-29. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  First offense. The owner, if possible, or the occupant of any property upon which any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in this article is found to exist shall, upon the first offense, be notified in writing to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors from such property within seven days after service of the notice upon him. Such notice may be served personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  Subsequent violations. For subsequent or repeat violations by the same person, such written notice shall not be required. 
(c)  Granting of additional time. Additional time may be granted by the enforcement officer where bona fide efforts to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors are in a state of progress deemed satisfactory to the enforcement officer. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-04.06.01, 8-04.06.02; Ord. No. 427, §§ 1(8-04.06.01), 1(8-04.06.02), 11-19-1997)  
Sec. 46-30. - Failure to comply; municipal civil infraction. 
Failure to comply with the notice provided in section 46-29 by the owner and/or occupant within the time allowed shall constitute a violation of this article. A person who violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Code 1976, § 8-04.06.03; Ord. No. 427, §§ 1(8-04.06.03), 1(8-04.06.04), 11-19-1997)  
Sec. 46-31. - Causes of blight or blighting factors. 
It is determined that the following uses, structures and activities are causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods: 
(1)  Junk automobiles. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of junk automobiles, except in a completely enclosed building. 
(2)  Building materials. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon the property and the materials are intended for use in connection with such construction. 
(3)  Junk. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish, or refuse of any kind, except for domestic refuse stored in a covered metal container for a period not to exceed 30 days; firewood that is neatly stacked so as not to provide harborage for rodents and vermin; and yard waste compost piles that are properly maintained to prevent odor, rodent, vermin or insect nuisances. 
(4)  Uninhabitable structures. 
a.  Due to disaster. In any area, the existence of any structure or part of a structure which, because of fire, wind, or other disaster, is no longer habitable as a dwelling or is not useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended and is left in that condition for a period of more than six months. 
b.  Due to physical deterioration. In any area, the existence of any structure or part of a structure which, because of physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling or is not useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  Vacant buildings. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the existence of any vacant dwelling, garage, or other outbuilding unless such building is kept securely locked and the windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals or trespassers. 
(6)  Partially completed structures. In any area, the existence of any partially completed structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within the life of the building permit or a valid extension thereof. 
(7)  Public roads and utility rights-of-way. In any area, allowing any of the causes of blight or blighting factors in subsections (1) through (6) of this section to exist on any public road right-of-way located between private or corporate property and an existing or dedicated street, alley, road or highway or upon any public utility easement or right-of-way located adjacent to such property. 
(Code 1976, § 8-04.03; Ord. No. 404, § 1(8-04.03), 12-18-1996)  
Sec. 46-32. - Responsibilities of property owners, tenants and occupants. 
(a)  Property owners. No property owner shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in section 46-31 upon any property in the city owned by such person. 
(b)  Tenants or occupants. Any tenant or occupant of property in the city shall also be responsible for any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in section 46-31 that he creates or permits on the property leased or occupied by him. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-04.04.01, 8-04.04.02)  
Sec. 46-33. - Applicability to areas other than residential. 
(a)  Generally. The causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in section 46-31 as applicable to areas zoned for residential purposes are also determined to be causes of blight or blighting factors and subject to the prohibitions of this article if located in areas zoned for other than residential purposes, unless such uses of property are incidental to and necessary for the carrying out of any business or occupation lawfully being carried on upon the property in question. 
(b)  Considerations. For purposes of this article, such business or occupation shall be considered lawful only when being carried out in a manner as prescribed by chapter 138 pertaining to zoning and any other applicable provisions, laws, or regulations of the city, county, state or federal governments. The proof that such use is incidental to and necessary for the carrying out of such business shall rest with the owner or user of the property, and such use shall not, in any case, constitute a hazard to the health or welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-04.04.03)  
Secs. 46-34—46-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
Public or private property or waters includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  The right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof and including the ice above such waters; 
(2)  Any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; and 
(3)  Any residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
(Code 1976, § 8-05.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-62. - Purpose. 
The dumping or disposal of waste material shall be prohibited to protect the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens. 
(Code 1976, § 8-05.01)  
Sec. 46-63. - Restrictions. 
It is declared to be unlawful for any person knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or waters other than property designated and set aside for such purposes within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-05.03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 324.8902(1).  
Sec. 46-64. - Signs and receptacles. 
(a)  Posting of signs. All public authorities having supervision of public property of this state or any political subdivision thereof may post notice signs and otherwise publicize the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Receptacles. All public authorities having supervision of public property in this state may establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter on the property and publicize the location thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 8-05.04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 324.8906.  
Sec. 46-65. - Violations. 
A violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 604 , § 1, 6-4-2018)  
Secs. 46-66—46-85. - Reserved.  
Chapter 50. - ETHICS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.; personnel, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq., MSA 4.1700(51) et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Violation of chapter. 
This chapter is intended to establish standards governing conduct in dealings with the city. Violations of this chapter shall not make the violator subject to fine or incarceration. 
(Code 1976, § 1-05.07)  
Sec. 50-2. - Purpose. 
Public officials and employees, by virtue of their positions, are trustees of the public, chargeable with honesty, integrity and openness in their handling of public affairs. Any deviation from such expectation, even where completely proper, makes the public highly suspicious and distrusting and should be carefully and conscientiously avoided. This chapter establishes the standards that should govern the conduct of all officials and employees of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 1-05.01)  
Sec. 50-3. - Intent of standards of ethical conduct. 
It is the intent of this chapter that the city's mayor and its councilmembers, full-time and part-time employees, consultants and members of boards and commissions avoid any action, whether or not specifically prohibited by this chapter, that might result in or create the appearance of: 
(1)  Using public office or employment for private gain; 
(2)  Giving preferential treatment to any organization or person; 
(3)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; 
(4)  Losing complete independence or impartiality of action; 
(5)  Making a government decision outside official channels; or 
(6)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 1-05.02)  
Sec. 50-4. - Disclosure of conflict of interest. 
(a)  In writing. Where there is any question concerning a conflict of interest, even though it may not exist in actuality, the particular situation should be disclosed in writing. 
(b)  Councilmembers to council president. The city councilmembers shall make disclosures to the council president who shall review and file them with the city clerk. 
(c)  All others to mayor. All other city employees, officials, members of boards and commissions and consultants shall make disclosures to the mayor who shall review and file them with the city clerk who shall attach to the original acknowledgment of receipt. 
(d)  Treatment by council president and mayor. The council president and mayor shall treat a disclosure in a discreet manner, and confidentially, until: 
(1)  The matter is considered prior to a public vote; 
(2)  Public disclosure is necessary under law; or 
(3)  The council president or mayor shall determine disclosure necessary or advisable, considering the interests of the city and those of the individual involved. 
(Code 1976, § 1-05.03)  
Sec. 50-5. - Actions and transactions to be avoided. 
The actions and transactions that shall be avoided under this chapter include the following: 
(1)  Divulging confidential information. Divulging to an unauthorized person confidential information acquired in the course of service to the city in advance of the time prescribed for its authorized release to the public. 
(2)  Soliciting gifts or loans. Soliciting or accepting a gift or loan of money, goods, services, or other things of value for the benefit of a person or organization which tends to influence the manner in which the public official or employee or another public official or employee performs official duties. 
a.  Exclusions. This does not apply to acceptance of perishable or consumable gifts of a nominal value, nor reasonable personal entertainment. 
b.  Return of substantial gifts. Gifts that are of a substantial nature shall be returned to the donor with the explanation that city policy will not permit the acceptance of the gift. The city will reimburse the expense of returning such gifts. 
(3)  Business transactions. Engaging in a business transaction in which the public official or employee may profit from the official's or employee's official position or authority or benefit financially from confidential information which the public official or employee has obtained or may obtain by reason of that position or authority. 
(4)  Incompatible employment. Engaging in or accepting employment or rendering services for a private or public interest when that employment or service is incompatible or in conflict with the discharge of the official's or employee's official duties or when that employment may tend to impair the official's or employee's independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties. 
(5)  Dealing with business entities. Participating in the negotiation or execution of contracts, making of loans, granting of subsidies, fixing of rates, issuance of permits or certificates, or other regulation or supervision relating to a business entity in which the public official or employee has a financial or personal interest. 
(6)  Interest in firm dealing with city. Holding substantial financial interest (i.e., any stake, including stockholder, partner, joint venture, creditor, guarantor or director) in a firm which provides services or supplies, materials or equipment to the city. This subsection shall not apply to an individual holding an interest in a firm providing services or supplies, materials, or equipment to the city if, after reporting the conflict as required in section 50-4, all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The contract for services or supplies, materials, or equipment is awarded pursuant to sealed bids obtained under the provisions of article VI of chapter 2, pertaining to purchasing, of this Code; 
b.  The individual is not involved, directly or indirectly, with making the decision on the award of the contract or the department of the city for which the contract relates; and 
c.  The city council, after reviewing the circumstances, determines the award of the contract would be in the best interests of the city. 
(7)  Dealing in city property purchases. Speculating or dealing in equipment, supplies, materials or property purchased by or sold to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 1-05.04)  
Sec. 50-6. - Stock holdings in publicly held corporations. 
The holding of any security not exceeding one percent of the total outstanding stock of a publicly owned corporation (i.e., one whose stock is listed on a national stock exchange) will not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 1-05.05)  
Sec. 50-7. - Delivery of copies of chapter. 
(a)  New employees. The human resources director shall deliver, in the new employee orientation packet, a copy of this chapter to each new employee. 
(b)  Newly elected or appointed officials. The city clerk shall deliver, by mail or otherwise, a copy of this chapter to newly elected and appointed officials at the time of appointment or taking of office. 
(c)  New consultants hired by council. New consultants hired by the city council shall be mailed a copy of this chapter by the city clerk. 
(d)  Consultants hired by department director. A department director shall notify the city clerk in writing of any new consultant hired directly by the director's department, and the city clerk shall forward a copy of this chapter to the consultant. 
(e)  Amendment of chapter. Any time this chapter is amended, the clerk shall deliver new copies of this chapter with an acknowledgment of receipt, by mail or otherwise, to all employees, officials, and consultants at the time of amendment. 
(f)  Posting annually. The city clerk shall annually post at all city sites, between November 15 and December 1, this chapter. 
(g)  Acknowledgement of receipt. The clerk shall also request each such person to sign and return to the clerk an acknowledgment of receipt of a copy of this chapter. The acknowledgment shall be filed in the clerk's office and shall remain in effect until termination of employment or expiration of appointment. 
(h)  Recording by clerk. Subsequent to such delivery, the clerk shall prepare and retain in the city files a record showing the date of delivery to each of the persons identified in this section and shall retain the acknowledgment of receipt. 
(Code 1976, § 1-05.06)  
Chapter 54 - FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-201 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; land development regulation fees, ch. 110. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the various fees charged under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.01), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 54-2. - Adoption. 
The city council adopts the following fees and fines schedule for public records and services provided by the city, and for ordinance violations which constitute municipal civil infractions. Any parts of ordinances or city council resolutions which are inconsistent with this chapter are repealed. This chapter is intended to preserve all existing fees, charges and fines set forth in any other ordinance and to fulfill the requirements of any ordinance authorizing the city council to establish fees. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 419, § 1(1-08.02), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 434, § 1(1-08.02), 10-21-1998; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 463, § 1(1-08.02), 6-27-2001)  
Sec. 54-3. - Violations; penalty. 
All violations of this chapter shall be municipal civil infractions and upon a determination of responsibility therefor shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 457, § 3, 1-26-2000)  
Secs. 54-4—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Birth certificates. 
The fees for birth certificates shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the original certified document ..... $15.00 
(2)  For each additional certified copy furnished at the same time the original document is requested ..... 5.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 487, § 1, 10-1-2003; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 54-31A. - Burning permit. 
The fee for an annual recreational fire permit shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 514, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 54-32. - Cemetery. 
The fees for the cemetery shall be as follows: 
(1)  Space fee, Sections 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6: 
a.  Residents ..... $ 750.00 
b.  Nonresidents ..... 1,100.00 
c.  Transfer fee from resident to nonresident ..... 350.00 
(2)  Babyland space fee, Section 7: 
Residents only; includes space, opening and closing, and chapel; Monday through Saturday burials ..... 500.00 
(3)  Burial opening and closing fees: 
a.  Weekdays, includes chapel ..... 950.00 
b.  Saturdays ..... 1,250.00 
c.  No Sundays or holidays 
d.  Disinterment - burials ..... 1,250.00 
(4)  Monument foundation fee ..... price varies depending on size 
(5)  Cremation space fee, Section 8: 
a.  Residents ..... 200.00 
b.  Nonresidents ..... 300.00 
(6)  Cremation opening/closing fees: 
a.  Burial performed by cemetery sexton without family presence ..... 300.00 
b.  Gravesite interment (Monday through Friday) ..... 500.00 
c.  Gravesite interment (Saturday) ..... 600.00 
d.  Use of chapel for all cremation options - add $100.00 to cremation opening/closing fees. 
e.  Disinterment - cremations ..... 300.00 
(7)  Cremation urns ..... price varies 
(8)  Cremation niches: 
a.  Niches begin at ..... 1,200.00 
(9)  Cremation niches opening/closing fees: 
a.  Interment performed by cemetery sexton without family presence ..... 300.00 
b.  Interment (Monday through Friday) ..... 500.00 
c.  Interment (Saturday) ..... 600.00 
d.  Use of chapel for all cremation options - add 100.00 to cremation opening/closing fees. 
e.  Disinterment - cremation niches ..... 300.00 
(10)  Scattering garden: 
a.  Residents ..... 400.00 
b.  Nonresidents ..... 450.00 
c.  Name and date engraved on Memorial Wall ..... cost based on current market pricing 
(11)  Selling of burial/cremation spaces and cremation niches back to the city: 
a.  Both subsection (1) spaces and subsection (5) cremation spaces will fall under the following buy-back progression: 
•  Within one to five years of purchase, the city will buy back the space at 75 percent of what it was sold for. 
•  Within six to ten years of purchase, the city will buy back the space at 50 percent of what it was sold for. 
•  After ten years of purchase there will be no refund from the city. 
b.  The buy-back for subsection (8) cremation niches will follow the same progression as listed above, but will also take into account the market value cost of replacing the granite face of the niche if names/dates were previously etched. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 1, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-33. - Confiscated illegal signs. 
The fees for retrieving confiscated illegal signs from the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Signs less than six square feet, each ..... $ 5.00 
(2)  Signs six square feet or greater, each ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000)  
Sec. 54-34. - Copy costs. 
The fees for copy costs shall be in accordance with the requirements of state law and shall be as follows: 
(1)  All paper copies made within the general acceptable scope of a copy machine (8 ½ x 11, 8 ½ x 14, 11 x 17) (per page) shall be ..... $0.10 
(2)  Print made of microfilm document: 
a.  First page of document ..... 1.50 
b.  Each additional page of document ..... 0.30 
(3)  Assessor's sales data: 
a.  Sales data history (one year of history), per book ..... 25.00 
(4)  Topographic map/blue line: 
a.  Quarter section, each ..... 25.00 
b.  Half section, each ..... 50.00 
(5)  Topographic map/Mylar: 
a.  Quarter section, each ..... 50.00 
b.  Half section, each ..... 100.00 
(6)  Plan sheet: 
a.  Blue line (24" x 36"), each ..... 5.00 
b.  Mylar, each ..... 5.00 
(7)  Engineering services Xerox copies: 
a.  24" x 36" print ..... 5.00 
b.  18" x 24" print ..... 4.00 
(8)  Engineering services microfilm, OCE: 
a.  24" x 36" print ..... 7.00 
b.  18" x 24" print ..... 5.00 
c.  8½" x 11" print ..... 3.00 
(9)  Tapes/DVD/CD (city): 
a.  Audiotape provided by the city ..... 10.00 
b.  DVD provided by the city ..... 10.00 
c.  CD provided by the city - per requested report ..... 10.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 12-15-2004; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 571 , § 1, 2-11-2013; Ord. No. 594 , § 2, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 571 , § 2, adopted Feb. 11, 2013, repealed § 54-35, in its entirety. Former § 54-35 pertained to "Culverts". See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-36. - Death certificates. 
The fees for death certificates shall be as follows: 
(1)  Original certified document ..... $15.00 
(2)  Each additional certified copy furnished at the same time the original document is requested .....  5.00 
(3)  Correction fee: 
a.  First copy ..... 15.00 
b.  Each additional copy furnished at the same time the first copy is requested .....  5.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 487, § 2, 10-1-2003; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 54-36A. - Tax assignment fee. 
In addition to the principal balance owed (and interest and penalty, if applicable), there shall be a $25.00 tax assignment fee added. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Secs. 54-37—54-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 594 , § 3, adopted Mar. 27, 2017, deleted §§ 54-37—54-39, all which pertained to fees for fire, hazardous material, fireworks and pyrotechnic display permits and derived from: Ord. No. 410, adopted Mar. 19, 1997; Ord. No. 433, adopted July 1, 1998; Ord. No. 453, adopted Jan. 5, 2000; Ord. No. 462, adopted July 5, 2000; Ord. No. 480, adopted Mar. 12, 2003; and Ord. No. 514, adopted Nov. 1, 2006.  
Sec. 54-40. - Marriage services. 
The fee for marriage services performed by the mayor shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 452, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 506, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 54-41. - Meeting rates. 
Meeting rates for "special meeting requests" shall be as follows: 
(1)  City council, per meeting ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  Planning commission, per meeting ..... 750.00 
(3)  Zoning board of appeals, per meeting ..... 625.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003)  
Sec. 54-42. - Use of municipal office auditorium or conference rooms. 
(a)  The fees for the use of the municipal office auditorium or conference rooms shall be as follows: 
Day 	Minimum Four-Hour Charge 	Additional Time Per-Hour Charge 
Saturdays 	$240.00 	$ 60.00 
Sundays and holidays 	320.00 	 80.00 
 
(b)  Please note that normal weekday evening use will be accommodated without a service charge if a custodian is working in the offices. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 54-43. - Returned items for nonsufficient funds, account closed. 
The fee for all returned items due to nonsufficient funds, account closed, etc. shall be $30.00 per return. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 12-15-2004)  
Sec. 54-44. - Police reports. 
The fees for police reports shall be as follows: 
(1)  First page ..... $4.00 
(2)  Each additional page ..... 1.00 
(3)  Fingerprinting residents ..... 5.00 
(4)  Background report residents ..... 5.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 54-45. - Recording fees. 
Recording fees shall be in accordance with current fees charged by Oakland County Clerk/Register of Deeds Office. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 4, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-46. - Roadside stands, markets, and Christmas tree sales. 
The fees for operating roadside stands, markets, and Christmas tree sales shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a resident residing on the property and operating: 
a.  Roadside stand or market ..... $110.00 
b.  Tree sales ..... 110.00 
c.  Application fee ..... 100.00 
d.  No bond is required. Application fees are nonrefundable. 
(2)  All others: 
a.  Permit fee (per month) ..... 170.00 
b.  Application fee ..... 100.00 
c.  The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 565, § 2, 1-9-2012; Ord. No. 582 , § 1, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 5, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-47. - Tax abatement filing fees. 
Tax abatement filing fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Industrial development district ..... $ 500.00 
(2)  Industrial facilities exemption certificate ..... 500.00 
(3)  Commercial development district ..... 500.00 
(4)  Commercial facilities exemption certificate ..... 500.00 
(5)  Research and technology development district ..... 500.00 
(6)  Research and technology facilities exemption certificate ..... 500.00 
(7)  Industrial revenue bond financing: economic development corporation (Public Act No. 338 of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.) and Public Act No. 62 of 1963 (MCL 125.1251 et seq.), one-half of one percent of bond issue. Minimum ..... 2,000.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000)  
Sec. 54-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 494, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2004, repealed § 54-48, which pertained to bonds and permit fees for temporary construction sites and derived from Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; and Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000.  
Sec. 54-49. - Voter registration materials. 
The fees for voter registration materials shall be as follows: 
(1)  Voter information on disc, per report ..... 10.00 
(2)  Voter information via electronic mail ..... 10.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 506, § 1, 4-5-2006; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 6, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-50. - Weight scale. 
The fees for weight scale shall be $5.00 per vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000)  
Sec. 54-51. - City Charter, C.I.P., budget and CAFR. 
The charge for a copy of the city Charter, capital improvements plan book, budget, and comprehensive annual financial report shall be: 
(1)  $0.10 per copy page, in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 7, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-52. - Maps. 
The fees for maps shall be as follows: 
(1)  Historical ..... $ 8.00 
(2)  Zoning ordinance (including zoning map) ..... 25.00 
(See sec. 54-54 for all other maps.) 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 10-22-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 54-53. - No trespassing sign. 
The fee for a "No Trespassing" sign shall be $10.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003)  
Sec. 54-54. - Geographic Information System (GIS) data and maps. 
The fees for data sets and maps created using the GIS shall be as follows: 
Map Products 
Product     Fee 
Aerial photo only (8.5" x 11") ..... $2.50 
Aerial photo only (8.5" x 14") ..... 2.50 
Aerial photo only (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Aerial photo only (24" x 36") ..... 5.00 
Cellular towers (11" x 17") ..... 7.00 
Census tracts - city (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Composite map - aerial photo and parcels (8.5" x 11") ..... 2.50 
Composite map - aerial photo and parcels (8.5" x 14") ..... 2.50 
Composite map (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Composite map - aerial photo and parcels (24" x 36") ..... 5.00 
Composite map - quarter section - aerial photo and parcels (36" x 36") ..... 50.00 
Council districts/polling locations (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Custom maps hourly fee of ..... 60.00 
Historic districts (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Line and annotation (8.5" x 11") ..... 2.50 
Line and annotation (8.5" x 14") ..... 2.50 
Line and annotation (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Line and annotation (24" x 36") ..... 5.00 
Master right-of-way (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
New residential development ..... 7.00 
Pathway (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Precinct (20" x 28") ..... 7.00 
Section map with address (20" x 20") ..... 6.00 
Sidwell book - entire book (11" x 17") ..... 300.00 
Sidwell book - page (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Street (20" x 28") ..... 4.00 
Street - by section book (8" x 11") ..... 8.00 
Street jurisdiction (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Subdivision (20" x 28") ..... 4.00 
Vacant land (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Zip codes - city (11" x 17") ..... 3.00 
Zoning (20" x 28") ..... 4.00 
Digital Data (CDs or E-Mail Only) 
Aerial photo - entire city (MrSID Compressed) ..... $375.00 
Oblique aerial photo tile (digital) ..... 25.00 
Oblique aerial photo tile (printed) (includes royalty for copyrighted material) ..... 15.00 
Cellular tower locations - city ..... 35.00 
City council districts ..... 15.00 
Color IR aerial photo - each tile (9,000' x 9,000') ..... 375.00 
Index contours - block (4 sections) ..... 20.00 
Index contours - city ..... 125.00 
Intermediate contours - block (4 sections) ..... 75.00 
Intermediate contours - city ..... 600.00 
Parcels - city ..... 200.00 
Parcels - section ..... 25.00 
Precinct boundaries ..... 15.00 
Road edges - city ..... 35.00 
School districts - city ..... 15.00 
Street centerline - city ..... 200.00 
Zoning - city ..... 35.00 
Landfile data - city ..... 110.00 
Appraisal data - city ..... 110.00 
Tax data - city ..... 110.00 
Sales data - city (up to one year) ..... 30.00 
Commissioner district - entire county ..... 15.00 
Municipal district - entire county ..... 15.00 
State House district - entire county ..... 15.00 
State Senate district - entire county ..... 15.00 
U.S. Congressional district - entire county ..... 15.00 
Media Mailing 
Product Mailed     Fee 
CD (per CD) ..... Actual cost 
Map ..... Actual cost 
(Ord. No. 475, § 1, 7-17-2002; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 506, § 1, 4-5-2006; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 571, § 3, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 594 , § 8, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-55. - Educational services. 
(1)  CPR class (per person/per class) ..... $20.00 
(2)  First aid and CPR class (per person/per class) ..... 30.00 
There is a $10.00 additional charge (per person/per class) for nonresidents. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 54-56. - Miscellaneous services. 
(1)  Notary services - each signature ..... $ 5.00 
(2)  Passport photographs ..... 10.00 
(3)  Third party release of funds ..... 75.00 
(4)  Refund fee for payment error-property taxes ..... 20.00 
(5)  Refund/transfer for payment in error or with incorrect account number ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 4-5-2006; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 571, § 4, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 588 , § 1, 11-10-2014)  
Secs. 54-57—54-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR 
 
Sec. 54-91. - Liquor licenses. 
The fees for liquor licenses as provided in section 6-37 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application for new license ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  Application for transfer of license ..... 1,000.00 
(3)  Change of stock interest in corporation of existing license holder ..... 1,000.00 
(4)  Annual liquor inspection fee .....   550.00 
The annual liquor inspection fee is for the initial inspection and one re-inspection. 
(5)  Re-inspection fee per inspector .....   100.00 
The re-inspection fee must be paid prior to scheduling any additional re-inspections. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.06), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 465, § 1, 11-28-2001)  
Secs. 54-92—54-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
 
Sec. 54-121. - Carnival, circus, etc. 
The fee for a carnival, circus, etc., permit, per day, as provided in section 10-59, shall be $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.03), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 54-122. - Dancehalls and roller rinks. 
The permit fee for dancehalls and roller rinks, as provided in section 10-122, shall be $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.01), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 54-123. - Mechanical and electronic amusement devices. 
The license fees for mechanical and electronic amusement devices, as provided in section 10-187, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Initial application for license ..... $250.00 
(2)  Renewal application (received by January 15th) ..... 100.00 
(3)  Renewal application (after January 15th) ..... 150.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.02), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 588 , § 2, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-124. - Video centers. 
The license fees for video centers shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application fee, as provided in section 10-287 ..... $100.00 
(2)  Annual license fee, as provided in section 10-289 ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.05), 3-19-1997)  
Secs. 54-125—54-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-151. - Permit fee schedule. 
The fees for services and acts performed by the building department, including, but not by way of limitation, the issuance of building permits, examination of plans and specifications, inspection of construction undertaken pursuant to a building permit, issuance of certificates of use and occupancy, issuance of permits for demolition of and moving of buildings, special investigations, reinspections, etc., shall be paid as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.02.02; Ord. No. 582 , § 2, 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 54-152. - Permit application fee. 
A nonrefundable application fee shall accompany each building permit application. The fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential additions/alterations ..... $100.00 
(2)  Nonresidential additions/alterations ..... 250.00 
(3)  New residential buildings ..... 250.00 
(4)  New nonresidential buildings ..... 750.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.01; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 9, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-153. - Building permit valuation. 
The building permit fee shall be based on the estimated cost of the project as computed from the current International Code Council (ICC) Building Valuation Data Report, exclusive of site work. The fee shall be based on the building construction valuation as follows: 
(1)  Up to $1,000.00 ..... $ 85.00 
(2)  Over $1,000.00 to $10,000.00 ..... 85.00 
Plus, for each additional $1,000.00 or part thereof over $1,000.00 ..... 22.00 
(3)  Over $10,000.00 ..... 283.00 
Plus, for each additional $1,000.00 or part thereof over $10,000.00 ..... 7.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.02; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 10, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-154. - Plan review fees. 
(a)  The building permit fee shall be based on the total estimated cost of the project as computed from the current International Code Council (ICC) Building Valuation Data Report, exclusive of site work. Plan review fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  R-3 and U plan review shall be computed at 0.00162 of the estimated construction cost or $85.00, minimum. This fee covers two reviews: the initial review and one re-review. A fee of $85.00 per hour will be charged for additional reviews. 
(2)  All others shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Zero dollars to $1,250,000.00 shall be computed at 0.00244 of the estimated construction cost or $165.00 minimum. 
b.  Over $1,250,000.00 shall be computed at 0.0008 of the estimated construction cost plus the first $1,250,000.00 at 0.00244. 
This fee covers two reviews: the initial review and one re-review. A fee of $85.00 per hour will be charged for additional reviews. 
(b)  Review of site plans associated with planning commission activities, shall be charged at $85.00 per hour. 
(c)  Where review of construction documents is performed by city employees other than building department employees, the review fee shall be charged at $85.00 per hour. 
(d)  Plan review of hazardous materials shall be charged at $85.00 per hour. 
(e)  Plan review for accessibility, energy, structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and fire protection shall be charged at 15 percent of the building plan review fee or $165.00 minimum. This fee covers two reviews: the initial review and one re-review. A fee of $85.00 per hour will be charged for additional reviews. 
(f)  Payment shall be in advance of the review based on estimated cost. 
(g)  Where review of construction documents is performed by outside consultants, the review fee shall be charged at 1.5 times the actual cost. Payment shall be in advance of the review based on estimated cost. 
(h)  High hazard occupancies (group H) will be charged an additional 25 percent of the calculated plan review fee. 
(i)  Pre-qualification or special inspection agency $85.00 per hour. 
(j)  Each phased building permit will be charged an additional $500.00. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.03; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 3, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 11, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-155. - Factory-built buildings. 
The permit fees for factory-build buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Within the MH district, the fee shall be $255.00 per dwelling unit. 
(2)  In other districts, the fee shall be the same as the building permit valuation. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.04; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 12, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-156. - Certificate of occupancy. 
The fees for certificates of occupancy shall be as follows: 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy request not part of a building permit ..... $165.00 
(2)  Temporary certificate of occupancy, each request or extension (R-3) ..... 250.00 
(3)  Temporary certificate of occupancy, each request or extension (all others) ..... 500.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.05; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 4, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 13, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-157. - Demolition fee. 
The fees for demolition permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Per structure, up to 1,000 square feet of floor area ..... $165.00 
(2)  Each additional 1,000 square feet of floor area ..... 40.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.06; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 14, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-158. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 54-158, in its entirety. Former § 54-158 pertained to "Construction or demolition bonds". See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-159. - Construction board of appeals. 
The fee for actions of the construction board of appeals shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.08; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000)  
Sec. 54-160. - Reinspection fee. 
For reinspection under this article, the fee shall be $85.00. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.09; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 15, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-161. - Safety and special inspections. 
The fees for safety and special inspections conducted under this article shall be an hourly rate of $85.00 with a one-hour minimum per inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.10; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 16, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-162. - Cancellation of permit. 
If a building permit is canceled, all fees shall be refunded except the application fee, 25 percent of the permit fee, $85.00 per inspection, and plan review fees. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.11; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 17, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-163. - Residential builder licenses. 
All contractors shall register their license with the city before work is commenced. Registration shall be valid until the expiration date on the license. This fee shall not be prorated. The fees for residential builder licenses, as provided in section 18-4, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential builder registration ..... $15.00 
(2)  Maintenance and alteration contractor registration ..... 15.00 
(3)  Administration fee for registration ..... 15.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0A.12; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 582 , § 5, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 18, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-164. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 54-164, in its entirety. Former § 54-164 pertained to "Work started without building permit". See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-165. - Zoning review. 
For review of zoning and zoning compliance, the fee shall be $85.00. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 5, 1-9-2012; Ord. No. 594 , § 19, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 54-166—54-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 54-191. - Alarm system only. 
The fees for fire alarm systems, only, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Building area less than 12,000 square feet ..... $290.00 
(2)  Building area less than 25,000 square feet ..... 390.00 
(3)  Building area less than 50,000 square feet ..... 500.00 
(4)  Building area less than or equal to 100,000 square feet ..... 680.00 
(5)  Building area more than 100,000 square feet ..... 680.00 
Plus, per 1,000 square feet over first 100,000 square feet ..... 4.00 
(6)  Installation of central station supervision of existing suppression system ..... 280.00 
(7)  Modification of less than six detectors of an existing system ..... 165.00 
(8)  Multistory, each floor above the first, one-half the original fee 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.01; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 20, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-192. - Fire suppression systems with or without alarm. 
The fees for fire suppression system permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Modification of less than six heads of an existing system, each ..... $170.00 
(2)  Limited area suppression system ..... 170.00 
(3)  Building area less than 25,000 square feet ..... 450.00 
(4)  Building area less than 50,000 square feet ..... 580.00 
(5)  Building area less than or equal to 100,000 square feet ..... 790.00 
(6)  Building area more than 100,000 square feet ..... 790.00 
(a)  Plus, per 1,000 square feet over first 100,000 square feet ..... 4.00 
(7)  Flushing, each ..... 85.00 
(8)  Multistory, each floor above the first, one-half the original fee. 
(9)  Fire pump ..... 220.00 
(10)  Kitchen hood systems ..... 330.00 
(11)  Special hazard ..... 330.00 
(12)  Backflow preventer/double check valve ..... 150.00 
(13)  Special and safety inspection, per hour with one hour minimum ..... 85.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.02; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 514, § 4, 11-1-2006; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 6, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 21, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-193. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 582 , § 7, adopted Mar. 17, 2014, repealed § 54-193, entitled "Division of fees", which derived from: Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.03; and Ord. No. 453, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 2000.  
Sec. 54-194. - Necessity of plumbing permit. 
Under this division, where a connection to a domestic water supply is to be made or where modifications to the domestic water supply is made, a separate plumbing permit shall be obtained by a licensed plumbing contractor. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.04; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000)  
Sec. 54-195. - Plan review fees. 
Plan review fees made pursuant to this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the purposes of this division, the fees for plan review and other miscellaneous fees shall be provided in division 1 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.05; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 54-196. - Refund. 
When installation has not occurred, all monies paid pursuant to this division shall be returned except 25 percent of the permit fee plus $85.00 per inspection plus plan review fees. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.06; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 22, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-197. - Suppression system installer's license. 
The fee for registration for a suppression system installer's license, as provided in section 18-5, shall be $15.00. Registration shall be valid until the expiration date on the license. The fee is not prorated. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0B.07; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 582 , § 8, 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 54-198. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-198, in its entirety. Former § 54-198 pertained to other miscellaneous fees. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
DIVISION 2A. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 54-199. - Administrative charges. 
Fire department billings will include an administrative charge of 20 percent of the total billing or $100.00, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-200. - Recreational fire permit. 
The fee for an annual recreational fire permit shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-201. - Cost recovery fees. 
The fees for cost recovery billings (one-hour minimum and 15-minute increments after initial hour) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Administrative vehicle ..... $50.00 
(2)  Utility vehicle ..... 50.00 
(3)  Ambulance ..... 100.00 
(4)  Ladder truck ..... 200.00 
(5)  Rescue truck ..... 125.00 
(6)  Engine ..... 1505.00 
(7)  Fire chief—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(8)  Deputy chief—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(9)  Assistant chief—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(10)  Battalion chief—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(11)  Captain/fire marshal—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(12)  Captain/training officer—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(13)  Captain/EMS coordinator—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(14)  Lieutenant/fire inspector—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(15)  Communications supervisor—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(16)  Lieutenant/paramedic—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(17)  Firefighter/paramedic—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(18)  FT EMT—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(19)  Part-time firefighter/EMT—Actual hourly wage plus benefits. 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 23, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-202. - Educational services. 
(1)  CPR class (per person/per class) ..... $25.00 
(2)  First aid and CPR class (per person/per class) ..... 35.00 
There is a $10.00 additional charge (per person/per class) for nonresidents. 
(3)  Fire extinguisher training (per person/per class) ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 24, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-203. - Emergency medical services. 
(1)  Basic life support ..... $475.00 
(2)  Advanced life support ..... 650.00 
(3)  Advanced life support (ALS2) ..... 800.00 
(4)  Fee for oxygen ..... 50.00 
(5)  Fee for transportation (per mile) ..... 12.00 
(6)  Fee for defibrillation ..... 75.00 
(7)  Extrication ..... 300.00 
(8)  Treat without transport ..... 200.00 
(9)  Operating while intoxicated (OWI). Billings will be based upon actual expenditures incurred. (One-hour minimum and 15-minute increments after initial hour). 
(10)  Any remaining medical billing balance less than $100.00 after insurance/self-pay payment will be waived for Rochester Hills residents, with the exception of incidents related to OWI. 
(11)  Return check fee ..... $30.00 
(12)  Lift assist - fee for service to cover lift assist/unnecessary responses to assisted living and skilled nursing facilities. The fee would be assessed to the facility, not the patient and only assessed when the resident is clearly not injured and refuses care and/or treatment ..... 250.00 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 25, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-204. - Fire incidents. 
The fees for fire incident reports shall be as follows: 
(1)  First page ..... $4.00 
(2)  Each additional ..... 1.00 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-205. - Patient care. 
The fees for patient care reports shall be as follows: 
(1)  First page ..... $4.00 
(2)  Each additional page ..... 1.00 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-206. - Fire safety inspections. 
The fees for fire safety inspections shall be as follows: 
(1)  Initial and first re-inspection ..... No charge 
(2)  Second re-inspection (same violation) unresolved ..... $100.00 
(3)  Third re-inspection (same violation) unresolved ..... 150.00 
(4)  Fourth re-inspection (same violation) unresolved ..... 200.00 
(5)  Fifth and subsequent re-inspections (same violation) unresolved ..... 250.00 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 26, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-207. - Fireworks/pyrotechnics display permit. 
The fees for fireworks/pyrotechnics display shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fireworks ..... $300.00 
(2)  On-stage pyrotechnics ..... 250.00 
(3)  Fireworks display would require the presence of a member from the fire marshal's office during the actual display. This cost would be incurred and based on actual expenditures (one-hour minimum) and billed to the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 27, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-208. - Plan reviews. 
The charge for each review by the fire department of one-family residential detached condominium, subdivision plat, site plan, unplatted land development, construction plan, or hazardous material plan shall be $75.00 per hour (one-hour minimum and 15-minute increments after initial hour). 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-209. - Freedom of information requests. 
The fee for FOIA research shall be $75.00 per hour (one-hour minimum and 15-minute increments after initial hour). 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-210. - Pre-incident surveys. 
Michigan Firefighter Right-to-Know Site specific fee: 
(1)  Building area less than 12,000 square feet ..... $250.00 
(2)  Building area between 12,000 and 25,000 square feet ..... 325.00 
(3)  Building area between 25,000 and 50,000 square feet ..... 340.00 
(4)  Building greater than 50,000 square feet ..... 550.00 
(Ord. No. 588 , § 6, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 28, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-211. - Safety and special inspections. 
The fees for a safety and special inspection performed by the fire department shall be at an hourly rate of $85.00 per hour (one-hour minimum and 15-minute increments after initial hour). 
(Ord. No. 594 , § 29, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-212. - Technical rescue incidents. 
The city shall charge fees associated with a technical rescue incident. This cost would be incurred and based on actual expenditures (one-hour minimum) and billed to the responsible party. Technical rescue incidents include the following: 
(1)  Trench rescue; 
(2)  Confined space rescue; 
(3)  Rope rescue; 
(4)  Water rescue (to include ice rescue); 
(5)  Structural collapse; 
(6)  Machinery rescue; 
(7)  Car into a building. 
(Ord. No. 594 , § 30, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-213. - Cost recovery from electric utility company. 
The city shall charge fees associated with an incident related to electric service incidents to include, but not limited to, downed wires, transformer fires, and downed utility poles. This cost would be incurred and based on actual expenditures (one-hour minimum) and billed to the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 594 , § 31, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 54-214—54-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBING 
 
Sec. 54-226. - Items. 
The fees for plumbing items shall be as follows: 
(1)  Air arrestors ..... $ 9.00 
(2)  Air admittance .....  9.00 
(3)  Back water valve .....  9.00 
(4)  Backflow preventors, each 
(a)  Lawn irrigation ..... 33.00 
(b)  3/8 —1" ..... 33.00 
(c)  1¼—3" ..... 66.00 
(d)  3" and larger ..... 138.00 
(5)  Bathtubs, each .....  9.00 
(a)  Whirlpool bath ..... 28.00 
(6)  Bidets, each .....  9.00 
(7)  Building drain to sewer connection in mobile home park, each ..... 26.00 
(8)  Dental chair .....  9.00 
(9)  Dishwashers, each .....  9.00 
(a)  Commercial ..... 18.00 
(10)  Drinking fountains, each .....  9.00 
(11)  Floor drains, each .....  9.00 
(a)  Trench drains ..... 18.00 
(12)  Hose bibbs, each .....  9.00 
(13)  Humidifiers, each .....  9.00 
(a)  Commercial ..... 62.00 
(14)  Ice maker .....  9.00 
(15)  Interceptors, each ..... 18.00 
(16)  Laundry trays; washer standpipes, each .....  9.00 
(17)  Lavatories, each .....  9.00 
(18)  Medical gases per inspection ..... 83.00 
(19)  Mobile home in MH district: 
Water and sewer connection ..... 50.00 
(20)  Pump lifts, each .....  9.00 
(21)  Pressure test residential/nonresidential ..... 83.00 
(22)  Roof sumps, storm conductor drains, each ..... 28.00 
(23)  Sanitary building drain, each ..... 9.00 
(24)  Sewage ejectors, each ..... 33.00 
(25)  Showers, each ..... 9.00 
(26)  Sinks (any description), each ..... 9.00 
(27)  Soda fountain ..... 9.00 
(28)  Special piping and storage systems ..... 9.00 
(29)  Stacks and revents, each ..... 9.00 
(30)  Sumps or inside bleeder drains, each ..... 18.00 
(31)  Tempering valves ..... 9.00 
(32)  Thermal expansion tank ..... 9.00 
(33)  Trap primer ..... 9.00 
(34)  Underground (when not called for w/rough), each ..... 83.00 
(35)  Urinals, each ..... 9.00 
(36)  Waste disposers, each ..... 9.00 
(37)  Water closets, each ..... 9.00 
(38)  Water heaters, each ..... 28.00 
(39)  Other openings, each ..... 9.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.01; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 457, § 1, 1-26-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 9, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 32, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-227. - Factory-built buildings. 
The plumbing fees for factory-built buildings, other than MH districts, shall be $175.00 per unit. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.02; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 33, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-228. - Water distribution. 
The fees for water distribution shall be based on the largest size pipe in a building or space as follows: 
(1)  One-inch or smaller pipe ..... $ 44.00 
(2)  Over one-inch to two-inch pipe ..... 83.00 
(3)  Larger than two-inch pipe ..... 139.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.03; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 34, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-229. - Minimum permit fee. 
The minimum plumbing permit fee shall be $44.00 plus the permit fees in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.04; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 10, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 35, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-230. - Reinspection fee. 
A plumbing reinspection fee shall be $85.00. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.05; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 36, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-231. - Safety and special inspections. 
The fees for safety and special inspections made under this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Hourly rate, one-hour minimum ..... $85.00 
(2)  Prewater inspection ..... 85.00 
(3)  Presewer inspection ..... 85.00 
(4)  Both a prewater and presewer inspection at same time ..... 85.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.06; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 37, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-232. - Cancellation of permit. 
If a plumbing permit is canceled, all monies paid shall be refunded except 25 percent of the permit fee, plus a base fee of $44.00 and $85.00 per inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.07; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 38, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-233. - Plan review and other miscellaneous fees. 
For the purposes of this division, the fees for plan review and other miscellaneous fees shall be provided in division 1 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.08; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000)  
Sec. 54-234. - Plumbing licenses. 
All contractors shall register their licenses with the city before work is commenced. Registrations shall be valid until the expiration date on the license. The fee shall not be prorated. The registration fees for plumbing licenses as provided in section 18-6 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Master plumber registration ..... $15.00 
(2)  Journeyman plumber registration ..... 15.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-02.0C.09; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 582 , § 11, 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 54-235. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 54-235, in its entirety. Former § 54-235 pertained to "Work started without plumbing permit". See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Secs. 54-236—54-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL 
 
Sec. 54-261. - Temporary or permanent service. 
The fees for temporary or permanent electrical service shall be as follows: 
100 amps or less, each service ..... $ 28.00 
400 amps or less, each service ..... 66.00 
800 amps or less, each service ..... 105.00 
Over 800 amps ..... 143.00 
Sub panels: 
100 amps or less ..... 28.00 
Over 100 amps ..... 66.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.01; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.01), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 12, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 39, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-262. - New, extended or altered circuits. 
The fees for new, extended or altered electrical circuits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Each circuit ..... $ 8.00 
(2)  The following fees are in addition to the circuit fee: 
a.  Lighting fixtures; smoke detectors: 
1.  First 50 fixtures ..... 22.00 
2.  Each additional 50 or part thereof ..... 17.00 
b.  HVAC connections: 
1.  Heating units: 
i.  Up to 100,000 Btu's ..... 8.00 
ii.  Over 100,000 Btu's or rooftop units ..... 28.00 
2.  Refrigerator or a/c units: 
i.  Zero to 2.5 tons ..... 17.00 
ii.  Over 2.5 to 4.5 tons or rooftop units ..... 28.00 
iii.  Over 4.5 tons ..... 44.00 
iv.  Over 30 hp ..... 66.00 
c.  Appliances: 
1.  Electrical space heating, each room ..... 8.00 
2.  Range, oven, water heater, dryer, water pump, dishwasher, each ..... 8.00 
d.  Bus duct, each 100 feet or less ..... 28.00 
e.  Feeders, each ..... 17.00 
f.  Underfloor duct, each 100 feet or less ..... 17.00 
g.  Motors, power units, welders, etc.: 
1.  Power plug, each ..... 8.00 
2.  One-fourth to 5 hp ..... 8.00 
3.  Over 5 to 10 hp ..... 17.00 
4.  Over 10 to 20 hp ..... 22.00 
5.  Over 20 hp ..... 39.00 
h.  Transformers: 
1.  Zero to 25 kva ..... 17.00 
2.  Over 25 to 75 kva ..... 28.00 
3.  Over 75 to 150 kva ..... 44.00 
4.  Over 150 kva ..... 72.00 
i.  Generators: 
1.  Zero to 10 kw ..... 39.00 
2.  Over 10 to 20 kw ..... 50.00 
3.  Over 20 to 50 kw ..... 61.00 
4.  Over 50 kw ..... 72.00 
5.  Whole house transfer switch ..... 28.00 
6.  Transfer panel ..... 17.00 
7.  Remote power plug with manual transfer ..... 17.00 
j.  Underground, each inspection (when not called for w/rough) ..... 44.00 
k.  Signs: 
1.  Connections, each sign ..... 28.00 
2.  Interior or exterior tag inspection ..... 28.00 
l.  Hot tubs, spas, swimming pools ..... 66.00 
m.  Interruptible a/c ..... 17.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.02; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.02), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 13, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 40, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-263. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-263. Former § 54-263 pertained to other alarm systems. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-264. - Factory-built buildings. 
The electrical fees for factory-built buildings, in other than MH districts, shall be $175.00 per unit. 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.04; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.04), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 41, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-265. - Minimum permit fee. 
The minimum electrical permit fee shall be $44.00 plus the permit fees listed in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.05; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.05), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 14, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 42, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-266. - Reinspection fee. 
An electrical reinspection fee shall be $85.00. 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.06; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.06), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 43, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-267. - Inspections. 
Fees for electrical safety and special inspections shall be at a one-hour minimum hourly rate of $85.00. 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.07; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.07), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 44, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-268. - Cancellation of permit. 
If an electrical permit is canceled, all permit monies shall be refunded except 25 percent of the permit fee, plus a base fee of $44.00 and $85.00 per inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.08; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.08), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 45, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-269. - Plan review and other miscellaneous fees. 
For the purposes of this division, the fees for plan review and other miscellaneous fees shall be provided in division 1 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.09; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.09), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 54-270. - Contractor registration and licenses. 
Every electrical contractor shall register his license with the city before work is commenced. Registration shall be valid until the first expiration date on the contractor or master license. The fee shall not be prorated. The fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Electrical contractor license registration ..... $15.00 
(2)  Sign and alarm contractor registrations ..... 15.00 
(3)  Sign and alarm specialist ..... 15.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-04.0A.10; Ord. No. 400, § 7(5-04.0A.10), 8-7-1996; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 582 , § 15, 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 54-271. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 54-271, in its entirety. Former § 54-271 pertained to "Work started without electrical permit". See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Secs. 54-272—54-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MECHANICAL 
 
Sec. 54-301. - Scope. 
The fees in this division shall be charged for heating, ventilation and air conditioning permits. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A)  
Sec. 54-302. - Nonsolid fuel burning equipment. 
The fees for mechanical items shall be as follows: 
(1)  Heating equipment (furnace, boilers, etc.) 
a.  Residential up to 300,000 BTU input, each unit ..... $83.00 
b.  Residential over 300,000 BTU input, each unit ..... 105.00 
c.  Multi-family and nonresidential up to 300,000 BTU input, each unit ..... 127.00 
d.  Multi-family and nonresidential over 300,000 BTU input, each unit ..... 165.00 
(2)  Air conditioning and refrigeration 
*Under 1½ HP, self-contained, no permit required 
a.  Residential 1½ to 5 ton, each unit ..... 83.00 
b.  Multi-family and nonresidential 1½ to 5 ton, each unit ..... 127.00 
c.  Multi-family and nonresidential over 5 ton ..... 127.00 
PLUS $11.00 per ton or fraction over 5 ton 
(3)  Roof top units with heat and air conditioning 
a.  1½ to 5 ton, each unit ..... 253.00 
b.  Over 5 ton ..... 292.00 
PLUS $11.00 per ton or fraction over 5 ton 
(4)  Items 
a.  Chimney or flue liners, each ..... 28.00 
b.  Duct smoke detectors ..... 39.00 
c.  Electronic air cleaners, each ..... 9.00 
d.  Gas vent, each ..... 28.00 
e.  Humidifiers, each ..... 9.00 
f.  Multi-family, nonresidential humidifier, each ..... 83.00 
g.  Water heater, each (includes vent) ..... 28.00 
h.  Zoned duct hydronic system, per zone ..... 39.00 
i.  Multi-family, nonresidential zoned duct hydronic system, per zone ..... 83.00 
j.  Miscellaneous ..... 39.00 
(5)  Process piping (gas, fuel, oil, air, water and steam, etc.) 
a.  Chillers, each ..... 110.00 
b.  Cooling tower, each ..... 110.00 
c.  Condensate receivers, each ..... 110.00 
d.  Distribution piping, up to 200 feet ..... 39.00 
e.  Distribution piping, each additional 200 feet ..... 22.00 
f.  Evaporative condensers, each ..... 110.00 
g.  Gas opening, each ..... 9.00 
h.  Pressure test, residential and nonresidential ..... 83.00 
i.  Underground inspection, each ..... 83.00 
(6)  HVAC distribution systems (ducts, air, water and steam, fuel, oil, gas and hydronic piping, etc.) 
a.  Residential, each system ..... 39.00 
b.  Multi-family and nonresidential, up to 200 feet (with each system) ..... 83.00 
c.  Multi-family and nonresidential, each additional 200 feet ..... 22.00 
d.  Heat and energy recovery units, each ..... 39.00 
e.  In-floor hydronic piping, up to 1,000 feet ..... 83.00 
f.  In-floor hydronic piping, each additional 1,000 feet or fraction over 1,000 feet ..... 39.00 
g.  Underground inspection, each (when not called with rough) ..... 83.00 
h.  VAV boxes, each ..... 22.00 
(7)  Fire and smoke dampers 
a.  Fire damper, each ..... 17.00 
b.  Smoke damper, first ..... 83.00 
c.  Smoke damper, each additional ..... 39.00 
(8)  Solid fuel equipment (includes chimney) 
a.  Wood stoves and furnaces, factory-built fireplaces, etc., each (ALL TO BE UNDER PERMIT) ..... 61.00 
b.  Chimney only, each ..... 39.00 
(9)  Storage tanks (gas, oil, etc.), each ..... 83.00 
(10)  Vent systems (kitchen hoods, ventilation fans, bath fans, make-up and combustion air, dryer, etc.) 
a.  Kitchen hood type I ..... 127.00 
b.  Kitchen hood type II ..... 83.00 
c.  Make-up and combustion air (mechanical or natural), each ..... 83.00 
d.  Residential system, each ..... 9.00 
e.  Miscellaneous nonresidential systems, each ..... 44.00 
f.  Ventilation fan, less than 300 cfm ..... 20.00 
g.  Ventilation fan, greater than 300 cfm ..... 83.00 
(11)  Generator (residential) ..... 130.00 
(12)  Pool heater ..... 165.00 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.01; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 582 , § 16, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 594 , § 46, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-303. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-303, in its entirety. Former § 54-303 pertained to refrigeration, air conditioners and heat pumps. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-304. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-304, in its entirety. Former § 54-304 pertained to electronic air cleaners and humidifiers. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-305. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-305, in its entirety. Former § 54-305 pertained to cooling towers. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-306. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-306, in its entirety. Former § 54-306 pertained to chillers. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-307. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-307, in its entirety. Former § 54-307 pertained to distribution systems. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-308. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-308, in its entirety. Former § 54-308 pertained to gas piping. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-309. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-309, in its entirety. Former § 54-309 pertained to class AA or gas vent chimneys. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-310, in its entirety. Former § 54-310 pertained to flue dampers. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-311. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-311, in its entirety. Former § 54-311 pertained to solid fuel equipment. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-312. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-312, in its entirety. Former § 54-312 pertained to storage tanks. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-313. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, repealed § 54-313, in its entirety. Former § 54-313 pertained to ventilation systems. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 54-314. - Minimum permit fee. 
The minimum mechanical permit fee shall be $44.00 plus the permit fees in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.13; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 47, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-315. - Reinspection fee. 
A mechanical reinspection fee shall be $85.00. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.14; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 48, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-316. - Safety and special inspections. 
The fees for safety and special inspections made pursuant to this division shall be at an hourly rate of $85.00, with a one-hour minimum. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.15; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 49, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-317. - Cancellation of permit. 
If a mechanical permit is canceled, all monies shall be refunded except 25 percent of the permit fee, plus a base fee of $44.00 and $85.00 per inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.16; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 50, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-318. - Plan review and other miscellaneous fees. 
Under this division, plan review and other miscellaneous fees shall be as provided in division 1 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.17)  
Sec. 54-319. - Mechanical licenses. 
All contractors shall register their licenses with the city before work is commenced. Registration shall be valid until the expiration date on the license. The fee is not prorated. The fees for registration of mechanical licenses as provided in section 18-7 shall be $15.00. The adding of additional license categories after registration will require re-registration. 
(Code 1976, § 5-05.0A.19; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 582 , § 17, 3-17-2014)  
Secs. 54-320—54-345. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 54-346. - Moving of buildings. 
The permit fee for moving of a building, as provided in section 18-430, shall be $255.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.26), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 594 , § 51, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-347. - Costs for use of city equipment, additional costs. 
Pursuant to subsection 18-461(b), the costs to be paid to the city for the use of all city equipment shall be an amount as set by the city council and, in addition, $85.00 per person per hour or fraction thereof for the services of the building department personnel and other city representatives. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 52, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 54-348—54-375. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - STREET ADDRESSES 
 
Sec. 54-376. - Street addresses. 
The fee for a request for a new street address shall be $85.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.19), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 53, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 54-377—54-405. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 54-406. - Massage regulation. 
The fees for massage licenses and establishments, as provided in division 2 of article II of chapter 22, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Business license investigation fee ..... $100.00 
(2)  Massagist license investigation fee ..... 100.00 
(3)  Annual license fee ..... — 
(4)  Change of location fee ..... 100.00 
(5)  Extension or expansion ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.08), 3-19-1997)  
Secs. 54-407—54-435. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 54-436. - False alarms. 
(a)  The fee for a false alarm, as provided in section 42-63, shall be as follows: 
First false alarm in a calendar year ..... No 
charge 
Second false alarm in a calendar year ..... $25.00 
Third false alarm in a calendar year ..... 125.00 
Fourth false alarm in a calendar year ..... 200.00 
Fifth false alarm in a calendar year ..... 400.00 
Sixth or more false alarms in a calendar year ..... 500.00 
(b)  Any false alarm that occurs after March 31, 2007, on an alarm system that has not been registered as required by section 42-33, shall be subject to an additional fee of $25.00. 
(c)  The false alarm shut-off fee as provided in subsection 42-65(c) shall be $100.00 for each occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.33), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 516, § 1, 12-13-2006)  
Sec. 54-437. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 594 , § 56, adopted Mar. 27, 2017, deleted § 54-437 entitled "Emergency medical services," which derived from: Ord. No. 533, § 1, adopted June 22, 2009; and Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010.  
Secs. 54-438—54-465. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sec. 54-466. - Spencer Park motor vehicle entry fees. 
The following schedule of motor vehicle entry fees shall apply only to Spencer Park. There shall be no charge for bicycles ridden into the park or for pedestrians. (Note: Status of residency to obtain the resident discount shall be determined by the vehicle registration.) 
(1)  Annual permit ..... $70.00 
(2)  Resident discount on annual permit ..... 35.00 
(3)  Daily permit ..... 10.00 
(4)  Resident discount on daily permit ..... 5.00 
(5)  Senior citizen (at least 60 years of age) and handicap annual pass ..... 20.00 
(6)  Resident discount on senior citizen (at least 60 years of age) and handicap annual pass ..... 10.00 
(7)  Bus rate (11 passenger or greater capacity), twice the annual permit fee. 
(8)  Off-season daily permit (day after Labor Day—May 15) ..... 5.00 
(9)  Resident discounted off-season daily permit ..... 3.00 
(10)  Weekend (Saturdays and Sundays) and holidays (Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day) daily permit ..... 15.00 
(11)  Resident discount on weekend and holidays daily permit ..... 7.00 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(1-08.02.32(A)), 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 546, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 588 , § 3, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-467. - Bloomer Park and Yates Park motor vehicle entry fees. 
The following schedule of motor vehicle entry fees shall apply to Bloomer Park and Yates Park. There shall be no charge for bicycles ridden into the park or for pedestrians. Annual permits and senior citizen and handicap passes shall be honored at Bloomer Park and Yates Park. 
(1)  Bloomer/Yates annual pass ..... $35.00 
(2)  Bloomer/Yates daily permit ..... 5.00 
(3)  Bus rate (11 passenger or greater capacity), twice the annual permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(1-08.02.32(B)), 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 5-15-2002; Ord. No. 546, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 588 , § 4, 11-10-2014)  
Sec. 54-468. - Daily shelter rental. 
The fees for daily shelter rental, not including motor vehicle entry fee, shall be: 
(1)  Stone shelter ..... $225.00 
(2)  Mountain ash shelter ..... 100.00 
(3)  Pine-Grove shelter ..... 175.00 
(4)  Hilltop shelter ..... 175.00 
(5)  Spencer shelter ..... 200.00 
(6)  Tent ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(1-08.02.32(C)), 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 546, § 1, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 54-469. - Commercial use of park grounds. 
The fees for commercial use of park grounds shall be as follows: 
(1)  One-half day (up to four hours) ..... $300.00 
(2)  Full day (four to eight hours) ..... 600.00 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(1-08.02.32(D)), 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 546, § 1, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 54-470. - Museum. 
The following schedule of fees shall apply to the non-exclusive use of the Rochester Hills Museum at Van Hoosen Farm: 
(1)  Tour admission fees: 
a.  Adult ..... $ 5.00 
b.  Senior citizen ..... 3.00 
c.  Student ..... 3.00 
(2)  Conferences, seminars, meetings and group use: 
a.  Conference room, per hour ..... 50.00 
b.  Dairy barn, per hour ..... 100.00 
c.  Calf barn, per hour ..... 100.00 
(3)  Wedding ceremony fees: 
a.  Non-resident—Three-hour minimum ..... 800.00 
b.  Resident—Three-hour minimum ..... 700.00 
c.  Additional hour or portion of an hour ..... 250.00 
d.  Reservation of museum grounds for wedding photography only (per hour or portion of an hour) ..... 75.00 
e.  Wedding ceremony, reception or event cancellation: 
Nine months or more before—50 percent of security deposit forfeited. 
Less than nine months before—100 percent of security deposit forfeited. 
(4)  Fee for reception or event lasting 6—12 hours: 
a.  Resident ..... 2,000.00 
b.  Non-resident ..... 2,250.00 
c.  Additional hour or portion of an hour ..... 250.00 
(5)  Fee for reception or event lasting 1—5 hours: 
a.  Per hour ..... 200.00 
b.  Change event date ..... 50.00 
(6)  Security deposit fees: 
a.  Reception or event ..... 500.00 
b.  Wedding ceremony ..... 250.00 
(7)  Commercial use of museum buildings and grounds: 
a.  Buildings—Interior: 
One-half day (less than four hours) ..... 750.00 
Full day (four to eight hours) ..... 1,500.00 
b.  Grounds: 
One-half day (less than four hours) ..... 500.00 
Full day (four to eight hours) ..... 1,000.00 
c.  Commercial photography use fee: 
Full-day (up to eight hours) ..... 50.00 
Calendar year ..... 250.00 
(8)  Museum membership fees: 
a.  Annual individual membership ..... 30.00 
b.  Annual individual plus membership ..... 40.00 
c.  Annual family membership ..... 50.00 
d.  Annual business partner membership ..... 250.00 
e.  Three-year individual membership ..... 75.00 
f.  Three-year individual plus membership ..... 105.00 
g.  Three-year family membership ..... 135.00 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(1-08.02.32(E)), 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 468, 1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 504, § 1, 2-15-2006; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 546, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 571, § 5, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 588 , § 5, 11-10-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 571, § 5, adopted Feb. 11, 2013 , retitled § 54-470 from "Museum and environmental education center" to "Museum".  
Sec. 54-471. - Sports field rental. 
Sports field rental fees are per game, per field, unless noted. Fees for sports fields include any motor vehicle entry fee. The field rental fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Soccer full field: 
	Youth 	Adults 
Categories 	Residents 	Nonresidents 	Residents 	Nonresidents 
World Cup Field 	$95.00 	$170.00 	$120.00 	$220.00 
Lights (per hour) 	25.00 	25.00 	25.00 	25.00 
Borden fields 2—5 	55.00 	70.00 	90.00 	120.00 
Borden fields 11—12 	55.00 	70.00 	N/A 	N/A 
 
(2)  Soccer half field: 
	Youth 	Adults 
Categories 	Residents 	Nonresidents 	Residents 	Nonresidents 
Spencer fields 1—2 	$30.00 	$50.00 	N/A 	N/A 
Spencer fields 3—4 	20.00 	35.00 	N/A 	N/A 
 
(3)  Soccer mini field: 
	Youth 	Adults 
Categories 	Residents 	Nonresidents 	Residents 	Nonresidents 
Borden mini fields 	$20.00 	$35.00 	N/A 	N/A 
 
(4)  Baseball and softball field: 
Categories 	Residents 	Nonresidents 
Borden Park: 		
 Per game 	$45.00 	$70.00 
 Practice per hour 	20.00 	35.00 
 Tournaments and Sundays, per hour 	20.00 	35.00 
 Lights per hour 	15.00 	15.00 
Avondale and Allen Parks, per hour (does not include optional field preparation fees) 	7.50 	15.00 
 
(5)  Multi-purpose fields: 
Categories 	Residents 	Nonresidents 
Spencer and Avondale Parks 	$25.00 	$40.00 
Bloomer Park: 		
 Sports camps, per hour 	50.00 	50.00 
 Sports camps, per 4 hours 	150.00 	150.00 
 Cricket, per day 	100.00 	100.00 
 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(1-08.02.32(F)), 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 5-15-2002; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 12-15-2004; Ord. No. 546, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 582 , § 18, 3-17-2014)  
Secs. 54-472—54-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS 
 
Sec. 54-501. - Itinerant merchants. 
The permit fees for itinerant merchants, per individual, as provided in section 78-164, shall be $75.00. The annual license fee for ice cream vendors, as provided in section 78-171, shall be $25.00, per vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.07), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 5-3-2010; Ord. No. 577, § 1, 6-10-2013 )  
Secs. 54-502—54-530. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SOLID WASTE 
 
Sec. 54-531. - Commercial and residential refuse control. 
The license fees for commercial and residential solid waste transporting units, as provided in section 86-64, shall be as follows: 
(1)  First solid waste transporting unit ..... $165.00 
(2)  Each additional unit .....   44.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.04), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 530, § 1, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 594 , § 54, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-532. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 530, § 2, adopted Feb. 23, 2009, repealed § 54-532 in its entirety. Former § 54-532, pertained to waste hauling for single-family residences and derived from Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.09), Mar. 19, 1997.  
Sec. 54-533. - Composting facilities. 
The license fees for composting facilities, as provided in section 86-334, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application ..... $ 275.00 
(2)  Annual license ..... 3,300.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.22), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 594 , § 55, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 54-534—54-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN OTHER PUBLIC PLACES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 54-561—54-585. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS; INSPECTIONS; APPLICATIONS 
 
Sec. 54-586. - Scope. 
The permit and inspection fees listed in this division include application fees. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0A)  
Sec. 54-587. - Driveway public right-of-way approach construction. 
The fees for driveway approach construction shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family drive approach: 
a.  Application permit fee and inspection ..... $170.00 
(2)  All other right-of-way approaches (commercial drives, private and public street approaches, etc.): 
a.  Application fee ..... 100.00 
b.  Permit and inspection fee ..... 400.00 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0A.01; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 571 , § 6, 2-11-2013; Ord. No. 594 , § 57, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 54-588. - Underground construction. 
The permit fees for underground public utility connections for storm drains, water mains, and sanitary sewers for each utility shall be as follows: 
(1)  Utility work within right-of-way: 
a.  Application fee ..... $175.00 
b.  Permit fee ..... 100.00 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0A.02; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 571, § 7, 2-11-2013 )  
Sec. 54-589. - Other non-municipal public utility installations. 
The application and permit fees for public utility installation for Consumers Energy, DTE Energy, and others not covered by Metro Act shall be as follows: 
(1)  Construction in right-of-way less than 200 feet, application and permit fee ..... $100.00 
(2)  Construction in right-of-way 200 feet or greater, application and permit fee ..... 400.00 
All application, permit, and inspection fees shall be invoiced on a quarterly basis. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0A.03; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 571, § 8, 2-11-2013 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 571, § 8, adopted Feb. 11, 2013 , retitled § 54-54 from "Underground private utility installation" to "Other non-municipal public utility installations".  
Sec. 54-590. - Other activities. 
The fees for other activities pursuant to this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Landscaping (including tree planting), drainage correction or relocation, temporary signs, and subdivision entrance markers pursuant to section 94-33. Certifying uncertified roads and streets pursuant to section 94-32: 
a.  Application fee ..... $100.00 
b.  Permit fee .....  50.00 
(2)  Tree trimming, tunneling and removing: (Fee will be waived if the applicant owns abutting land or is a utility company operating under an annual systems maintenance and improvement permit), application and permit fee ..... 50.00 
(3)  Annual systems maintenance and improvement permit for repairs by non-municipal public utilities (Consumers Energy, DTE Energy, others not covered by Metro Act), application and permit fee* ..... 1,000.00 
*Annual permit fee due in January of year of permit. Inspection fee payable per occurrence or on a monthly basis. 
(4)  Occupancy of streets (block parties, fun run events, etc.); as provided in section 94-45, application and permit fee .....  35.00 
a.  Application, each permit .....  35.00 
(5)  Street lighting application fee ..... 200.00 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0A.04; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 571, § 9, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 582 , § 19, 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 54-591. - Inspection fees. 
Inspection fees for all permits required under this division except right-of-way approaches, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Per-hour charge ..... $75.00 
(2)  Minimum four-hour charge for cancellations without prior notification to city ..... 300.00 
Inspection fees charged in escrow shall be for a minimum eight hours. Unused escrow fees shall be reimbursed upon satisfactory completion of permit conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0A.05; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 571, § 10, 2-11-2013 )  
Sec. 54-592. - Administrative charges. 
Twenty percent of the sum of the inspection fees in section 54-591 shall be added to such fees as an engineering administration fee. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0A.06; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Secs. 54-593—54-620. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STREET SIGNS 
 
Sec. 54-621. - Installation labor and equipment charges. 
The fees for installation labor and equipment charges for street signs, as provided in section 94-44, shall be based on actual costs plus a 20 percent administrative fee. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.0B.01; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 571, § 11, 2-11-2013 )  
Sec. 54-622. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 571, § 12, adopted Feb. 11, 2013 , repealed § 54-622, in its entirety. Former § 54-622 pertained to "Material prices". See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Secs. 54-623—54-650. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE-PEDESTRIAN PATHS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 54-651. - Inspection fee. 
The inspection fee for a nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path, as provided in section 94-108, shall be $65.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.32), 3-19-1997)  
Secs. 54-652—54-680. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - VACATING STREETS, ALLEYS OR PUBLIC GROUNDS 
 
Sec. 54-681. - Application fee. 
The application fee for vacating streets, alleys or public grounds, as provided in section 94-173, shall be $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.18), 3-19-1997)  
Secs. 54-682—54-710. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - UTILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-711. - Service calls for water and sewer personnel. 
(a)  The fees for service calls for water and sewer personnel shall be as follows: 
(1)  Other than regular business hours, per hour ..... $92.00 
(b)  There shall be a minimum two-hour charge. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 7-1-1998; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 571, § 13, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 582 , § 20, 3-17-2014)  
Secs. 54-712—54-740. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 54-741. - Bi-monthly water charges. 
Bi-monthly (i.e., every two months) water supply charges, as provided in section 102-122, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge ..... $2.89 
(2)  Commodity charge, for each 100 cubic feet of water ..... 5.81 
(3)  Fire line availability charge. There shall be a bi-monthly charge for each unmetered fire line connection for fire sprinklers and hydrant service, depending on size of the fire line, as follows: 
Line Size 
(inches) 	Bi-monthly 
Charge 
1 	$22.68 
1½ 	 31.18 
2 	 39.70 
3 	 48.18 
4 	 56.72 
6 	 73.70 
8 	 90.72 
10 	 107.74 
12 	 124.74 
 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(A)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(A)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 463, 1(1-08.31), 6-27-2001; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 6-16-2004; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-15-2005; Ord. No. 508, § 1, 6-21-2006; Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-27-2007; Ord. No. 522, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 569 § 1, 6-18-2012 ; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 6-10-2013 ; Ord. No. 585 , § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 590 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 592 , § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 598 , § 1, 6-5-2017; Ord. No. 602 , § 1, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 611 , § 1, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-742. - Temporary use of public hydrants. 
The fees for temporary use of public hydrants, as provided in section 102-126, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum charge ..... $  65.00 
(2)  Hydrant adapter charge: 
5/8 -inch by ¾-inch meter ..... 183.00 
1-inch meter ..... 404.00 
1½-inch meter ..... 639.00 
2-inch meter ..... 1,222.00 
3-inch meter ..... 3,075.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(B)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(B)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 6-16-2004; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 12-15-2004; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-15-2005; Ord. No. 522, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 569 § 1, 6-18-2012 ; Ord. No. 571, § 14, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 6-10-2013 ; Ord. No. 582 , § 21, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 585 , § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 54-743. - Sewage treatment bi-monthly charges. 
Sewage treatment bi-monthly (i.e., every two months) charges, as provided in section 102-156, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge ..... $ 2.89 
(2)  Commodity charge: 
a.  Metered, for each 100 cubic feet ..... 6.20 
b.  Nonmetered, flat rate per residential unit or unit factor ..... 74.40 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(C)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(C)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 6-16-2004; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-15-2005; Ord. No. 508, § 1, 6-21-2006; Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-27-2007; Ord. No. 522, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 569 § 1, 6-18-2012 ; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 6-10-2013 ; Ord. No. 585 , § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 590 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 592 , § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 598 , § 1, 6-5-2017; Ord. No. 602 , § 1, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 611 , § 1, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-744. - Nonresidential surcharge. 
The nonresidential surcharge for the water supply, as provided in section 102-157, shall be as follows: 
Meter 
Size (inches) 		Monthly 
Nonresidential 
Surcharge 
 
5/8 ..... $   3.38 
¾ ..... 5.07 
1 ..... 8.45 
1½ ..... 18.59 
2 ..... 27.04 
3 ..... 49.01 
4 ..... 67.60 
6 ..... 101.40 
8 ..... 169.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(D)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(D)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 434, § 1(1-08.02.31(D)), 10-21-1998; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 7-7-1999; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 6-16-2004; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-15-2005; Ord. No. 510, § 1, 8-16-2006; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 10-24-07; Ord. No. 522, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 569 § 1, 6-18-2012 ; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 6-10-2013 ; Ord. No. 585 , § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 590 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 592 , § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 598 , § 1, 6-5-2017; Ord. No. 602 , § 1, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 611 , § 1, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-745. - High strength surcharge. 
The high strength surcharge, as provided in section 102-160, shall be as follows: 
  Type of High 
Strength Surcharge 	Total Charge 
Per Pound  
of Excess  
Pollutants 
 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of 275 mg/l ..... $0.491 
Total suspended solids (TSS) in excess of 350 mg/l ..... 0.499 
Phosphorous (P) in excess of 12 mg/l ..... 7.354 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) in excess of 100 mg/l ..... 0.473 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(E)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(E)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 434, § 1(1-08.02.31(E)), 10-21-1998; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 7-7-1999; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 6-16-2004; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-15-2005; Ord. No. 510, § 1, 8-16-2006; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 10-24-07; Ord. No. 522, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 569 § 1, 6-18-2012 ; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 6-10-2013 ; Ord. No. 585 , § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 590 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 592 , § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 598 , § 1, 6-5-2017; Ord. No. 602 , § 1, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 611 , § 1, 6-3-2019)  
Sec. 54-746. - Capital charges. 
(a)  Residential water and sewer. Capital charges for residential water and sewer services shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water service ..... $ 850.00 
(2)  Sewer service ..... 1,150.00 
(b)  Nonresidential water. Capital charges for nonresidential water services shall be as provided in this subsection. 
Tap size 
(inches) 	Water 	Sewer 
1 	$  1,360.00 	$  1,840.00 
1½ 	4,170.00 	5,640.00 
2 	14,450.00 	19,550.00 
3 	19,550.00 	26,450.00 
4 	33,150.00 	44,850.00 
8 	157,250.00 	212,750.00 
 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-09.0A, 6-09.0B; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(F)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(F)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003)  
Sec. 54-747. - Lateral benefit charge. 
The lateral benefit charges, as provided in section 102-187, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Freestanding single-family residence: 
a.  Water ..... $1,300.00 
b.  Sanitary sewer ..... 1,850.00 
(2)  Non-single-family residence: 
Tap size 
(inches) 	Water 	Sewer 
1 	$  2,080.00 	$  2,960.00 
1½ 	6,370.00 	9,070.00 
2 	22,100.00 	31,450.00 
3 	29,900.00 	42,550.00 
4 	50,700.00 	72,150.00 
8 	240,500.00 	342,250.00 
 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(G)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(G)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003)  
Sec. 54-748. - Tap charges. 
Tap charges as provided in section 102-227 shall be as follows: 
(1)  One-inch tap ..... $1,600.00 
(2)  One-and-one-half-inch tap ..... 1,850.00 
(3)  Two-inch tap ..... 2,000.00 
(4)  The charge for tap sizes greater than two inches shall be based on the prevailing hourly labor and material costs, plus 20 percent of actual cost. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.31(H)), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 417, § 1(1-08.02.31(H)), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 12-15-2004; Ord. No. 571, § 15, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 582 , § 22, 3-17-2014)  
Secs. 54-749—54-775. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 54-776. - Municipal water department. 
The fees for the municipal water department, as provided in article III of chapter 102, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water permit and initial inspection fee ..... $75.00 
(2)  Reinspection ..... 75.00 
(3)  Meter fees. The following meter fees shall apply and are due and payable at the time other water connection charges are paid: 
a.  One-inch service with 5/8 inch meter ..... 380.00 
b.  One-inch service with one inch meter ..... 470.00 
c.  One-and-one-half-inch service with 1½-inch meter ..... 1,600.00 
d.  Two-inch service with two-inch meter ..... 1,900.00 
e.  The fee for meters larger than two inches shall be based on current time and material costs, plus 20 percent. 
If meter installation is not made at the appointed time and a new appointment must be arranged, at no fault to the city, there shall be an additional charge of ..... 75.00 
(4)  Meter testing cost. Meters, at the request of customers, will be tested Mondays through Fridays only, and the following charges shall apply: 
a.  Five-eighths-inch through one inch ..... 60.00 
b.  One-and-one-half-inch through two inches ..... 70.00 
c.  Three inches or more ..... 85.00 
(5)  Construction water (per month charge) ..... 30.00 
(6)  Water main flushing, three times the volume of the pipe, minimum charge ..... 10.00 
(7)  Area maintenance meters. The required fees are as follows: 
a.  Five-eighths-inch meter ..... 250.00 
b.  One-inch meter ..... 340.00 
c.  One-and-one-half-inch meter ..... 1,470.00 
d.  Two-inch meter ..... 1,770.00 
e.  The fee for meters larger than two inches shall be based on current time and material costs, plus 20 percent. 
If meter installation is not made at the appointed time and a new appointment must be arranged, at no fault to the city, there shall be an additional charge of ..... 75.00 
f.  Recording fee. In accordance with the Oakland County Register of Deeds' fee schedule. 
(8)  Shutoffs ..... 56.00 
(9)  Turnons ..... 56.00 
(10)  Contractor's licenses: 
a.  Master plumber ..... 1.00 
b.  All others ..... 25.00 
c.  Annual ..... 15.00 
d.  Reinstated ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.30), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 463, § 1(1-08.30), 6-27-2001; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 12-15-2004; Ord. No. 571, § 16, 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 582 , § 23, 3-17-2014)  
Secs. 54-777—54-805. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SEWER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 54-806. - Municipal sanitary sewer connections. 
The fees for municipal sanitary sewer connections, as provided in article IV of chapter 102, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Sewer service connection permit and initial inspection ..... $75.00 
(2)  Reinspection .....  75.00 
(3)  Contractor's licenses: 
a.  Master plumber .....   1.00 
b.  All others .....  25.00 
c.  Renewal .....  15.00 
(4)  Sewer adjustment inspection ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.29), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 7-16-2003; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 12-15-2004; Ord. No. 582 , § 24, 3-17-2014)  
Chapter 58 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 513, § 1, adopted Nov. 1, 2006, amended Ch. 58 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 58, §§ 58-26—58-94, pertained to similar matter. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; emergency management, ch. 38; emergency services, ch. 42; cost recovery for hazardous material incidents, § 42-151 et seq.; fires in parks, § 74-68; burning in parks, § 74-97; fireworks in parks, § 74-107; fires on trailways, § 74-212. 
State Law reference— State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 58-26. - Established; enforcement authority. 
The fire prevention code adopted in article III of this chapter shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city. The bureau of fire prevention is hereby established, and the bureau shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 58-27. - Fire marshal's duties. 
The fire marshal shall be in charge of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 58-28. - Inspectors. 
The chief of the fire department is permitted to detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the mayor the employment of technical inspectors through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Secs. 58-29—58-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 58-56. - Effect of state regulations. 
Whenever state law or regulations provide a higher standard or requirement than is provided in the fire prevention code adopted in section 58-57, the higher requirement or standard of the state law shall be followed in lieu of the requirement or standard of the fire prevention code. Such state standards or requirements shall be construed as part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this article and shall be enforceable as a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 58-57. - Adopted; enforcement. 
(a)  Adopted. There is adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the 2006 International Fire Code, including appendices B, C, and D, promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in section 58-58. Not less than three copies of such code shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk, and the code is hereby adopted and incorporated in this article as if set out at length in this section. The provisions of the code, with any modifications in this article, shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(b)  Enforcement authority. Enforcement of this article may be by the fire chief, the fire marshal, fire inspectors, and the county deputy sheriffs. 
(c)  Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any section of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as set forth in section 66-37. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical code by reference, MCL 117.3(k).  
Sec. 58-58. - Amendments. 
(a)  Sections deleted . The following sections of the fire code adopted in section 58-57 shall be deleted: appendices A, E, F and G. 
(b)  Amendments . The fire code shall be amended with the following modifications and additions: 
Section 101.1, General , shall be modified to read as follows: 
Title . These regulations as set forth herein shall be known as The Fire Prevention Code of the City of Rochester Hills and is herein referred to as such or as "this code." 
Section 108.1, Board of Appeals , shall be modified to read as follows: 
Appeals . Appeals may be taken to the Rochester Hills Construction Board of Appeals by any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation made by the code official pursuant to this code. The construction board of appeals is hereby constituted and granted authority to act as the Fire Prevention Code Board of Appeals with full power to interpret and decide appeals as provided herein. 
Section 109.4, Restitution , shall be added to read as follows: 
109.4.1 General . When the fire department is called to respond to any emergency or incident resulting from a violation of any federal, state or local regulation governing fire safety, or through gross negligence, the responsible person shall reimburse the fire department for all costs incurred as a result of responding to the emergency or incident. 
Section 112, General , is added to read as follows: 
112.1 Review Fees . When, at the discretion of the code official, plans and specifications are to be reviewed by an outside consultant, the person submitting the plans and specifications shall be responsible for payment of such consulting fees or charges, plus a ten-percent administrative charge. The code official shall select the consultant. Consulting fees plus administrative charge shall be submitted in full with the plans and specifications prior to review. 
Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads , shall be modified to read as follows: 
503.3 Posting . All fire lanes shall be conspicuously posted on both sides of the fire lane with fire lane signs, which shall conform to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as prescribed by the code official. Signs shall be erected no further than 100 feet apart in all areas designated as fire lanes. 
503.7 Enforcement and Penalties . Enforcement of this section, being section 503, may be by the city fire chief, deputy fire chiefs, fire marshal, fire inspectors, firefighters working under the direction of the fire marshal, and the Oakland County Sheriffs Department. 
503.7.1 Said enforcement officers shall have the authority to issue appearance citations, as provided by MCL 764.9a — 764.9g, and notices of parking violations, as provided in article IV of chapter 98 of the City of Rochester Hills Code of Ordinances, for violations of this section. 
503.7.2 Procedure and Fines . The procedure and fines for parking violations shall be as provided in article IV of chapter 98 of the City of Rochester Hills Code of Ordinances. 
503.7.3 Authority to Remove Obstructions . If any vehicle, trailer, or other object is located within a fire lane during a fire emergency or alarm or any other time when use of the fire lane is necessary, any Oakland County Sheriffs Deputy or member of the city fire department may move or cause the vehicle to be moved, by any means reasonably available, without liability for any damages sustained to said vehicle, etc. 
Section 505.3, Streets Names , is added to read as follows: 
505.3.1 General . Names for any new public or private street or drive shall neither duplicate nor be so similar in spelling or phonetics to the name of an existing street or drive so as to create the possibility of confusion. 
505.3.2 Review . All new street names, or requests to change existing street names, shall be reviewed by the code official and other appropriate city departments. 
Section 912.7, Fire Department Connections , is added to read as follows: 
In any building or structure required to be equipped with a fire department connection, a fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the connection which shall be located within 50 feet of a minimum 20-foot wide paved driveway or street. 
Section 307, Open Burning , shall be deleted and replaced with the following: 
307.6.1 Definitions. 
307.6.1.1 Open Burning . Any fire in an outdoor location where fuel being burned is not contained in an outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit. 
307.6.1.2 Recreational Fire . Burning of materials where the fuel being burned is not contained in an outdoor fire place, barbecue grill, or barbecue pit; for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes. 
307.6.2 Allowable Open Burning . Open burning is prohibited, except as allowed in this section. 
307.6.2.1 Leaves . The burning of leaves is prohibited in the City. 
307.6.2.2 Recreational Fires . A recreation fire may be allowed, on detached residential properties, at any time during the year between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight. 
307.6.2.2.1 Size and Duration . A recreational fire shall not exceed 3 feet in diameter, or 3 feet in height and shall burn no longer than 3 hours. 
307.6.2.2.2 Fuel . Fuel for a recreational fire shall consist only of dry seasoned firewood and be ignited with a small quantity of paper. 
307.6.2.3 Preparation of Mortar . Open burning shall be allowed on all properties for warming of sand and/or water for the preparation of mortar when such burning is fueled by propane or wood. 
307.6.2.4 Special Burn Permits . A burn permit may be issued by the code official for special situations where open burning is determined by the code official to be necessary in order to alleviate a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the residents or the environment. 
307.6.3 Permits . 
307.6.3.1 Permit Required . An annual permit is required for any open burning. 
307.6.3.2 Application for Permit . A permit for open burning shall be obtained from the fire department administrative office during normal business hours, before the fire is set, and shall be in such form and contain such information as required by the code official. 
307.6.3.3 Permit Issuance . A permit for open burning shall be requested by and issued to the owner of the land upon which the burning is to take place. The fee for an annual burning permit shall be as prescribed in section 54-31A. 
307.6.3.4 Permit Limitations . The code official may refuse to allow burning if the code official determines atmospheric conditions are not conducive to burning. Permits may be conditioned on obtaining authorization from the code official prior to actually starting the fire. 
307.6.4 Location . Open burning is prohibited within any public road right-of-way, pedestrian-bicycle pathway, within 50 feet of any structure or within 25 feet of any property line. 
307.6.5 Attendance . Any open burning shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. Fire extinguishment equipment shall be present and available for immediate use. 
307.6.6 Outdoor Fire Places . A permit is not required for outdoor fireplaces; however, these devices are only permitted to be fueled by dry seasoned firewood, charcoal or commercial fire logs. 
307.6.7 Complaints . Any person burning without a permit or not in accordance with permit guidelines may be ordered to extinguish the fire. If the person is unable to extinguish the fire it will be extinguished by the fire department. 
307.6.8 Violations. Any violation of these open burning regulations shall be a municipal civil infraction. The fines for violations shall be $150 for first offense, $250 for second offense, and $500 for any subsequent offenses. The fire department may void the permit and prevent the issuance of any further permits. 
Section 401. False Alarms . Shall be modified to read as follows: 
401.3.1.1 General . It shall be unlawful for any person to report any information concerning a fire or other emergency condition when such person knows no fire or other emergency has occurred, or that the information is false. 
401.3.2.1 Activation of the Fire Alarm System . A person shall not activate a fire alarm system in any building or place within the City of Rochester Hills unless a valid fire emergency exists within the building or place. A fire alarm system is any system which, upon activation, warns the occupants of the building or place that a fire emergency exists. 
Section 2204.2.6. Self-Service Stations . Shall be added to read as follows: 
The owner or lessee of a self-service gasoline station shall conspicuously post at all times at the approved emergency controls the current state or local fire code regulations governing self-service stations, as prescribed by the code official. All persons in charge of the premises shall be familiar with all provisions of the regulations. 
Section 3301.1.3 Fireworks, shall be modified to read as follows: 
3301.1.3.1 Definitions . For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "APA Standard 87-1" means 2001 APA Standard 87-1, standard for construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland. 
(b)  "Consumer fireworks" means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
(c)  "Display fireworks" means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA Standard 87-1, 4.1. 
(d)  "Firework" or "fireworks" means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
(e)  "Low-impact fireworks" means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
3301.1.3.2 Manufacture of Fireworks . The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the City limits. 
3301.1.3.3 Use of Consumer Fireworks . 
(a)  The ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks shall be prohibited, except on the following days after 11 a.m.: 
(i)  December 31 until 1 a.m. on January 1. 
(ii)  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(iii)  June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(iv)  July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m. 
(v)  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(b)  A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks on those premises. 
(c)  A violation of this subsection 3301.1.3.3 shall be a civil infraction for which a civil fine of $1,000 for each violation shall be imposed. 
3301.1.3.4 Display Fireworks . Use of display fireworks shall comply with the rules and regulations issued by the code official for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by the City, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations. Every such use of display fireworks shall be under the control of a person competent to ensure compliance with the code and ensure proper safety precautions. The display fireworks shall be arranged, located, discharged or fired in a manner that, in the opinion of the code official will not be a hazard to property or endanger any person. 
3301.1.3.5 Exceptions. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit any of the following: 
(a)  A wholesaler, retailer, commercial manufacturer, or importer from selling, storing, using, transporting, or distributing consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks. 
(b)  The use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies or law enforcement agencies for signal purposes or illumination. 
(c)  The use of agricultural or wildlife fireworks. 
(d)  The sale or use of blank cartridges for any of the following: 
(i)  A show or play. 
(ii)  Signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports. 
(iii)  Use by military organizations. 
(iv)  Use by law enforcement agencies. 
(e)  The possession, sale, or disposal of fireworks incidental to the public display of fireworks by wholesalers or other persons who possess a permit to possess, store, and sell explosives from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives of the United States Department of Justice. 
(f)  Interstate wholesalers from selling, storing, using, transporting, or distributing fireworks. 
Section 3308.11.5 Seizure of Illegal Fireworks. If the code official or law enforcement agency determines a violation of this Section has occurred, the code official or law enforcement agency may seize the fireworks as evidence of the violation. Evidence seized under this subsection shall be stored pending disposition of any criminal or civil proceedings arising from a violation of this Section at the expense of the person, if the person is found responsible or liable for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006; Ord. No. 548, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 579, § 1, 6-24-2013 ; Ord. No. 595 , § 1, 3-27-2017; Ord. No. 610 , § 1, 2-25-2019)  
Secs. 58-59—58-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 58-86. - Violations; authority of enforcement. 
Violations of this article shall be municipal civil infractions. Enforcement of this article may be by the city fire chief, the fire marshal, fire inspectors, and the county deputy sheriffs. Such enforcement officers shall have the authority to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices, pursuant to section 66-37. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 58-87. - Authorized emergency vehicles and equipment. 
(a)  Definition. Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under state laws. 
(b)  Yielding right-of-way. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the vehicle to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire official or a police officer. 
(c)  Following prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 500 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(d)  Unlawful boarding or tampering. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of the fire department emergency equipment: 
(1)  Cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the vehicle is in motion or at rest; 
(2)  Sound the siren, horn, bell, or other sound-producing device thereon; or 
(3)  Manipulate or tamper with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on or a part of any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 58-88. - Damage or injury to equipment or personnel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface or to attempt or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time or to injure or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 58-89. - Driving over fire hoses. 
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in command of the operations. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 58-90. - Hydrants and department connections. 
(a)  Restricting access unlawful. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface or obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
(b)  Violations. Penalties for violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Removal after notification. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove the obstruction or encroachment. 
(2)  Cost. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the fire official and with the approval of the chief administrative official, and the city shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(c)  Approval required for use. A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the department of public service after approval from the fire department. The code official may order the disconnection from any fire hydrant if it is necessary for firefighting purposes or if there is any unauthorized device, vehicle or equipment connected to a fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
State Law reference— Authorized emergency vehicle defined, MCL 257.2.  
Chapter 62. - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance relating to franchises saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(9); businesses, ch. 22; cable communications, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 102. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSUMERS POWER CONTRACT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The Consumers Power Company is now known as Consumers Energy. 
 
Sec. 62-26. - Purpose. 
The Consumers Power Company, its successors and assigns shall be granted the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places, and conduct a local gas business in the city for a period of 30 years. 
(Code 1976, § 6-01.01)  
Sec. 62-27. - Authorization. 
(a)  Right, power and authority granted. The city hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company, a corporation authorized to transact business in this state, its successors and assigns, referred to in this article as the "grantee," the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes, and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the city for a period of 30 years. 
(b)  Contingencies. 
(1)  Performance. In consideration of the rights, power and authority granted by this article, the grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms of this article. 
(2)  Rights not exclusive. The rights, power and authority granted in this article are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished under this article. 
(3)  Extension of gas distribution system. The grantee shall from time to time extend its gas distribution system to and within the city and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(4)  Rate and rule regulation. 
a.  Approval by state public service commission. The grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of the city for gas furnished therein, the rates as approved by the state public service commission, to which commission and its successors the authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and make rules regulating gas service in the city is hereby granted and conferred for the term of this franchise. 
b.  Review and change. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either the city or the grantee. 
(c)  Restrictions. 
(1)  Obstructions during construction. No highway, street, alley, bridge or other public place used by the grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and such shall be restored to the same order and condition as when work was commenced. 
(2)  Highway interference. All of the grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 6-01.02)  
Sec. 62-28. - Negligent construction and maintenance. 
(a)  Holding city free and harmless. The grantee under this article shall at all times keep and save the city free and harmless from all loss, costs, and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment authorized by this article. 
(b)  Defense of city. If any action is commenced against the city on account of the permission given in this article, the grantee shall, upon notice, defend the city and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
(Code 1976, § 6-01.03)  
Sec. 62-29. - Notice of revocation. 
The franchise granted by this article is subject to revocation by the city or the grantee upon 180 days written notice by the party desiring revocation. 
(Code 1976, § 6-01.04)  
Sec. 62-30. - Acceptance. 
Upon the acceptance of this article by the grantee, this article shall constitute a contract between the city and the grantee for a period of 30 years from the date of such acceptance, unless revoked in accordance with section 62-29. 
(Code 1976, § 6-01.05)  
Secs. 62-31—62-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DETROIT EDISON COMPANY 
 
Sec. 62-56. - Purpose. 
Detroit Edison Company, its successors and assigns shall be granted permission to construct, maintain, and operate in the public streets, highways, alleys, and other public places all needful and proper poles, towers, mains, wires, pipes, conduits, and all such lines and other apparatus requisite for the transmission, transforming, and distribution of electricity for public and private use and to transact a local electric business. 
(Code 1976, § 6-02.01)  
Sec. 62-57. - Authorization. 
(a)  Permission granted. Permission is hereby granted to the Detroit Edison Company, incorporated under the laws of the States of Michigan and New York, its successors and assigns to construct, maintain and operate in the public streets, highways, alleys and other public places in the city all needful and proper poles, towers, mains, wires, pipes, conduits and all such lines and other apparatus requisite for the transmission, transforming and distribution of electricity for public and private use and to transact a local electric business within the city, subject, however, to all conditions and restrictions contained in this article. 
(b)  Duration. This franchise and article shall be and remain in force for 30 years from and after the date of its confirmation by the electors of the Township of Avon, Oakland County, Michigan. 
(c)  Rates and charges. In consideration of the granting of this franchise, the grantee agrees that its rates and charges for electric service in the city shall not exceed its rates and charges for like service elsewhere in its service area, evidenced by its uniform rate schedules at the time on file with and approved by the state public service commission. 
(d)  Regulation by state public service commission. It is understood that the grantee is subject to regulation by the state public service commission and that any order, rule, or regulation by that commission, or its successor, will prevail over any regulation contained in this article or provided for in case of conflict. 
(Code 1976, § 6-02.02)  
Sec. 62-58. - Conditions. 
The conditions of the grant in this article are as follows: 
(1)  Injury or interference prohibited. The grantee shall do no injury to any street, highway, alley or other public place or to any shade trees or in any manner disturb or interfere with any water or gas pipes or with any public or private sewer laid or constructed by any authorized person or corporation. 
(2)  Erection and construction. 
a.  Regulation by state public service commission. The construction of the lines shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state public service commission or its successor. 
b.  Notice to city in writing. The grantee, before entering upon any street, highway, alley or other public place for the purpose of erecting and constructing any poles, mains, wires, pipes, conduits, or other apparatus shall, in writing, notify the city or its representatives of the proposed construction and shall, if the city so requires, file with it a sufficient plan and specification, showing the nature and extent of the proposed erection and construction. 
c.  Obstruction and excavation safeguards. No street, highway, alley or public place shall be allowed to remain open or encumbered by the construction work of the grantee for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work, and the grantee shall at all times conform to all sections of this Code in force relative to the fencing and lighting of obstructions and excavations. 
d.  Holding city free and harmless. The grantee shall save the city harmless from any judgment that may be recovered against the city by reason of the wrongdoing or negligence of the grantee in the erection and maintenance of poles, mains, wires and other apparatus or construction. 
(3)  Tree trimming. The city may, in its discretion, grant permission for the trimming of trees when necessary to make the lines safe and accessible, such trimming to be done under its supervision. 
(4)  Raising wires. The grantee shall make due provision, upon 48 hours notice in writing, by raising its wires or otherwise for the passage of any barn, building or other structure on or over any street, highway, or public place occupied by the mains, wires, poles and apparatus of the grantee. 
(5)  Other city laws applicable. The grantee shall comply with all lawful and valid sections of this Code, zoning ordinances, rules, regulations and standards of the city in the conduct of its public utility business in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-02.03)  
Sec. 62-59. - Clarification of rights. 
(a)  Public title. Nothing in the grant under this article shall be construed to alienate the title of the public in and to any street, highway, alley or public place or any portion thereof. 
(b)  Retention of legislative power. Nothing in this article shall be construed in any manner as a surrender by the city of its legislative power with respect to the subject matter of this article or with respect to any other matter whatsoever. 
(c)  Lawful regulation. Nothing in this article shall be construed as in any manner limiting the right of the city to lawfully regulate the use of any street, avenue, highway or public place within its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 6-02.04)  
Sec. 62-60. - Acceptance and confirmation. 
The grant in this article shall take effect if the grantee shall, within 15 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, file with the city clerk its written acceptance of the terms of the grant, and upon the confirmation of this grant, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the electors of Avon Township voting thereon at a special election to be held on Tuesday, October 23, 1973, as provided for by the statutes and the state constitution. If not confirmed by the electors voting at the election, this article shall be null and void. 
(Code 1976, § 6-02.05)  
Secs. 62-61—62-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NORDIC ELECTRIC, L.L.C. 
 
Sec. 62-81. - Grant. 
The city hereby grants the right, power and authority to Nordic Electric, L.L.C., its successors and assigns, referred to in this article as the "grantee," to furnish electricity and electrical service to customers in the City of Rochester Hills, Oakland County, Michigan, to the extent permissible and approved by the state public service commission. The grantee does not have the right, power or authority to construct or maintain electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances along, over and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways and other public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-82. - Term. 
This franchise shall be for a term of ten years, subject, however, to the term being revoked at will by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-83. - Consideration. 
In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, the grantee shall faithfully perform all responsibilities and obligations required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-84. - Conditions. 
No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway or other public place shall be obstructed by the grantee in the performance of its business under this article. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-85. - Hold harmless. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the grantee shall at all times keep and save the city free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subjected by reason of the grantee's operations or the granting of this franchise. In case any action is commenced against the city on account of, or as a direct or indirect result of, the franchise given in this article, the grantee shall, upon notice, defend the city and save it free and harmless from all losses, costs, claims and damages, including litigation costs and actual attorney's fees, arising therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-86. - Extensions. 
The grantee may from time to time extend its services and furnish electricity to customers within the city in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-87. - Franchise not exclusive. 
The rights, power and authority in this article granted are not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-88. - Rates. 
The grantee shall be entitled to charge its customers in the city for electricity furnished at the rate and upon the terms and conditions approved by the state public service commission, which commission or its successors have authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate electric rates and promulgate rates regulating such service in the city. Such rate shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition made by either the city acting through the city council, or by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-89. - Processing fee. 
The grantee shall pay to the city a fee of $5,000.00 to cover the administration and costs incurred by the city for processing the grantee's application and ensuring that the terms of this agreement are adhered to. The fee shall be paid to the city at the time of the grantee's acceptance of the franchise pursuant to section 62-93. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-90. - Revocation. 
The franchise granted by this article is subject to revocation at the will of the city council upon 60 days written notice to the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-91. - State public service commission jurisdiction. 
The grantee shall, as to all other conditions and terms of service not fixed in this article, be subject to the rules and regulations of the state public service commission applicable to the furnishing of electricity by the grantee in the city. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-92. - City jurisdiction. 
The grantee shall remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city now in effect, or which might subsequently be adopted for the regulation of land uses or for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver by the grantee of any of its existing or future rights under state or federal law or a limitation upon the existing or future powers of the city under its Charter or state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Sec. 62-93. - Effective date. 
The franchise granted in this article shall take effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; provided, however, the franchise shall cease and be of no effect 30 days after its adoption unless within that period the grantee shall accept the franchise in writing filed with the city clerk. Upon the grantee's written acceptance, this article shall constitute a contract between the city and the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 439, § 1, 4-21-1999)  
Chapter 66. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to designate certain violations as municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l, MSA 5.2083(2); municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq., MSA 27A.8701 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized enforcement officer means all county sheriff's deputies and all city personnel designated by the mayor or authorized by this Code or city ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction notices. 
Municipal civil infraction means a violation of this Code or a city ordinance for which the remedy and/or sanction is prescribed to be a civil fine or sanction other than a criminal penalty. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a criminal offense or of a violation of this Code or of an ordinance violation that is not a civil infraction. 
Municipal civil infraction determination means a determination that a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction based on one of the following: 
(1)  An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction; 
(2)  An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, with explanation; 
(3)  A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing or formal hearing; or 
(4)  A default judgment for failing to appear at a scheduled appearance. 
Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized enforcement officer, directing a person to appear at the ordinance violations bureau established under article II of this chapter for the purpose of paying a civil fine and/or costs for a violation which is prescribed to be a municipal civil infraction. 
Violation means any act or offense which is prohibited or declared to be unlawful under this Code or a city ordinance and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.01), 3-5-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 600.8701, 600.8707(6), MSA 27A.8701, 27A.8707, (6).  
Sec. 66-2. - Commencement of municipal civil infraction actions. 
A municipal civil infraction action is commenced upon the issuance by an authorized enforcement officer of either of the following: 
(1)  Citation. A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in district court; or 
(2)  Violation notice. A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.02.01), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 66-3. - Citation form. 
The form and content of citations used for municipal civil infraction violations shall be in accordance with sections 8705 and 8709 of Public Act No. 12 of 1994 (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709, MSA 27A.8705, 27A.8709). 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.02.02), 3-5-1997) 
State Law reference— Citation form, MCL 600.8705, MSA 27A.8705; citation contents, MCL 600.8709, MSA 27A.8709.  
Sec. 66-4. - Issuance and service of citations. 
(a)  Basis for issuance. The basis for issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation shall be as follows: 
(1)  Witness by authorized enforcement officer. An authorized enforcement officer who witnesses a person violate a section of this Code or an ordinance, the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and three copies of a citation unless the officer instead issues a municipal civil infraction violation notice pursuant to section 66-35. 
(2)  Based upon investigation. An authorized enforcement officer may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(3)  Based upon investigation of complaint by witness. An authorized enforcement officer may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person violate a section of this Code or an ordinance, the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and if the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(b)  Filing and service. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be filed with the district court, and a copy shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  Personal service. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, the authorized enforcement officer shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
(2)  Use or occupancy of land; posting. In a municipal civil infraction action involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other structure, a copy of the citation need not be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(3)  Processing of citation. A citation served as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section for a violation involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other structure shall be processed in the same manner as a citation served personally upon a defendant. 
(Ord. No. 408, §§ 2(1-05.02.03), 2(1-05.02.04), 3-5-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 600.8707, MSA 27A.8707.  
Sec. 66-5. - Failure to appear. 
A person served with a municipal civil infraction citation, as provided in subsection 66-4(b), who fails to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is guilty of a misdemeanor. Failure to appear will also result in the entry of a default judgment on the municipal civil infraction. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 600.8723, 600.8727(9), MSA 27A.8723, 27A.8727, (9).  
Secs. 66-6—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish a municipal ordinance violations bureau, MCL 600.8396, MSA 27A.8396. 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Established. 
An ordinance violations bureau is established for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized enforcement officers, and to collect civil fines and costs prescribed by this Code or by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.03.01), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 66-32. - Location. 
The ordinance violations bureau shall be located in the city's administrative offices and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.03.03), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 66-33. - Authority. 
(a)  Acceptance of payment. The ordinance violations bureau is authorized to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices and to collect civil fines and costs in connection therewith. 
(b)  Nonacceptance of payment where responsibility denied. The ordinance violations bureau shall not accept payment of a fine or costs from any person who denies having committed the municipal civil infraction charged in a municipal civil infraction violation notice or who admits responsibility only with explanation. 
(c)  Authority to determine responsibility. The ordinance violations bureau shall not have authority or jurisdiction to determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.03.04), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 66-34. - Disposition of payments. 
Payments made to the ordinance violations bureau shall be retained and accounted for as fines and costs, respectively, and shall be deposited in the city's budgetary fund to which the cost of enforcing the particular section of this Code or ordinance is charged. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.03.02), 3-5-1997)  
Sec. 66-35. - Municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
An authorized enforcement officer may issue and serve a municipal civil infraction violation notice, instead of a citation, under the same circumstances and in the same manner as provided for the service of citations. The violation notice shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the ordinance violations bureau, the means by which a violator may appear, the address and telephone number of the ordinance violations bureau, the ordinance violations bureau's hours, the amount of the fine for the violation, the consequences for failure to appear or to pay the fine, together with any other information required by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.02.05), 3-5-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 600.8707(6), MSA 27A.8707, (6).  
Sec. 66-36. - Disposition of violations. 
(a)  Alleged violator's options. Any person receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice may dispose of the charge alleged in the notice by making payment of the fine and/or costs to the ordinance violations bureau. However, a person shall have the right to elect not to have the violation processed by the ordinance violations bureau and to instead have the alleged violation processed in district court. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of a violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(b)  Procedure for processing violation at bureau. A person electing to have the alleged violation processed at the ordinance violations bureau shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and/or costs within the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. Appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation. If appearance is made by mail, the person charged in the notice shall be responsible for timely delivery of the fine and/or costs within the time specified in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. 
(c)  Procedure where responsibility not admitted or fine not paid. If a person elects not to admit responsibility or pay the specified civil fine and/or costs prescribed for the alleged violation, an authorized enforcement officer may file a municipal civil infraction citation with the district court, in which case a copy of the citation shall be served by first class mail upon the person charged with the municipal civil infraction at the person's last known address. The citation filed with the court need not comply in all particulars with section 66-3, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violations notice and shall fairly inform the defendant how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.03.05), 3-5-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 600.8707(6), MSA 27A.8707, (6).  
Sec. 66-37. - Schedule of civil fines. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the ordinance violations bureau established under this article for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal civil infraction violation notices is listed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  A copy of the adopted schedule of civil fines shall be posted at the ordinance violations bureau. 
_____
(c)  The schedule of civil fines shall be as follows: 
Code 
Section 	Municipal Civil Infraction 	First 
Violation 	First Repeat 
Violation 	Second or 
Subsequent 
Repeat 
Violation 
2-284 	Purchasing regulations 	$ 70.00 	$150.00 	$500.00 
10-56 	Carnival, circus, show or exhibition permit 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
10-121 	Dancehall and roller rink permit 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
10-181 	Mechanical and electronic amusement device license 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
18-9 	Weekday construction hours 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
18-10 	Sunday and holiday construction hours 	70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
18-45 	State construction code 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
18-137 	State electrical code 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
18-398 	Moving of buildings 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
18-494 	Dangerous buildings 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
84-6 	Fences 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
18-567 	Street addresses 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
Chap. 84 	Property maintenance 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
58-57 	Fire prevention code 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
58-86 	Fire control measures and regulations 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
94-144 	Sidewalk maintenance 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
84-17 	Failure to cut or destroy weeds 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
118-30 	Historic district regulations 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
126-266 	Tree conservation 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
126-499 	Wetland and watercourse protection 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
134-5 	Signs 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
138-7 	Zoning 	 70.00 	150.00 	500.00 
 
(Ord. No. 408, § 2(1-05.04), 3-5-1997; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.03), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 557, § 1, 7-26-2010)  
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Hunting. 
No person shall hunt wild game or fowl or in any manner carry any gun, weapon or firearm within the city for the purpose of hunting any wild game or fowl at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.16)  
Sec. 70-2. - Trapping. 
No person shall, by use of any pit, pitfall, deadfall, cage, snare, trap, net, baited hook, or any similar device or of any drug, poison, chemical or explosive, injure, capture or kill any bird, wild game or furbearing animal, nor shall any person at any time or in any manner whatsoever molest, harass, or annoy any such bird, wild game or furbearing animal within the city limits. However, a live cage may be utilized by a resident at his place of residence for purposes of removing a wild animal that is creating a nuisance to the resident or the resident's family. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.17)  
Sec. 70-3. - Trespass for hunting or trapping. 
No person shall trespass upon the lands of another to hunt or trap wild game or fowl within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.18)  
Secs. 70-4—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-31. - Retail fraud. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of retail fraud: 
(1)  Misrepresents the price. While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting difference in price is less than $200.00. 
(2)  Steals property. While a store is open to the public, steals property that is offered for sale, at a price of less than $200.00. 
(3)  Wrongful refunds and exchanges. With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and that belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.00. 
(b)  Violations; penalty. All violations of this section shall be misdemeanors and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a sentence of not more than 93 days of confinement to jail or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, in the court's discretion. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.20; Ord. No. 459, § 1, 2-23-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.356d, MSA 28.588(4).  
Sec. 70-32. - Larceny under $200.00. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. If the property stolen shall be of the value of less than $200.00, it shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, converting or wrongfully withholding the property of another, including but not limited to any of the following: 
(1)  Money, goods, chattels or services; 
(2)  Bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate; 
(3)  Book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due or to be delivered; 
(4)  Deed or writing containing a conveyance of land; 
(5)  Valuable contract in force; 
(6)  Receipt, release, or defeasance; or 
(7)  Writ, process, or public record. 
(b)  Violations; penalty. All violations of this section shall be misdemeanors and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a sentence of not more than 93 days of confinement to jail or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, in the court's discretion. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.21; Ord. No. 459, § 1, 2-23-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.356, MSA 28.588.  
Secs. 70-33—70-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRESPASS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Recreational trespass, MCL 324.73101 et seq., MSA 13A.73101 et seq.; trespass generally, MCL 750.546 et seq., MSA 28.814 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-60. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is so that the trespass on private property within the city shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 7-02.01)  
Sec. 70-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner means the titleholder, land contract purchaser, lessee, tenant, occupant, agent, employee or trustee thereof. For a public, private, or parochial school, the term "owner" includes authorized employees of the school or school district. 
Person means any individual, adult or minor, partnership, firm and corporation. 
Trespass means the unauthorized use of private property not open to the public or any public, private, or parochial school site which has been registered as provided for in this division by persons without the express written permission of the owner. The term "trespass" does not include the use of property by the owner thereof, members of his immediate family, and persons lawfully residing upon the property, nor shall it include a person accompanied by the owner, a member of his immediate family, or a person lawfully residing upon the property. The term "trespass" does not include a person in the process of or on property for the purpose of normal ingress to and egress from a residence; a commercial establishment; any public, private, or parochial school; or other occupancy of the property. 
Vehicle means any motor-driven vehicle of any type that utilizes sled-type runners, skis, wheels, or an endless belt tread or any combination thereof or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, having a seat or saddle for the use of a rider. In addition, this term means every vehicle not entitled to be licensed for travel upon the public highways of the state that is designed primarily for recreational purposes, including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, go-carts, trail bikes or drag bikes. 
(Code 1976, § 7-02.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-62. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Persons. No person shall trespass upon any private property not open to the public or on any public, private, or parochial school site that has been registered as provided for in this division. 
(1)  Written permission. Every person, except and in the company of the owner of the property, members of his immediate family and persons lawfully residing upon the property, shall carry with him at all times when on the property the express written permission of the owner. The written permission shall identify the property for which the permission is granted, the person to whom permission is granted, his address, the owner of the property, the duration of the permission, and the permission shall be signed by the owner. 
(2)  Display on request. The written permission shall be displayed to any law enforcement officer of the city or the county sheriff's department. 
(b)  Vehicles. No person shall operate, park, leave, stop, or stand a vehicle on private property of another without the express or implied consent or authorization from the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 7-02.03)  
Sec. 70-63. - Registration. 
To invoke the operation and enforcement of this division, an owner must register the property by appropriate description on forms provided by the city clerk to be filed with the city clerk, who shall maintain a current roster thereof. The owner shall furnish copies of the registration to the law enforcement agencies in and for the city. Registration shall be required annually. 
(Code 1976, § 7-02.04)  
Sec. 70-64. - Posted notice. 
(a)  Required. In order to invoke enforcement of this division for any particular property, notice must be posted by the owner in one or more places so as to be plainly visible to persons unfamiliar with such property for the purpose of giving notice that trespassing is prohibited. 
(b)  Form. The form of the posted notice required by subsection (a) of this section shall be substantially as follows: 
(1)  Private property not open to public. When displayed on private property not open to the public, such form shall read substantially as follows: 
This is private property. Any persons other than the owner as defined by the City Trespass Ordinance, or otherwise authorized by said Ordinance, must have on his person written permission to use the property, or said persons will be guilty of trespassing in violation of the City of Rochester Hills Trespass Ordinance. 
This property has been registered under the provisions of said Trespass Ordinance and violators will be prosecuted and unauthorized vehicles towed away or ticketed. 
(2)  School sites. When displayed on public, private, or parochial school sites, such form shall read substantially as follows: 
This is school property. No trespassing is allowed under the provisions of the City of Rochester Hills Trespass Ordinance; however, persons may utilize recreational facilities located on the property between the hours of sunrise and sunset. 
Violators will be prosecuted and unauthorized vehicles towed away or ticketed. 
(Code 1976, § 7-02.05)  
Sec. 70-65. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Right of entry. The registering of any private property pursuant to this division shall give the law enforcement agencies of the city, which includes the county sheriff's department, the right and authority to enter the property for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(b)  Evidence of violation. In any enforcement proceeding for violation of this division, the owner as registered with the secretary of state shall be presumed to have placed or left standing any vehicle found on private property protected by this division. 
(c)  Remedies. Remedies for enforcement of this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Towing vehicle. Any owner or law enforcement of the city may cause any vehicle that is violating this division to be towed away. 
(2)  Issuance of ticket. Any police officer or deputy sheriff may issue a ticket for violation of this division and leave it attached to any vehicle requiring the appearance of the owner thereof in court at the time and place designated therein to answer for the violation of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 7-02.06)  
Secs. 70-66—70-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-91. - Resisting, obstructing officer in discharge of duty. 
Any person who shall knowingly and willingly obstruct, resist or oppose any sheriff or other peace officer, building and zoning code enforcement officers, or any other person duly authorized, in serving or attempting to serve or execute any process, rule or order made or issued by lawful authority, or who shall obstruct, resist or oppose said officer/person by any means including verbally, physically or otherwise, in the execution of any ordinance, law, or any rule, order or resolution made, issued or passed by the City of Rochester Hills or by the State of Michigan or who shall assault, beat or wound any sheriff, other law enforcement officer, including building and zoning enforcement officers, or other person duly authorized, while serving, or attempting to serve or execute any such process, rule or order, or for having served or attempted to serve or execute the same, or who shall so obstruct, resist, oppose, assault, beat or wound any of the above-named officers, or any other person or persons authorized by law to maintain and preserve the peace, in their lawful acts, attempts and efforts to maintain, preserve and keep the peace, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by a sentence of not more than 93 days of confinement in jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 1, 1-29-2003)  
Secs. 70-92—70-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Disorderly persons defined, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364. 
 
Sec. 70-115. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is so that disorderly conduct shall be defined and prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.01)  
Sec. 70-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business parking lot means any privately owned parking area providing parking during business hours adjacent to and serving any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, office building, commercial building, industrial building or other business establishment. 
Cruising means operating or occupying any vehicle being driven in, upon, around or about essentially one place, location or premises, including but not limited to a business parking lot, for a period longer than is reasonable necessary to enter, exit, pass through, transact lawful business at, or frequent any establishment at or adjoining such place, location or premises. 
Loitering means remaining idle or lingering in essentially one location. The term "loitering" includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, lounging, standing or sitting around, walking about aimlessly, sitting in or on parked vehicles and also includes the colloquial expression, "hanging around." 
Public place means any structure, building, alley, street, house, hall, room, private property, or other place to which the general public has access for business, entertainment or other lawful purposes, including the front or immediate area of or parking area serving any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and also including public grounds, areas or parks. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-117. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be disorderly conduct and shall be unlawful for any person to commit or join with another person in the commission of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Prostitution. Any common prostitute. 
(2)  Molesting or assault. Any window peeper or any person who shall designedly molest, assault, or interfere with the persons or the safety, comfort, and repose of any person in any public place. 
(3)  Improper language. Any person who shall use indecent, obscene, immoral, vile, vulgar, or profane language in any public place or who shall use such language in the presence or hearing of any woman or child or who shall communicate such language to any woman or child via telephone. 
(4)  Disturbing the peace. Any person who shall make any improper, loud or tumultuous noise or disturbance which interferes with the peaceful enjoyment of the premises of others. 
(5)  Intoxication or unlawful imbibing. Any person who shall be drunk or intoxicated in any public place, and any person who shall imbibe any alcoholic liquor, including beer and wine, in any public place not licensed to sell such liquor for consumption on the premises. 
(6)  Illegal sale or dispensing of alcohol or liquor. 
a.  Any person who shall illegally sell, keep for sale, offer for sale or otherwise dispense alcoholic liquors or spirituous liquor either by the bottle or glass; 
b.  Any person who shall aid and abet in the illegal sale of alcoholic liquor or spirituous liquor; 
c.  Any person found loitering in or about a place where alcoholic liquors or spirituous liquor is illegally sold, offered for sale, or otherwise dispensed; and 
d.  Any person who shall represent his age to be 21 years or over, when such person shall be under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic liquor or spirituous liquor. 
(7)  Loitering or cruising. Any person who shall loiter or cruise in a public place in such a manner as to: 
a.  Obstruct or interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles and pedestrians. 
b.  Create or cause a breach or disturbance of the peace or danger thereof. 
c.  Create or cause any unreasonable disturbance, annoyance or threat to the comfort, response or safety of any other person. 
d.  Obstruct or interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of private property or with any business lawfully conducted in, upon or fronting on any such public place so as to prevent the free and uninterrupted ingress to and egress from such business. 
e.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place by conduct including but not limited to the making of unsolicited remarks or gestures of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy, disturb or threaten the person to whom or in whose presence they are made. 
(8)  Loitering in illegal place. Any person who shall knowingly loiter in and about any place where an illegal occupation or business prohibited by state law or local ordinance is being conducted, practiced, encouraged or allowed. 
(9)  Prowling. Any person who is found prowling in or about any public place, bus depot or bus stop, banking institution, motel, hotel, store, shop, public building, dwelling or private property with no valid reason for being there. 
(10)  Soliciting. Any person who stands, loiters, or strolls in any public place awaiting or seeking an opportunity to obtain money or valuable things from others by trick or fraud or to aid or assist therein. 
(11)  Breach of peace. Any person found unnecessarily shoving or jostling people in any public place, and any person who shall create any disturbance in any public place or who shall create a disturbance in any private place which shall result in any annoyance to the occupants and invitees of the immediate vicinity or who shall in any way cause a breach of the peace. 
(12)  Fights or disturbances. All persons who engage in or aid and abet in any fight, quarrel, riot or other disturbance in the city. 
(13)  Riots. Any person who shall collect, stand in crowds, or remain loitering in, on or about any street or other public place so as to hinder the free and uninterrupted passage of other persons or hinder or impede the free access to and departure from inside of any public hall, courtroom, or place of entertainment or worship, or who shall commit any act constituting a disturbance, public quarrel or riot or aid or abet in the commission of such act or any persons riotously congregated or assembled. 
(14)  Trespass on business parking lot. 
a.  Upon notification to leave. Any person remaining in any business parking lot for a period longer than reasonably necessary to transact lawful business at or frequent any establishment served by the business parking lot who, without legal right or lawful authority and upon being notified to leave by the owner, person lawfully in charge, or the servant, employee or agent of either, neglects to comply with or disregards such notification shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct. 
b.  After hours where posted. In addition to subsection (14)a. of this section, any person who enters or remains in any business parking lot at any time when entering or remaining in the lot is prohibited, as shown by a sign at the business parking lot, shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct, and it shall not be required that the person be otherwise first notified to leave. 
c.  Signs. The prohibition contained in subsection (14)b. of this section shall be effective at any business parking lot where the owner or person lawfully in charge has posted signs clearly stating the prohibition. Signs must be placed so they can be seen either at all entrances to the lot or at other prominent locations in the lot. Each sign must contain the following, or substantially similar, language: 
No parking or trespassing between _____ p.m. and _____ a.m. pursuant to section 70-117 of the City of Rochester Hills Code of Ordinances. 
(15)  Urinating in public . Any person who shall urinate or defecate in a public place other than in a toilet or a urinal. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-03.03.01, 7-03.03.03—7-03.03.05, 7-03.03.07—7-03.03.15, 7-03.03.19; Ord. No. 496, § 1, 5-4-2005)  
Secs. 70-118—70-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-146—70-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AIRTIGHT REFRIGERATION DEVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned or unattended icebox or refrigerator, leaving in place accessible to children prohibited, MCL 750.493d. 
 
Sec. 70-171. - Purpose. 
Abandonment, neglect or indiscriminate location of iceboxes, refrigerators, deep freezes and other devices with airtight doors which constitute an attractive nuisance and danger to small children so that they may conceal themselves in such devices and thereby suffocate shall be controlled and regulated as provided in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 7-01.01)  
Sec. 70-172. - Abandonment or neglect. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or neglect any icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze or other device with airtight doors within the city unless all doors of the icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze or other device with airtight doors shall have been removed prior to such abandonment. 
(Code 1976, § 7-01.02.01)  
Sec. 70-173. - Possession or maintenance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze or other device with airtight doors in any place within the city unless: 
(1)  All doors of such icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze or other device with airtight doors shall have been removed. 
(2)  The icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze or other device with airtight doors shall be either kept or maintained: 
a.  In an inhabited dwelling; 
b.  Securely locked with a padlock or other locking device requiring a key, the key to which is at all times in the possession or under the control of an adult person and in such manner as to be unavailable to a minor child of less than 14 years of age; 
c.  In a structure securely locked with a padlock or other locking device, the key to which is at all times in the possession or under the control of an adult person and in such manner as to be unavailable to a minor child of less than 14 years of age; or 
d.  In a retail mercantile establishment under the control and supervision of an adult person. 
(Code 1976, § 7-01.02.02)  
Sec. 70-174. - Liability. 
For the purpose of this division, officers and/or members of the board of directors of any firm, association or corporation shall be charged with responsibility for their respective firms, associations or corporations complying with this division. 
(Code 1976, § 7-01.03)  
Secs. 70-175—70-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WEAPONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Licenses required to sell, purchase, possess and carry certain firearms, MCL 28.421 et seq., MSA 28.91 et seq.; local units of government prohibited from imposing certain restrictions on pistols or firearms, MCL 123.1101 et seq., MSA 5.3415(1) et seq.; crimes relating to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq., MSA 28.397 et seq.; crimes involving firearms and weapons, MCL 750.222 et seq., MSA 28.419 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-201. - Discharge of firearms. 
No person shall discharge or use any firearm, gun, air rifle, air pistol, or any rifle or any handgun that propels BB's, bullets, pellets, or other similar projectiles, by means of spring, gas or air, except when: 
(1)  Lawfully acting in defense of persons or property. 
(2)  On the property of his domicile and no bullet, BB, pellet, or other similar projectile goes beyond the property. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.06) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms prohibited, MCL 750.234 et seq., MSA 28.431 et seq.  
Secs. 70-202—70-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-231. - Prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Be employed in or found in any house of prostitution or ill fame or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed or in any house of assignation; 
(2)  Be the keeper, operator, or proprietor of such a place or the owner of property who shall knowingly permit such property to be used for such a place; 
(3)  Solicit for any such place; 
(4)  Solicit, accost, call or invite another person for any common prostitute or for any act of prostitution or lewdness; or 
(5)  Attempt to procure the commission by another or by others of any act of illicit intercourse or lewdness. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.01) 
State Law reference— Prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq., MSA 28.703 et seq.  
Sec. 70-232. - Indecent exposure. 
No person shall intentionally exhibit himself in any place of entertainment or in any public place or to the public view, indecently clad or in the nude, or engage in any indecent, immoral or obscene conduct in such places, or make any indecent or open exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1976, § 7-03.03.02) 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, MCL 750.335a, MSA 28.567(1).  
Secs. 70-233—70-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Drug paraphernalia, MCL 333.7451 et seq., MSA 14.15(7451) et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled substance means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor enumerated in schedule 1-5 of sections 7201 to 7231 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7201 et seq., MSA 14.15(7201) et seq.). 
Drug paraphernalia. 
(1)  Definition. The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind that are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance. It includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
b.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances. 
c.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled substance. 
d.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
e.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
f.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use, or designed for use in mixing with, diluting, or cutting controlled substances. 
g.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
h.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
i.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes or other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
j.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
k.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
l.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as the following: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls. 
2.  Water pipes. 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
5.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
7.  Chamber pipes. 
8.  Carburetor pipes. 
9.  Electric pipes. 
10.  Air driven pipes. 
11.  Chillums. 
12.  Bongs. 
13.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(2)  Inclusions or exclusions from definition. The following are either included in or excluded from the definition, as indicated: 
a.  Paper with a colorful design or name designed or marketed for use with controlled substances are included in the definition. White paper or tobacco-oriented paper not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity of other items within the definition are not included. 
b.  Roach clips or other pincer-type devices designed or marketed for use with controlled substances are included in the definition. Common paper clips, tie clips, hair pins and alligator clips not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity of other items within the definition are not included. 
c.  Pipes, bongs and similar inhalators designed or marketed for use with controlled substances are included in the definition. Pipes and inhalators not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity of other items within the definition are not included. 
d.  Common household or retail items not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity of other items within the definition are not included. 
(3)  Additional considerations. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
b.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object under any local ordinance or state or federal law relating to any controlled substance. 
c.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this division. 
d.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
e.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
f.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver the object to a person whom he knows or should reasonably know intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this division. The innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object as to a direct violation of this division shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
g.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
h.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
i.  National and local advertising concerning the object's use. 
j.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
k.  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
l.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
m.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
n.  Expert testimony concerning the object's use. 
Market means the act of marketing a product. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-262. - Purpose. 
The possession, delivery, sale, marketing and advertising of items, paraphernalia, accessories or things which are designed or marketed for use with controlled substances shall be prohibited to: 
(1)  Protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  Discourage the use of controlled substances. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.01)  
Sec. 70-263. - Enforcement. 
This division shall be enforced by the county sheriff's department, the state police, and/or other law enforcement officers as may be designated by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.08)  
Sec. 70-264. - Civil forfeiture. 
Any drug paraphernalia used or possessed in violation of this division shall be seized and forfeited to the city or the seizing agency. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.06)  
Sec. 70-265. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Misdemeanor of second degree. A person who violates any of the provisions of section 70-266 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. A misdemeanor of a second degree shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by a sentence of not more than 30 days of confinement in jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(b)  Misdemeanor of first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of section 70-266, any subsequent violation of the same section shall be a misdemeanor of the first degree. A misdemeanor of the first degree shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 or by a sentence of not more than 90 days of confinement in jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(c)  Separate offenses. Each day that a violation of this section shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.07)  
Sec. 70-266. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Delivery, sale or marketing. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, market, or possess with intent to deliver, sell or market drug paraphernalia knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. 
(b)  Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. 
(c)  Advertisements. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.03)  
Sec. 70-267. - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions contained in section 70-266 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists, or embalmers in the normal course of their respective businesses or professions; 
(2)  Common carriers or warehousers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia; 
(3)  Public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties; or 
(4)  Persons suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.05)  
Sec. 70-268. - Delivery to minors. 
Any person 18 years of age or over who violates subsection 70-266(a) by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior is guilty of a special offense which shall be punishable as a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Code 1976, § 7-12.04)  
Secs. 70-269—70-276. - Reserved.  
Sec. 70-277. - Possession/use of marijuana. 
(a)  Except as authorized by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess marijuana. 
(b)  Any person who shall be convicted of violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 1, 4-24-2002)  
Secs. 70-278—70-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES CONCERNING UNDERAGE PERSONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Frequenting of premises for mechanical and electronic amusement devices by minors, § 10-223; patronage of massage businesses by minors, § 22-101. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-296—70-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 70-321. - Findings and purpose. 
The city council determines that alcohol use by persons less than 21 years of age should be regulated, as unregulated use creates serious social problems, including but not limited to injury and harm to persons and property caused by vehicles operated by persons less than 21 years of age under the influence of alcohol, disturbance of the peace, and other devastating effects on not only the person less than 21 years of age involved but on the public at large. It is further determined that the regulation of the use of alcohol by persons less than 21 years of age will reduce the incidence of problems attributable to alcohol use by persons less than 21 years of age. 
(Code 1976, § 7-18.01)  
Sec. 70-322. - Enforcement. 
This division shall be enforceable by any deputy sheriff of the county sheriff's department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-18.04)  
Sec. 70-323. - Prohibited conduct and penalties. 
(a)  A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. A minor who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions and is not subject to the penalties prescribed in section 909 of Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1909): 
(1)  First offense. For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.00. A court may order the minor to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at the minor's own expense. 
(2)  Second offense. If a violation of this subsection after one prior judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, by a fine of not more than $200.00, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.6230), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at the minor's own expense. 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense. If a violation of this subsection occurs after two or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60 days; if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978, MCL 333.6230 and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at the minor's own expense. 
(b)  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(c)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request that minor to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a municipal civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(d)  A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age and not emancipated pursuant to Public Act No. 293 of 1968, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall notify the parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notification required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) of this section is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated pursuant to Public Act No. 293 of 1968, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The notification may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice, including but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If a person less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a) of this section, his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(e)  This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Code, Public Act No. 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(f)  The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of subsection (a): 
(1)  A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor. 
(2)  A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the following criteria: 
a.  Has consumed alcoholic liquor. 
b.  Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor. 
(3)  A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care concern. 
(g)  This section shall not be construed to limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of the Michigan Liquor Control Code, Public Act No. 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 
(h)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(i)  The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited. 
(j)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(k)  In a prosecution for the violation of subsection (a) concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(l)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
a.  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
b.  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(2)  "Minor" means an individual less than 21 years of age. 
(3)  "Prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United States substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state: 
a.  This section or sections 701 or 707. 
b.  Sections 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625. 
c.  Sections 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.80176, 324.81134, and 324.82127. 
d.  Sections 167a or 237 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1939 PA 328, MCL 750.167a and 750.237. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-18.02, 7-18.03; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 9-29-1999; Ord. No. 493, § 1, 11-17-2004; Ord. No. 599 , § 1, 11-13-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703.  
Secs. 70-324—70-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - HOUSE PARTIES 
 
Sec. 70-351. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Control means the authority to regulate, direct, superintend or govern or the authority to exercise restraining or dominating influence over, including a possessory right over property. With respect to a hall, a person who rents, leases, lets, hires or is otherwise responsible for arranging or obtaining use of the hall shall be considered to have control. 
Controlled substance means any drug, substance or immediate precursor designated and listed in schedules 1—5 of sections 7201 to 7231 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7201 et seq.). 
Hall means a hall, motel or hotel room, meeting room, ballroom, suite, club or other place of assembly used for a social function or gathering. 
Hall party means a social gathering at a hall. 
House party means a social gathering at a residence that includes at least one person who is not an owner, tenant or regular legal occupant of the residence. 
Residence means a house, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, including the curtilage and land around the dwelling unit to the extent the land is subject to the control of the same person having control of the dwelling unit. 
(Code 1976, § 7-14.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-352. - Purpose. 
The city council determines that alcohol and controlled substance use by persons less than 21 years of age should be regulated, as unregulated use creates serious social problems, including but not limited to injury and harm to persons and property caused by vehicles operated by persons less than 21 years of age under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, disturbance of the peace, and other devastating effects on not only the person less than 21 years of age involved, but on the public at large. It is further determined that the regulation of house parties and hall parties involving alcohol and controlled substance use by persons less than 21 years of age by requiring sponsoring persons to assume responsibility for house parties and hall parties, and by prohibiting persons less than 21 years of age from attending such parties, will significantly reduce the incidence of problems attributable to alcohol and controlled substance use by persons less than 21 years of age. 
(Code 1976, § 7-14.01)  
Sec. 70-353. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to legally protected religious observances and education activities. 
(Code 1976, § 7-14.04)  
Sec. 70-354. - Control and allowance of party. 
It shall be unlawful for any person 16 years of age or older having control of any residence or hall to allow a house party or a hall party to take place or to continue once it has begun at that residence or hall when the person knows or reasonably should know an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance is being or has been possessed or consumed at the house party or hall party by a person less than 21 years of age. 
(Code 1976, § 7-14.03.01)  
Sec. 70-355. - Attendance by person less than 21 years of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person less than 21 years of age to attend a house party or hall party while having knowledge that alcohol or controlled substances are being sold, offered for sale or dispensed to or are being possessed by persons less than 21 years of age, unless the person less than 21 years of age is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1976, § 7-14.03.02)  
Secs. 70-356—70-399. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - E-CIGARETTES 
 
Sec. 70-400. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Persons under age 18 are prohibited by law from purchasing or possessing cigarettes and other tobacco products, and retailers are prohibited from selling them to minors. However, new tobaccoless products, commonly referred to as e-cigarettes, are available which allow the user to simulate cigarette smoking and ingest nicotine. These products may be purchased by minors and are being marketed without age restrictions or health warnings and come in different flavors that appeal to young people. 
(b)  The production and distribution of e-cigarettes is not currently regulated by federal or state authorities, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not completed testing of these products. But, initial studies by the FDA have determined that e-cigarettes can increase nicotine addiction among young people and contain chemical ingredients known to be harmful, which may expose users and the public to potential health risks. 
(c)  Therefore, the Rochester Hills City Council determines that prohibiting the sale, giving or furnishing of e-cigarettes to minors and prohibiting the purchase, possession or use of e-cigarettes by minors is in the city's best interests and will promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 586 , § 1, 10-6-2014)  
Sec. 70-401. - Definitions. 
(a)  E-cigarette shall mean an electronic oral device that provides a vapor of nicotine, simulates smoking through its use or through inhalation of the vapor generated by the device, is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as an aid in quitting the use of tobacco or a nicotine product, and is composed of a heating element, battery or electronic circuit. 
(b)  E-cigarette cartridge shall mean a container which has openings on each end, serves as a liquid reservoir and mouthpiece, allows the passage of a liquid to an atomizer and vapor from the atomizer to the user's mouth, and contains liquid for producing vapor in an e-cigarette. 
(c)  Minor shall mean an individual younger than 18 years of age. 
(d)  Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, wholesaler, retailer or any business. 
(Ord. No. 586 , § 1, 10-6-2014)  
Sec. 70-402. - Prohibitions; penalty. 
(a)  Sell, give or furnish to minor. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, furnish, or offer for sale an e-cigarette or e-cigarette cartridge in the City of Rochester Hills to a minor. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each violation. 
(b)  Purchase, use or possession by minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, possess or use an e-cigarette in the City of Rochester Hills. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 586 , § 1, 10-6-2014)  
Sec. 70-403. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense to subsection 70-402(a), above, that the defendant had in force at the time of the incident and continues to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of e-cigarettes and e-cigarette cartridges to minors and the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy. 
(b)  Subsection 70-402(b), above, does not apply to the handling or transportation of e-cigarettes or e-cigarette cartridges by a minor under the terms, and in the course, of the minor's employment. 
(Ord. No. 586 , § 1, 10-6-2014)  
Sec. 70-404. - Age verification. 
Any person selling, offering for sale, giving or furnishing an e-cigarette or e-cigarette cartridge to an individual, shall first verify that the individual is not a minor by examining a government-issued photographic identification establishing that the individual is at least 18 years of age. Or, for sales over the internet or other remote sales method, the person shall perform an age verification through an independent, third-party age verification service that compares information available from a commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that are regularly used by government agencies and businesses for the purpose of age and identity verification to the personal information entered by the individual during the ordering process that establishes the individual is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 586 , § 1, 10-6-2014)  
Secs. 70-405—70-430. - Reserved.  
Chapter 74 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Authority to operate a system of public recreation, MCL 123.51 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 74-1—74-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Camping means the overnight lodging or sleeping of a person in a tent, trailer tent, trailer coach, vehicle camper, motor vehicle, or any other conveyance placed within a park. 
Motor vehicle means any power-driven vehicle, sports equipment, or motorized device, whether operated by means of wheels, tracks, runners, skis, or other means, whether or not eligible for licensing and registration under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.). Motorized wheelchairs, carts or similar devices or equipment used for transporting persons unable to walk shall not be defined as motor vehicles. 
Park means any land owned or leased by or otherwise under the jurisdiction and control of the city, whether located within its boundaries or not, that has been designated by resolution of the city council to the use of the public for park purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.03) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-27. - Purpose. 
(a)  Establishment of city park system. A city park system shall be established to enrich the lives of the people of the city by granting recreational opportunities to the community. 
(b)  Establishment of rules for operation. Rules for the operation of the city parks shall be established in order to preserve the parks for the benefit of the community and to safeguard life and property. 
(c)  Establishment of conservation areas. Conservation areas may be established and maintained in city parks to secure for the people of the city the benefits of an enduring resource of natural environment. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.01)  
Sec. 74-28. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all property owned and/or operated as parks by the city. The city council shall designate park areas by resolution, copies of which shall be available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. Such resolution shall contain a full legal description of the park property. City parks shall be posted as such by the department of parks, forestry, and facilities and their borders delineated by a fence or other means so as to inform the public that the area is a parkland. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.02)  
Sec. 74-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement authorities. A park shall be made secure and this article enforced by designated employees or agents of the city and as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  Interference with duties prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee or agent of the city performing his official duties in the administration or policing of a park or to refuse to obey any lawful command of any such employee or agent. Nothing in this article shall prohibit or hinder duly authorized agents of the city or any peace officers from performing their official duties. 
(c)  Impersonation unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate such employee or agent. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.04)  
Sec. 74-30. - Emergency powers. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the mayor or the mayor's designee from establishing emergency rules designed to protect the health, welfare, and safety of park visitors, to protect park property, and to maintain order. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.05)  
Sec. 74-31. - Fees for use of park or facility. 
(a)  Established. Fees for the use of a park, on a daily or yearly basis, and/or charges for the use of any special facility made available within a park, on a yearly, seasonal, or per-use basis, shall be as set forth in article VIII of chapter 54. 
(b)  Payment mandatory. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a park or any facility for which such a charge is made without payment for such fee or charge, unless prior written waiver of such fee or charge by the mayor is received. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.06; Ord. No. 433, § 3, 7-1-1998)  
Secs. 74-32—74-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 74-61. - Hours. 
The city council shall establish hours of operation for each park by resolution. No person shall enter or remain within a park at any other time, unless the hours have been extended for a special event by the mayor. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.01)  
Sec. 74-62. - Closed areas. 
The mayor may declare a park or a portion of a park closed to public use or entry. During periods when a park or portion thereof is designated as closed, no person shall enter or remain within such closed area at any time, except those persons whose presence is related to or in connection with a municipal activity or a project or an activity that has been licensed to be carried on within such park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.02)  
Sec. 74-63. - Motor-driven vehicles. 
(a)  Traffic code applicable. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code as adopted by article III of chapter 98 of this Code, which traffic code is adopted in its entirety and made part and incorporated in this article by reference. 
(b)  Operation within park. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Operate a motor-driven vehicle of any kind or nature except on designated roads and parking areas within a park. 
(2)  Operate a motor-driven vehicle on any park road at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour or at any speed greater than that posted. 
(3)  Continuously cruise in any motor-driven vehicle within a park, for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  Stopping, standing or parking. Prohibitions and restrictions on stopping, standing and parking shall be as follows: 
(1)  Passenger or loading zones. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor-driven vehicle of any kind to stop, stand, or park the vehicle in any place marked as a passenger or loading zone, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or the unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials. 
(2)  Obstructing traffic. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park upon any roadway or in any parking area in such manner as to form an obstruction to traffic. 
(3)  Designated parking areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor-driven vehicle of any kind or nature any place within a park except in designated parking areas. 
(d)  Motorbikes and sport vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle, trail bike, all-terrain vehicle, or similar type of sport vehicle anywhere in a park except on the designated roads and parking areas. 
(e)  Sleds, toboggans, snowmobiles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-driven sled, toboggan, snowmobile, or similar type of vehicle anywhere in a park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.03) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate the speed of vehicles in public parks, MCL 257.606(1)(f), MSA 9.2306, (1)(f).  
Sec. 74-64. - Bicycles. 
(a)  Bicycles may be operated within a park, except where prohibited. 
(b)  Bicycles shall not be operated in an unsafe manner so as to endanger the operator or others. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.04) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Sec. 74-65. - Use of beach and lake. 
(a)  Swimming. No person shall swim, bathe, wade or scuba dive in a park lake, river, pond, or stream, except at such times and places as may be posted. Persons shall abide by posted swim rules. 
(b)  Food, beverages and containers. No person shall carry or consume any food or beverage of any kind, nor have in his possession any glass or metal container on any beach within a park. 
(c)  Floatation devices. No person shall use any floatation devices, inflatable or otherwise, within a park lake, river, pond, or stream, except as may be specifically posted for such use. 
(d)  Watercraft. No person shall bring into, use or navigate any watercraft of any kind, whether powered or not, including model watercraft, within a park, except as may be specifically posted for such use. This subsection shall not apply to boats made available by the city or its agent. 
(e)  Fishing. Fishing shall be prohibited in swimming areas designated by the placement of buoys and within 25 feet thereof. 
(f)  Winter sports. It shall be unlawful to skate, sled, walk or go upon any ice or to snowshoe or ski, except at such times and upon such places as may be posted within a park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.05)  
Sec. 74-66. - Roller skating or coasting. 
It shall be unlawful to roller skate or coast with skateboards, hand sleds, bobsleds, carts or other vehicles on wheels or runners, except on designated pathways. Such vehicles shall be operated in a safe manner. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.06)  
Sec. 74-67. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful to stay or sleep overnight and to camp within the park, except in authorized areas pursuant to a written permit issued by the mayor. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.07)  
Sec. 74-68. - Fires. 
No person shall build any fire within a park, except within fireplaces, receptacles, or open spaces approved and designated for such purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.08) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 58.  
Sec. 74-69. - Exhibitions and performances. 
It shall be unlawful to exhibit any machine, show or animal or engage in any acrobatic exhibitions within a park or carry on any performance that shall cause persons to congregate so as to interfere with the proper use of a park by the community, or obstruct the passage of persons or vehicles on designated roadways within a park, except on written permit by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.07.09)  
Secs. 74-70—74-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 74-96. - Malicious destruction. 
(a)  Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, deface, mark upon, cut, break, alter, change or remove any marker, structure, equipment, fence, foundation, gate, lamppost or notice of any kind whatsoever within a park. 
(b)  Trees, plants and natural surroundings. Within a park, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Cut, remove, or destroy any plant, including trees of whatever size, or deface or injure a plant in any way; 
(2)  Pick, uproot, remove or destroy any flower, plant or grass; or 
(3)  Remove or cause to be removed any sod, earth, humus, peat, boulder, gravel, or sand. 
(c)  Wildlife. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap, catch, wound, chase, harass, or kill or treat cruelly any bird or animal or attempt any of such activities or to molest or rob the nest, den or burrow of any such animal or bird within a park. 
(1)  Contraband. All game animals, fowl, birds, fish and other aquatic life hunted, killed, taken or destroyed, bought, sold, bartered or had in possession contrary to this article shall be and are declared to be contraband, and the animals, fowl, birds, fish and other aquatic life may be turned over to the state department of natural resources or properly disposed of by park officials. 
(2)  Weapons. Any weapon or object carried or used by any person in violation of this subsection shall be subject to seizure by the city or its agents and disposed of according to law. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.01)  
Sec. 74-97. - Burning. 
No person shall willfully set or cause to be set on fire any tree, woodland, brushland, grassland or meadow within a park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.02) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 58.  
Sec. 74-98. - Littering. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter any material, object, or substance that is not part of the natural environment in a park. 
(b)  Inflammable materials. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches or burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco paper, or other inflammable material within a park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.03) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86.  
Sec. 74-99. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Refuse. It shall be unlawful to discard or deposit refuse of any kind or nature within a park, except by placing the refuse in containers provided for such purpose. 
(b)  Pollution. It shall be unlawful to discharge or leave in a park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result in the pollution of the air, water, or soil of the park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.04)  
Sec. 74-100. - Restriction of use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a park official, to attempt to prevent any other person from entering, leaving or making full use of a park, by force, threats, unlawful fencing or any other means. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.05)  
Sec. 74-101. - Alcoholic liquors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in, have in possession, or use alcoholic liquors within a park, except that the use of alcoholic liquors may be permitted with the permission of the city council and if the park facility and/or its operator has been issued a liquor license by the state liquor control commission. The city council reserves the right to limit areas and/or times of consumption of such alcoholic liquors in parks where alcoholic liquors are permitted. Alcoholic beverages may be permitted on museum grounds subject to rules and policies to be established by the city, provided that a licensed and insured caterer shall be used to serve alcohol, and all events shall end by 11:00 p.m. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.06; Ord. No 573, § 1, 5-6-2013 ) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit the possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor in public parks, MCL 436.34, MSA 18.1005.  
Sec. 74-102. - Drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in, have in possession or be under the influence of intoxicants, narcotics or other mind-affecting drugs in any park, unless such possession or use is in accordance with a valid prescription. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.07)  
Sec. 74-103. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, lewd, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct tending to create a breach of the peace or disturb or annoy others within a park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.08)  
Sec. 74-104. - Nudity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear nude or nearly nude in a park. For the purposes of this section, the term "nude or nearly nude" shall mean when a person appears in such a manner as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals or when a female appears in such manner or attire as to expose to view the portion of the breast referred to as the "areola," "nipple," or a simulation thereof. A person has exposed to view such portions of the anatomy if such portions are naked, uncovered, or less than opaquely covered. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.09)  
Sec. 74-105. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful to use a loudspeaker, public address system or amplifier within a park, except as may be authorized. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.10)  
Sec. 74-106. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct or to participate in any form of gambling, lottery, or game of chance within a park, except as may be permitted by state law. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.11)  
Sec. 74-107. - Fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful to fire, discharge or have in possession any rocket, firecracker, sparkler, torpedo, squib or other fireworks or any substance of an explosive or dangerous nature within a park, except by special permit from the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.12) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 58.  
Sec. 74-108. - Firearms and weapons. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, air rifle, airgun, or any other weapon that propels projectiles by any means in a park. However, this section shall not apply to any authorized peace officer while carrying out the duties of his position, nor to any individual who discharges a firearm in lawful self-defense or the lawful defense of another individual. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.13; Ord. No. 553, § 1, 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 74-109. - Peddling, soliciting or advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit business of any nature whatsoever or distribute any written material of a commercial nature or post unauthorized signs within a park. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.14) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants, ch. 78.  
Sec. 74-110. - Animals. 
(a)  Pets. A pet shall be kept on a leash no greater than six feet in length and under the immediate control of its handler at all times within a park. Pets shall be prohibited in parks or any portion thereof posted against such use. 
(b)  Horses. It shall be unlawful to ride, lead or cause or suffer a horse to be in a park or any portion thereof posted against such use. 
(c)  Other livestock. It shall be unlawful to drive or cause to be driven any other livestock within a park or to allow any animal to run at large within a park without prior written permission of the mayor. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.15) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14.  
Sec. 74-111. - Balloons or parachutes. 
It shall be unlawful to ascend or descend in any balloon or parachute within a park without prior written permission of the mayor. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.16)  
Sec. 74-112. - Construction. 
No structure shall be erected, constructed, or maintained above or below ground within a park or upon the waters or ice of any lake, river, pond, stream, or designated wetland within a park by persons other than city employees or agents except on specific permit by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.08.17) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18.  
Sec. 74-113. - Smoking prohibited in Thelma G. Spencer Park. 
(a)  Prohibition. Smoking is prohibited in Thelma G. Spencer Park. 
(b)  Smoking defined. "Smoking" means the burning, inhaling, exhaling, or carrying of any lighted bidi, bong, cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, hookah, kretek, plant, pipe, weed, or other lighted tobacco product or device. For purposes of this section, "smoking" shall also include the use of an e-cigarette, as defined in city Code section 70-401. 
(Ord. No. 601 , § 1, 4-9-2018)  
Secs. 74-114—74-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONSERVATION AREAS 
 
Sec. 74-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Conservation area means an area of undeveloped land retaining or being returned to its natural character and influence, without permanent improvements or human habitation, which is managed so as to protect its natural conditions and which: 
(1)  Generally appears to have been affected primarily by the forces of nature, with the imprint of man's work substantially unnoticeable; or 
(2)  Contains ecological, geological, or other features of scientific, educational, scenic, or historical value. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.09.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-142. - Authority to establish. 
The city council may designate conservation areas within parks by resolution, copies of which shall be available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. Such resolution shall have attached a drawing designating the area of parkland that is a conservation area. Conservation areas shall be posted as such by the department of parks, forestry, and facilities and their borders delineated by posting or other means so as to inform the public that the area is a conservation area. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.09.02)  
Sec. 74-143. - Maintenance. 
Conservation areas shall receive minimal maintenance and for all intents and purposes shall be left in or returned to a natural condition, subject only to the necessary removal of manmade debris and the maintenance of pathways, lands, rivers, streams, watercourses or previously existing easements as required by law or deemed necessary to the public health, safety and welfare. Nature paths, feeder stations, and similar nondisruptive uses shall be acceptable within the designated area. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.09.03)  
Sec. 74-144. - Rules and regulations. 
All conservation areas shall be subject to the park rules and regulations set forth in division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.09.04)  
Sec. 74-145. - Prohibited and restricted activities. 
(a)  Prohibited activities. There shall be no commercial enterprise, permanent road, temporary road or use of motor vehicles, motorized equipment, or any form of motorized transport within a conservation area, except as may be necessary for maintenance or in emergencies. 
(b)  Bicycles. No bicycles shall be operated within a conservation area. 
(c)  Pets. No pets shall be allowed in a conservation area. 
(d)  Disturbing the peace. It shall be unlawful to use a loudspeaker, public address system, bullhorn or amplifier within a conservation area. 
(Code 1976, § 7-10.09.04)  
Secs. 74-146—74-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAILWAYS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle means any power-driven vehicle, sports equipment, motorized device or remote controlled vehicle, whether propelled by means of wheels, tracks, runners, skis, or other means, whether or not eligible for licensing and registration under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
Trailways land means land owned by the trailways commission, as described in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-172. - Purpose. 
The city and other municipalities have established trailways. Certain minimum rules of conduct are necessary for the best interests of the community and citizens and for the preservation of such natural assets as may be located within the trailways. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.01)  
Sec. 74-173. - Controlling provisions. 
This article shall not be deemed to repeal other provisions of the code and whichever provision is most restrictive shall control. A complaint may be brought for a violation of either or both provisions at the discretion of the enforcement officer. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.09)  
Sec. 74-174. - Applicable land. 
(a)  Land owned by trailways commission. This article shall apply to and be in effect for all lands located within the city owned by the trailways commission, which was created by an agreement between the city, the Charter Township of Avon and the Townships of Oakland and Orion dated December 23, 1981. 
(b)  Penn Central railroad right-of-way. Within the city, such lands are described as those lands formerly owned by the Penn Central Railroad and commonly known as the Penn Central Railroad right-of-way, traversing in a northwesterly-southeasterly direction through sections 3, 4, 10, 13, and 14 of the city and which lands have the appearance to persons using the trailways lands as being a trail or former railroad right-of-way because of its setting or relationship with other properties or are arranged, delineated or posted in some way as to cause a person thereon to be aware that he is on trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.03)  
Sec. 74-175. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Officers. This article shall be enforceable by any deputy sheriff of the county sheriff's department or any state police officer. 
(b)  Issuance of appearance citations. Such officers shall have the authority to issue and serve appearance citations pursuant to MCL 764.9f. 
(c)  Appointment of limited duty officer. In addition, the city council may appoint a limited duty officer who shall have authority to issue parking violation notices and complaints for vehicles illegally parked, as provided in article IV of chapter 98. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.04)  
Secs. 74-176—74-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RULES AND REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinance regulating trailway, violation as municipal civil infraction, MCL 117.4m. 
 
Sec. 74-201. - Activities requiring permission of trailways commission. 
The following activities on trailways require written permission of the trailways commission: 
(1)  Hours. No person shall enter into or occupy any area of the trailways land when it is closed except by written permission of the trailways commission. All areas shall be deemed to be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Natural features. No person shall dig for, remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing thing or any wild bird or animal or any earth, rock or other material within the boundaries of the trailways land without written permission from the trailways commission. 
(3)  Sales. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article, privilege or service within the trailways land without a written permit from the trailways commission. 
(4)  Advertising. No person shall display, distribute or place any sign, advertisement, circular, notice, or statement or display any banner within the trailways land without a written permit from the trailways commission. 
(5)  Groups. No person shall promote, arrange for, or participate in any function occurring within the trailways land and involving more than 35 persons without a written permit from the trailways commission. The commission may impose such conditions upon the issuance of such permit as it deems necessary to maintain the public use of the trail, to prevent damage to the trail or any part thereof, and to protect the public safety. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-13.05.01, 7-13.05.06—7-13.05.09)  
Sec. 74-202. - Closed area. 
No person shall enter or occupy any portion of the trailways land that has been designated closed to public use or entry. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.05.02)  
Sec. 74-203. - Animals. 
(a)  Horses. No person shall ride or lead a horse within the boundaries of the trailways land except in designated areas. 
(b)  Dogs and other animals running at large. No person shall allow a dog or other animal to run at large on the trailways land. Any person with a dog or other animal on trailways land shall, at all times, maintain control of the dog or animal and keep it held securely on a leash of suitable strength and length. 
(c)  Sanitary disposal of animal waste. It shall be unlawful for any person in control of a horse, dog, or other animal within the boundaries of trailways land to fail to pick up and remove from the improved surface of the trailway such animal's feces, manure, or solid waste. However, any person in control of a horse, dog, or other animal within the boundaries of trailways land may pick up and remove from the improved surface of the trailway such animal's feces, manure, or solid waste and dispose of it in an unimproved portion of trailways land. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-13.05.04, 7-13.06.08(A)) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14.  
Sec. 74-204. - Littering. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter any material, object, or substance on the trailways land and not retrieve or pick up such material, object or substance. 
(b)  Inflammable materials. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, lighted cigarettes, lighted tobacco paper, other sources of fire, or combustible or inflammable material in the trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.08) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86.  
Sec. 74-205. - Disposal of trash. 
Except in receptacles provided for the purpose of disposal, no person shall deposit or abandon in or on any lands or water areas within the trailways land any garbage, glass, trash, waste, sewage or other obnoxious or polluting material. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.05.05) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86.  
Sec. 74-206. - Trespass to adjacent lands. 
No person shall go onto land adjacent to trailways land which is in private ownership, without the expressed permission of the owner of the land. The person going onto any such land shall be the owner or a member of the family of the owner or shall carry in his possession written permission allowing entry onto the private land, signed by the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.05.10)  
Sec. 74-207. - Damage to property. 
No person shall injure, deface, disturb, befoul, change or remove any portion of any marker, structure, equipment, fence or any other property within the trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.01)  
Sec. 74-208. - Obstruction of persons. 
No person shall locate or deposit any bicycle, equipment or material upon the trailways land or loiter, sit or lie upon the trailways land so as to obstruct persons in their use of the trail. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.02)  
Sec. 74-209. - Disorderly conduct. 
No person shall engage in any drunken, loud, boisterous, or disorderly or indecent conduct, nor shall any person or group of persons engage in any activity which shall endanger or annoy other persons or disturb the peace or good order within the boundaries of the trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.03)  
Sec. 74-210. - Noise. 
No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio, mechanical record player or tape player or sound amplifying equipment of any kind within the boundaries of the trailways land in such a manner as to create excessive noise that disturbs or annoys others. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.04) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46.  
Sec. 74-211. - Camping. 
No person shall camp or establish temporary lodging places within the boundaries of the trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.05)  
Sec. 74-212. - Fires. 
No person shall start or maintain a fire within the boundaries of the trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.06) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 58.  
Sec. 74-213. - Hunting and weapons. 
No person shall hunt or discharge any firearm or weapon, including but not limited to a bow or BB gun, within the trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.07)  
Sec. 74-214. - Alcoholic liquors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in, have in possession, or use alcoholic liquors within the trailways land. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.06.09) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6.  
Secs. 74-215—74-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
 
Sec. 74-241. - Operation. 
No person shall drive, propel or park a motor vehicle or motorized sports equipment of any nature upon the trailways land except motor vehicles used by authorized law enforcement or maintenance personnel and except in areas specifically designated and posted for parking. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.05.03)  
Sec. 74-242. - Illegal parking. 
(a)  Citation or impoundment. Any motor vehicle or equipment which is parked in violation of this division may be issued a citation for the violation, or may be towed away and impounded as provided in section 74-243, or both, in the discretion of the enforcement officer. 
(b)  Presumption of violation. 
(1)  Registered owner. In the prosecution for a violation of parking a motor vehicle in violation of this division, proof that the particular motor vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this article, together with proof, by verifying ownership of the motor vehicle with the secretary of state, that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle shall create in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed the motor vehicle at the point where and for the time during which the violation occurred. 
(2)  Lessee. If it appears that the motor vehicle was at the time of the violation leased, proof that the defendant named in the complaint was the lessee of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation shall create in evidence a presumption that the lessee of the motor vehicle, not the registered owner, was the person who parked or placed the motor vehicle at the point for the time during which the violation occurred. 
(c)  Violations. 
(1)  Civil infractions. All violations of this division pertaining to the parking of motor vehicles are declared to be civil infractions as provided for in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.) and article IV of chapter 98 of this Code. 
(2)  Authority. Authority is granted for issuance of parking violation notices or appearance citations, the procedure after issuance, fines to be assessed, and all other provisions relating to violations of parking sections of this division in accordance with and pursuant to article IV of chapter 98 of this Code, which article is incorporated in this section by reference. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.07)  
Sec. 74-243. - Towing. 
(a)  Authority granted. The county sheriff's department is authorized to remove and tow away or to have removed and towed away by a commercial towing service any motor vehicle parked in violation of this division, which violation is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Impounding. Motor vehicles so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place. 
(c)  Payment of fine and charges. Motor vehicles so towed away for illegal parking shall be restored to the owner or operator of such motor vehicle upon payment of the fine as provided in article IV of chapter 98 and the reasonable towing and storage charges. 
(Code 1976, § 7-13.08)  
Chapter 78 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; peddling, soliciting or advertising in parks, § 74-109; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 78-1—78-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE, RELIGIOUS AND POLITICAL SOLICITATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq., MSA 3.240(31) et seq.; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq., MSA 3.240(1) et seq.; home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq., MSA 19.416(201) et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable, religious or political organization means a not-for-profit charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, eleemosynary or civic organization of persons which solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable, religious or political purposes. 
Nonresident means a person who resides in a place other than in the city; an organization that has not established and does not maintain an office within the city. 
Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, political party or organization, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
Resident means a person residing within the city; an organization that has established and maintains an office within the city. 
Solicit, solicitation and soliciting mean the request of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value by personal interview or otherwise on the plea or representation, other than by telephone, that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value or any part thereof will be used for a charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, eleemosynary or civic purpose. The terms also mean and include the sale or offer to sell any article, tag, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription, or other thing, whether of value or not, on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value or any part thereof, whether received by the solicitor or purchased by the buyer, will be used for a charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, eleemosynary or civic purpose. 
Solicitor means a person who or an organization that solicits. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Charitable organization, defined, MCL 400.272, MSA 3.240(2).  
Sec. 78-27. - Purpose. 
To prevent fraud, crime, undue annoyance and harassment and to protect the privacy, safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city, all nonresident persons and organizations soliciting for charitable, religious and political purposes shall register with the city, and all such persons and organizations, resident and nonresident, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.01)  
Secs. 78-28—78-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE 
 
Sec. 78-56. - Required. 
Prior to solicitation in the city, a nonresident charitable, religious or political organization or person who solicits or intends to solicit or receives or intends to receive contributions from persons in the city shall register and be issued a certificate of registration from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.03.01)  
Sec. 78-57. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from this division: 
(1)  An organization's own members. The solicitation for charitable, religious and political purposes by an organization from its members. 
(2)  On an organization's own premises. The solicitation of funds for charitable, religious and political purposes by a person or organization when such solicitation occurs on premises owned or in lawful possession of the person or organization soliciting funds or with the permission of the person or organization who owns or is in lawful possession of the premises. 
(3)  Announcements. The issuance of any announcement or advertisement that such solicitation as described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section will occur or which announces or advertises an event at which unannounced solicitation as described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section occurs. 
(4)  Telephone and mail. Telephone and mail solicitations. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.06)  
Sec. 78-58. - Information. 
Registration by a nonresident person or organization under this division shall be with the city clerk on forms to be furnished by the clerk. The registration shall contain the following information or in lieu thereof a statement of the reason why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and headquarters of the person registering. 
(2)  If the registrant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the registrant and the principal officers and managers. 
(3)  The purposes for which such solicitation is to be made and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitations. 
(5)  An outline of the method to be used in conducting the solicitations. 
(6)  The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations and the hours of the days thereof. 
(7)  Where and when the organization was established, the form of its organization, and its tax exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code, if any. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.03.02)  
Sec. 78-59. - Issuance; fee. 
The city clerk shall issue a certificate of registration upon the filing of the registration form as set forth in section 78-58. No fee shall be charged in connection with the registration or the certificate of registration. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.03.03)  
Sec. 78-60. - Content. 
The certificate of registration issued under this division shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is made, the date issued, the dates within which the registrant will be soliciting, and a statement that the certificate does not constitute an endorsement by the city of the purpose of the solicitation or of the person or group conducting the solicitation. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.03.04)  
Sec. 78-61. - Transferability. 
Any certificate of registration issued under this division shall be nontransferable; provided, however, each solicitor and representative of an organization which has registered shall carry a facsimile copy of such registration while engaged in solicitation. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.03.05)  
Sec. 78-62. - Misrepresentation of endorsement by city. 
No person shall represent that the granting of a certificate of registration under this division is an endorsement by the city of the particular organization involved, and any such representation is declared to be a misrepresentation of fact and subject to the provisions for revocation of the certificate. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.03.06)  
Secs. 78-63—78-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 78-91. - Registration information. 
(a)  Changes. While a certificate of registration issued pursuant to division 2 of this article is in effect, a soliciting person or organization shall, within three calendar days, report to the city clerk in writing any material change in any information previously provided on the registration form. 
(b)  False statements. No person shall knowingly file or cause to be filed a registration form containing one or more false statements. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.04.01)  
Sec. 78-92. - Proof carried and shown on demand. 
Under this article, a solicitor shall carry on his person at all times while soliciting either a certificate of registration, if a nonresident solicitor, or proof of residency within the city, if a resident of the city, and shall show the certificate or proof whenever requested to do so by a person solicited or by a city representative. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.04.02)  
Sec. 78-93. - Hours. 
Under this article, no door-to-door solicitation on private property shall be permitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except by invitees. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.04.03)  
Sec. 78-94. - Time limit. 
Under this article, no solicitation by an individual or organization pursuant to this article shall exceed 30 days in any calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.04.04)  
Sec. 78-95. - Obstructing traffic. 
Under this article, a solicitor shall not block, obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or within public buildings and other public areas within the city by means of a barricade, object or device or with his person. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.05.01) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Sec. 78-96. - Interfering with public. 
Under this article, a solicitor shall not, without permission, accost, interfere with, or touch any member of the public in any manner. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.05.02)  
Sec. 78-97. - Noise. 
Under this article, a solicitor shall not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of the city, and to this end solicitors shall not shout or cry out their solicitation or use any device or means of amplification to draw attention to the solicitation. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.05.03) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46.  
Sec. 78-98. - Misrepresentation. 
Under this article, a solicitor shall not make any fraudulent or misleading representations to any person in connection with any solicitation pursuant to this article, including but not limited to any misleading representation concerning the true name and nature of the soliciting organization, the purposes for which the soliciting organization was organized, and the purposes for which contributions solicited will be used. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.05.04)  
Sec. 78-99. - Posted property. 
Under this article, no door-to-door solicitations or solicitations on private property shall be permitted at any time where a "No Solicitors," "No Trespassing" or similar notice is posted, except by invitees. A member of an organization is presumed to be an invitee of other members of that organization. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.05.05)  
Sec. 78-100. - Request to leave. 
Under this article, no solicitor shall remain on private property after having been directed to quit the premises by any person lawfully in possession of the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.05.06)  
Sec. 78-101. - Request to cease. 
If any person being solicited pursuant to this article indicates in any manner a desire that the solicitation cease, the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully cease the solicitation. 
(Code 1976, § 3-11.05.07)  
Secs. 78-102—78-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Veterans exempt from payment of fee for peddler's license, MCL 35.441 et seq., MSA 4.1241 et seq.; licensing and regulation of transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq., MSA 19.691 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck farm products or provisions, offering and exposing such for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who takes or attempts to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. Any person who solicits, orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of an itinerant merchant scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed an itinerant merchant. The term "itinerant merchant" shall include the terms "peddler," "hawker," "huckster" and "canvasser." The term "peddler" shall not include agents of utility companies or firms franchised by referendum of the city electorate or agents of such firms governed by franchise ordinance enacted by the city council following an affirmative advisory vote on the question by the electorate. 
Parent organization means the person or organization that the transient or itinerant merchant is employed by or represents, the principal manufacturer and distributor of goods and the principal provider of services being sold or for which solicited. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-132. - Purpose. 
To prevent fraud, crime, undue annoyance and harassment and to protect the privacy, safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city, all transient or itinerant merchants, commercial solicitors, peddlers and hawkers shall be licensed by the city and subject to the regulations set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.01)  
Sec. 78-133. - Exempt persons. 
(a)  Subject to other sections only. The following shall be exempt from the licensing, registration and fee requirements of this article but shall be subject to the other sections of this article: 
(1)  Farmers or truck gardeners selling or offering for sale any products grown, raised or produced by them on the same parcel of land or land within the city, which are licensed under chapter 138, the sale of which is not otherwise prohibited or regulated. 
(2)  Newspaper delivery service. 
(b)  Nonprofit solicitations. Nonprofit, charitable, political and religious solicitations shall be exempt from this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.06)  
Secs. 78-134—78-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 78-161. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of an itinerant merchant in the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.01)  
Sec. 78-162. - Application. 
Before the issuance of a license required by this division, an itinerant merchant shall apply for a license upon forms prescribed and furnished by the city clerk. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the individual who will sell or solicit within the city, including resident address, telephone number, driver's license number and a physical description including height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
(2)  The complete name, address and telephone number of the parent organization and where and when the parent organization was established or incorporated and the form of its organization. 
(3)  An outline of the method to be used in conducting the sales or solicitations (for example, door to door, street corners, sidewalks, etc.). 
(4)  The dates and times when and location where sales or solicitations will be made, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such sales or solicitations and the hours of the days thereof. 
(5)  The types of goods or services to be sold or for which solicitations will be made. 
(6)  Whether the parent organization or the itinerant merchant has ever been enjoined from soliciting. 
(7)  Whether the itinerant merchant or an officer or director of the parent organization has been convicted of a felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and if so, a brief description and explanation of the reason therefor. 
(8)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(9)  Such other information as the clerk may require relating to the identity and background of the applicant and the proposed solicitation or sales activity. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.02; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-10-2013 )  
Sec. 78-163. - Basis for issuance. 
The city clerk shall issue a license required under this division whenever the clerk shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)  There are no facts to cause a reasonable belief that the activities of the applicant will not become an annoyance or a nuisance to the citizens of the city. Such activities shall inure to the benefit of the citizenry of the city. 
(2)  The applicant has not been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  There has been compliance with this article, including payment of the applicable fee. 
(4)  There have been no violations of this article in the past, which would form a basis of a reasonable belief of further violations of this article. 
(5)  Criminal background check has been conducted through the Internet Criminal History Access Tool (ICHAT). 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.03; Ord. No. 576, § 2, 6-10-2013 )  
Sec. 78-164. - Fee; undue burden. 
The fee for a license required by this division shall be in the amount as provided in section 54-501, per individual, covered by the license. No fee for a license shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case, where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may apply to the city clerk who shall refer the application to the city council to consider making an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable, or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show the method of business and gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the clerk may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.06)  
Sec. 78-165. - Content. 
A license issued under this division shall bear the name, address and photograph of the itinerant merchant; the date issued; the dates within which the license holder may solicit; and a statement that the license does not constitute an endorsement by the city of the purpose or products involved or of the persons or parent organization conducting the solicitation. All licenses shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.05)  
Sec. 78-166. - Duration. 
A license issued under this division shall be issued for a period of 90 days. If additional time is needed, the applicant may reapply. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.07; Ord. No. 576, § 3, 6-10-2013 )  
Sec. 78-167. - Transferability. 
Any license issued under this division shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.09)  
Sec. 78-168. - Misrepresentation of endorsement by city. 
No person shall represent that the granting of a license under this division is an endorsement by the city, and any such representation is declared to be a misrepresentation of fact, a violation of this article and subject to revocation of the license. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.10)  
Sec. 78-169. - Appeal on denial. 
Whenever the city clerk shall decide not to issue a license pursuant to this division, the applicant may appeal in writing to the city council, which shall make the final determination. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.04)  
Sec. 78-170. - Revocation. 
Under this article, if any licensee or any agent or representative of the licensee is misrepresenting or making untrue statements with regard to the solicitation or has made untrue statements in the application or in any other way the solicitation is being conducted in a manner inimical to the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city or in violation of any of the sections of this article or of any state statute or any other section of this Code or city ordinance or is representing in any way that any license granted under this division is an endorsement of such solicitation, the city clerk shall suspend the license or revoke the license and shall cause notice thereof to be mailed to the licensee, who shall have a right of appeal and hearing by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.11)  
Sec. 78-171. - Ice cream vendor license. 
In addition to an itinerant merchant permit under section 78-164, ice cream vendors shall obtain an annual ice cream vendor license for each ice cream vending vehicle to be used in the city. Prior to the issuance of an annual license for ice cream vendors, the city building department and sheriff's department shall inspect each ice cream vending vehicle to determine whether it is roadworthy and complies with applicable state laws and city ordinances. An annual license decal will be affixed to the vehicle by the inspector upon successful completion of the inspection and payment of the annual license fee. The inspector will report the results of the inspection to the city clerk's office. Inspections will be performed during normal business hours by appointment. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 2, 5-3-2010)  
Secs. 78-172—78-195. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 78-196. - License application information. 
(a)  Changes. While a license issued pursuant to division 2 of this article is in effect, an itinerant merchant shall, within seven calendar days, report to the city clerk in writing any material change in any information previously provided on the application form. 
(b)  False statements. It shall be a violation of this article for any person knowingly to file or to cause to be filed an application for a license containing one or more false statements. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.04.01)  
Sec. 78-197. - Inferred endorsement by city. 
A license issued under division 2 of this article shall not be used or represented in any manner as an endorsement by the city or by any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.04.02)  
Sec. 78-198. - Hours. 
Under this article, door-to-door sales or solicitations or sales or solicitations on private property shall be permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. while daylight savings time is in effect and between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. when daylight savings time is not in effect. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.04.03; Ord. No. 576, § 4, 6-10-2013 )  
Sec. 78-199. - License display. 
Every solicitor registered hereunder shall carry and display his or her city-issued license at all times while engaged in solicitation, upon a lanyard or in a manner such that the photograph and information is readily, continuously and clearly visible and unobstructed. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.03.08; Ord. No. 576, § 5, 6-10-2013 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 576, § 5, adopted June 10, 2013, retitled § 78-199 from "License display on request" to "License display."  
Sec. 78-200. - Obstructing traffic. 
Under this article, an itinerant merchant shall not block, obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or within public buildings and other public areas within the city by means of a barricade, object or device, or with his person. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.01) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Sec. 78-201. - Interfering with public. 
Under this article, an itinerant merchant shall not, without permission, accost, interfere with, or touch any member of the public in any manner. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.02)  
Sec. 78-202. - Noise. 
Under this article, an itinerant merchant shall not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of the city, and to this end itinerant merchants shall not shout or cry out their solicitation or blow any horn or utilize any amplification system or use any device to attract the attention of the public, except there may be a ringing of a bell, unamplified, so long as it does not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.03) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46.  
Sec. 78-203. - Misrepresentation. 
No fraudulent or misleading representations to any person shall be made in connection with any sale or solicitation under this article, including but not limited to any misleading representation concerning the true product or service involved, the name of the transient or itinerant merchant, the trade name and the nature of the parent organization. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.04)  
Sec. 78-204. - Posted property. 
Under this article, no door-to-door sales or solicitations or sales or solicitations on private property shall be permitted at any time where a "no solicitors," "no trespassing" or similar notice is posted, except by invitees. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.05)  
Sec. 78-205. - Request to leave. 
Under this article, no itinerant merchant shall remain on private property after having been directed to quit the premises by any person lawfully in possession of the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.06)  
Sec. 78-206. - Fixed stands on public property. 
Under this article, no licensee shall stop or remain in any one place upon any public right-of-way, alley or public place longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to buy. Any itinerant merchant using a vehicle, when stopped, shall stop or park his vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, shall utilize emergency flashing lights, and shall depart from such place as soon as he has completed sales with customers actually present. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.07)  
Sec. 78-207. - Peddling on public or commercial property. 
Under this article, no itinerant merchant shall engage in: 
(1)  Peddling on any public right-of-way, alley or public place after having been requested to desist by any sheriff's deputy because of congested or dangerous traffic conditions. 
(2)  Business on any state trunk line highway within the city. 
(3)  Business in a commercially zoned district outside of any building. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.08)  
Sec. 78-208. - Curb service. 
(a)  On or near highways. Under this article, no itinerant merchant shall operate or maintain any stand, vehicle, store or place of business on or near to any highway in such manner that the customers or traders with such person occupy or congregate within the limits of any street, lane, highway, or public place within the city. 
(b)  Public places, rights-of-way, alleys, etc. No person shall be permitted to use the public rights-of-way, alleys, lanes or public places of the city for the service of customers or for the transaction of business or to use any stands, stores or other places of business in any manner that shall require the customer, when transacting business, to stand within the limits of the public right-of-way, highway, alley or public place of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-10.05.09)  
Chapter 79 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 79-1. - Purpose. 
The regulations promulgated herein are in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of residents and visitors in the City of Rochester Hills by ensuring that special events held at commercially-zoned property do not create disturbances or nuisances, threaten or endanger persons or property, cause traffic problems, or burden public services. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-01), 7-26-2010)  
Sec. 79-2. - Definition. 
Special event means, for purposes of this chapter, a carnival, circus, show, attraction or exhibit, or the temporary display or sale, whether for profit, non-profit or charitable, of goods, products, wares, merchandise, services or material, that is held, staged or conducted in open air or at a stand, tent or temporary structure outside of a completely enclosed building or an approved permanent outdoor sales area on non-residential property. "Special event" shall include, but not be limited to, carnivals, circuses, shows, amusement rides, arts and crafts exhibits and fairs, flea markets, rummage sales and similar temporary activities or events conducted, sponsored or authorized by the owner, tenants or occupants of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-02), 7-26-2010)  
Sec. 79-3. - Permit requirement. 
No person shall hold, stage or conduct a special event without first obtaining a permit from the City of Rochester Hills Building Department. The building official or his/her designee is authorized to approve special event permits. In addition, other permits may be required including, where applicable: 
(1)  Permit from the Oakland County Health Department shall be obtained for all temporary sanitary, water and food service facilities. However, no permit shall be required where only pre-packaged, ready-to-eat type foods are sold from a concession stand or booth. 
(2)  Street occupancy permit from Rochester Hills Engineering Department for blocked public streets, pathways or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-03), 7-26-2010)  
Sec. 79-4. - Exception. 
This article shall not apply to the display or sale by a business of merchant goods or services when placed or located directly in front of the business (but not in any parking/maneuvering/fire lane) and in accordance with local building, fire codes and zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-04), 7-26-2010)  
Sec. 79-5. - Application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a special event permit shall complete and submit an application with the City of Rochester Hills Building Department for each event accompanied by the required fee. Permit applications must be submitted at least 14 calendar days prior to event and include all of the following information: 
(1)  Written permission from the property owner (if other than applicant). 
(2)  Three copies of a site plan (8½" x 11" preferred) describing and depicting: 
a.  Location of event activities; 
b.  Temporary structures or tents and their size; 
c.  Location and type of merchandise; 
d.  Any/type of food to be served; 
e.  Location and type of sanitary facilities; 
f.  Temporary electrical use and lighting (may require separate permit); and 
g.  Trash receptacles. 
(3)  Certificate of insurance with the city name as certificate holder for public liability insurance in the amount of $500,000.00, combined single limit coverage, for injuries to person and property and umbrella liability coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00. No cancellation of material change in insurance may occur without 30 days written notice to the city. 
(4)  Description of activities including the following information: 
a.  Dates and hours of the event (hours are restricted to 7:00 a.m.—9:00 p.m.); 
b.  Types of activities proposed; 
c.  Anticipated number of participants; and 
d.  Any activities that may cause unusual noise, danger or safety concerns. 
(5)  If a temporary tent, canopy or other structure 200 square feet or more with sides or 400 square feet or more without sides are proposed, the following information must be provided: 
a.  Site plan (three sets) indicating the size and location and proximity between the tent/structure and all buildings, parking lots and streets (include on site plan); 
b.  Floor plan with interior layout showing seating, tables, aisles and exits with dimensions; 
c.  Fastening details; 
d.  The proposed occupant load of the structures; 
e.  Fire Resistance Certificate of Flame Spread documentation for tent/canopy fabric; 
f.  Parking lot protection for pedestrians; 
g.  Indicate if tent will have open or closed sides; 
h.  Indicate location and type of heating and electrical equipment; and 
i.  Number and location of fire extinguishers. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-05), 7-26-2010)  
Sec. 79-6. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  Approval. A permit application shall be approved if the building department determines the special event will not interfere with public health, safety and welfare, create a disturbance or nuisance, threaten or endanger persons or property, create a traffic problem or violate other applicable ordinances or regulations. 
(b)  Conditions. The building department may attach reasonable conditions to the permit designed to ensure the objectives of this chapter are met. 
(c)  Duration. Permits shall be effective for up to 30 days. A person may hold up to three such events per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-06), 7-26-2010)  
Sec. 79-7. - Fees. 
Application, plan review, permit and inspection fees for tenant and building owners shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Application fee ..... $100.00 
(2)  Plan review, permit and inspection fee ..... 50.00 
Application, plan review, permit and inspection fees for all others shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Application fee ..... $100.00 
(2)  Plan review fee (building and fire departments) ..... 170.00 
(3)  Permit fee: 
a.  1—10 days ..... 170.00 
b.  11—20 days ..... 255.00 
c.  21—30 days ..... 340.00 
(4)  Fire department inspection fee ..... 85.00 
(5)  After-hours inspection fees will be charged for building department and fire department inspections at an overtime or double-time rate, as appropriate, with a four-hour minimum. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-07), 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 596 , § 1, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 79-8. - Signs. 
Temporary signs when displayed during the approved times of the event shall be permitted without additional fees or permits. Temporary signs shall be limited to one per road frontage, 25 square feet in area and not be located in any public right-of-way. Ground signs are limited to seven feet in overall height; wall signs are limited to 20 feet in overall height. No roof-mounted displays, balloons or signs are permitted. Signs may not be located in any parking, fire lane or area interfering with public activity outside the event area. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-08), 7-26-2010)  
Sec. 79-9. - Permit revocation. 
A violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or any permit condition, or the making of any false, inaccurate or misleading statement in the permit application is grounds for the immediate revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1(79-09), 7-26-2010)  
Chapter 82 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 517, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2007, amended ch. 82 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 82, §§ 82-26—82-130, pertained to similar matter. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 
Cross reference— Regulations pertaining to personnel saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(13); administration, ch. 2; ethics, ch. 50. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEE APPEAL PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 82-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Day means a week day—Monday through Friday—except holidays. 
Employee means all persons who are regular, full-time employees, except those specifically excluded in section 82-29 or otherwise indicated by the context of the use of the word. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-27. - Purpose. 
An employee appeal procedure is available to all regular, full-time employees to provide recourse to them if their city employment is adversely affected as described in this article. The purpose of this procedure is to assist the city in attracting and maintaining employees of ability and character, and thus increase the efficiency of city government by granting to these employees the right to obtain a hearing and present their position to a personnel board, as defined in this article, which is authorized to make a final decision regarding their city employment. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-28. - Right to repeal or amend. 
The City of Rochester Hills specifically reserves the right to amend this article in whole or in part, at one or more times hereafter, or to repeal this article; provided, however, that the rights of an employee who has initiated an appeal in accordance with the provisions below shall not be abrogated by such amendment or repeal. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-29. - Employees excluded. 
The following employees are specifically excluded from this article: 
(1)  Elected officials . The mayor, members of the city council and other elected officials. 
(2)  Appointed officials . The city clerk, deputy city clerk, city treasurer, deputy city treasurer, assistant to the mayor, city administrator, city attorney, city planning consultant, city auditor, city assessor, and members of boards and commissions. 
(3)  Members of collective bargaining units . Employees who are members of any organization that has been certified or legally recognized as a collective bargaining agent for any group of employees, and that negotiates wages, hours and conditions of employment with the city pursuant to Public Act No. 336 of 1947 (MCL 423.201 et seq.). 
(4)  Temporary and part-time employees . Employees who are hired to work a limited length of time (temporary employees) and employees who are regularly scheduled to work fewer than 40 hours per week (part-time employees). 
(5)  Paid-on-call firefighters . Individuals employed by the city to provide emergency service on an intermittent, as-needed basis, under the direction of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-30. - Personnel board. 
(a)  Composition . The personnel board shall consist of three members, appointed as follows: 
(1)  Employees' appointment . The regular, full-time employees of the city shall appoint one member of the personnel board to serve a term ending December 31 of the second year following the appointment; provided, however, should a majority of these employees be unable to agree on an appointee, a secret ballot election shall be held under the control of the city clerk, who shall be solely responsible for the conduct and certification of such election. If the employees' appointee is employed in the same city department as the employee appealing under this article, an alternate must be chosen by the employees to hear the matter. No employee assigned to the city's human resources department may be a member of the personnel board. 
(2)  City council appointment . The city council shall appoint one member of the personnel board to serve a term ending as of December 31 of the second year following the appointment. 
(3)  Third member appointment . 
a.  By two board members. The two members so appointed shall mutually appoint a third member of the personnel board when there is a matter to be heard as is provided for by this article. Upon mutual agreement by the two members, the same third member may be appointed to hear more than one matter. 
b.  By American Arbitration Association. If the two members are unable to agree upon the selection of a third member within five days of an appeal from an employee, a third member shall be selected according to the rules for expedited hearing promulgated by the American Arbitration Association. 
c.  Compensation. The third member shall be compensated a reasonable fee, and such cost may be assessed against the city and/or the employee, in the discretion of the personnel board. 
(b)  Vacancy appointment . Any appointment to the personnel board to fill a vacancy due to a member's death, discharge, resignation or retirement shall be made only for the remainder of the unexpired term for which the former member had been appointed. 
(c)  Authority of employees' appointee . The personnel board member appointed by the employees shall sit on the board and hear matters presented pursuant to this article. Such member shall not have any authority to represent the employees, other than is specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-31. - Employee coverage status. 
All regular, full-time employees employed by the city shall be excluded from the coverage and sections of this article until these employees have successfully completed a probationary period of six consecutive months of employment in a covered position, or such longer probationary period as extended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-32. - Dismissal, suspension or demotion. 
(a)  Actions affecting employment. An employee covered by this article may be dismissed, suspended, or demoted by the city for good and sufficient cause. 
(b)  Appeal to personnel board. Such employee may, within ten days after presentation to him of written confirmation of such action affecting his employment, appeal the action to the personnel board. 
(c)  Hearing by personnel board. The board shall, within two weeks from the date of filing such appeal, commence hearings thereon and shall thereupon hear and determine the matter and either affirm, modify or revoke the action affecting the employee's employment. The employee shall be entitled to appear personally, produce evidence, have counsel and have a public hearing, if the employee so desires. The findings and decisions of the personnel board shall be final and shall be promptly delivered to the employee and to the city. 
(d)  Benefits continued. Benefits such as health, dental, life insurance and disability benefits shall be continued for the employee by the city during an appeal from a suspension or dismissal until such time as a decision is rendered by the personnel board. 
(e)  Compensation. If a dismissed employee is reinstated or a suspension without pay is reversed or reduced, the personnel board shall decide, in its discretion, whether the employee shall receive full, partial or no compensation for such time as the suspension or dismissal was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-33. - Suspensions. 
(a)  Without pay. An employee covered by this article may be suspended without pay for reasons relating to the employee's performance of job duties. An employee suspended without pay may request a hearing before the personnel board if the suspension is for more than ten working days or, if indefinite, after the tenth working day of the suspension. 
(b)  With pay. An employee may be suspended with pay indefinitely immediately upon the occurrence of an event for the purpose of investigation or when the best interests of the city require. An employee who is suspended with pay may appeal any such suspension after the 30th calendar day of the suspension. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-34. - Nondiscrimination. 
A person entitled to the benefits of a hearing by the personnel board under this article shall not be in any way favored or discriminated against because of race, sex, age, religion, or other reasons proscribed by law or because of political opinions or affiliations. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Secs. 82-35—82-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEE PENSION PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Investment of assets of public employee retirement systems, MCL 38.1132 et seq; municipal employees retirement act of 1984 MCL 38.1502a et seq. 
 
Sec. 82-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Full-time employee means an employee subject to completion of a probationary period of at least six months, or as may be extended by the city, who is regularly employed for 40 hours or more per week, or as otherwise designated in the plan document and who receives city-recognized fringe benefits available to full-time employees. 
(ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-62. - Purpose. 
A pension plan for the mayor, city council, and eligible employees of the city, as originally adopted and established by Ordinance No. 65, effective November 1, 1974, shall be continued. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-63. - Continuation. 
(a)  Plan continued. The city continues its pension plan for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits for its mayor, city council, and eligible employees. 
(b)  Contracts authorized. The city also authorizes the mayor and the city clerk to undertake all steps necessary for the continuation of the pension plan, including the following: 
(1)  Enter contracts. Entering into a contract, in the name of the city and/or the pension plan, with the approval of the city council, with any company or persons authorized to transact such business within the state; or 
(2)  Establish trust fund. Establishing an independent trust fund to be administered by an investment fiduciary, as defined by Public Act No. 314 of 1965 (MCL 38.1132 et seq.), who may be either an employee of the city or an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-64. - Coverage, vesting and contributions. 
(a)  Plan controls. The requirements set forth in the pension plan documents shall control the coverage, vesting, contributions and other aspects of the pension plan. 
(b)  Plan amendment. The pension plan may, from time to time, be modified or changed by a resolution duly adopted by the city council or by collective bargaining agreement approved by city council. Any changes to the pension plan must comply with the conditions of Public Act 728 of 2001, as amended. Unless otherwise specifically provided, any amendment of the pension plan will apply to individuals employed by the city on and after the effective date of the amendment. The pension rights of an individual whose city employment terminated before the effective date of the amendment will be governed by the provisions of the pension plan in effect on the date the individual last terminated employment. 
(c)  Trustee administration. The pension plan is intended and has been administered to be a qualified pension plan under subsection 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. The trustee of the pension plan may adopt such additional provisions of the pension plan as are necessary to fulfill this intent. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-65. - Ratification of existing plan. 
The city ratifies and confirms the validity of any pension plan in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives and ratifies and confirms all official actions previously taken in connection with such plans. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Secs. 82-66—82-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE GROUP INSURANCE PLANS 
 
Sec. 82-96. - Purpose. 
Group insurance plans covering life, health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expense and disability insurance for certain classes of city officers and employees and their dependents shall be created and established as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-97. - Established. 
(a)  Plans created. The city creates and establishes group insurance plans covering life, health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expense, and disability insurance for its officers and employees enumerated in this article and their dependents. 
(b)  Contracts authorized. For the purposes described in subsection (a) of this section, the city also authorizes the mayor and the city clerk to contract, in the name of the city subject to approval of the city council, with any company authorized to transact such business within the state for such group insurance policies. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-98. - Coverage. 
(a)  Health, hospitalization, and medical. The group insurance plan or plans for health and hospitalization, and medical services shall cover persons within the following classes of officers and employees and shall also cover the dependents of such persons, as the policies of insurance allow and provide: 
(1)  Mayor, city clerk and city treasurer. 
(2)  All city employees who are employed 30 hours or more per week on a regular basis. 
(3)  Retired city employees who qualify under city policies and/or collective bargaining agreements. 
(4)  As otherwise determined by the city. 
(b)  Life insurance. The group life insurance plan created, established and contracted for under this article shall cover each person within the following classes of officers and employees: 
(1)  Mayor, city clerk and city treasurer. 
(2)  All city employees who are employed for more than 30 hours per week on a regular basis. 
(3)  As otherwise determined by the city. 
(c)  Disability insurance. The group disability insurance plan created, established and contracted for under this article shall cover each person within the following classes of officers and employees: 
(1)  Mayor, city clerk and city treasurer. 
(2)  All city employees who are employed for more than 30 hours per week on a regular basis. 
(3)  As otherwise determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-99. - Premium contributions. 
The city shall annually contribute and pay premiums or charges arising under the insurance plans provided for in this article for each person within the classes of persons enumerated in section 82-98 as required by city policies and/or collective bargaining agreements. Such city contribution shall be secured from the appropriate fund (in proportion to the percent of salary earned from the fund), as the case may be, of the city. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-100. - Ratification of existing insurance plans. 
The city ratifies and confirms the validity of any life, health, hospitalization, medical and surgical, and disability insurance or any one or more of such forms of insurance in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives and ratifies and confirms all official actions previously taken in connection with such plans and/or policies. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Secs. 82-101—82-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN AND TRUST 
 
Sec. 82-126. - Purpose. 
A deferred compensation plan and trust for the benefit of employees of the city shall be continued for the purpose of attracting and retaining competent employees and assisting them to provide for their retirement security. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-127. - Deferred compensation plan. 
(a)  Plan continued. The city hereby continues its deferred compensation plan for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits for its eligible employees. 
(b)  Authorization of contracts. The city authorizes the mayor and city clerk, subject to city council approval, to enter a contract or contracts to provide deferred compensation benefits for eligible city employees. Contracts shall only be entered with a company licensed and/or authorized to provide deferred compensation plans in the State of Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-128. - Coverage. 
(a)  Eligibility. All full-time and part-time city employees shall be eligible to participate in the plan established by this article upon their commencement of employment with the city. 
(b)  Participants. City employees may elect to participate in the plan by entering into an individual agreement conforming to the plan. Any employee so electing shall be designated as a participant. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Sec. 82-129. - Loan program implementation. 
The city may offer a loan program as part of any deferred compensation plan it offers to its eligible employees. If a loan plan is offered, it shall be governed by the conditions and requirements set forth in the plan documents. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-2007)  
Secs. 82-130—82-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RETIREE HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN AND TRUST  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 82-140. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the plan and trust is to establish a program to provide additional funding for the health insurance needs of long-term eligible employees for the use of post-employment medical insurance premiums. 
The plan and trust is intended to be tax exempt under Section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The city intends the trust fund to conform to all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-141. - Short title. 
This article may be known and cited as the City of Rochester Hills Retiree Health Supplemental Benefit Plan and Trust ("Plan and Trust"). 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-142. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
City means the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Reference to any section or subsection of the Code includes reference to any comparable or succeeding provision of any legislation which amends or replaces such section or subsection. 
Collective bargaining agreements means any written agreement, supplemental agreement, memorandum of understanding, final arbitrator's decision, judicial decision or decision of any public board or agency, by and between applicable collective bargaining associations and the city. 
Collective bargaining associations means those associations which participate in the plan and trust. 
Contributions means the payment required to be made to the trust by the city under the terms of the plan and trust or under authority such as ordinance, collective bargaining agreement or city council resolution for the purpose of saving assets for post-employment medical expenses. 
Dependent means the spouse of a participant or any person who may be claimed as a dependent of the participant, as defined in Internal Revenue Code Section 152, determined without regard to Sections 152(b)(1), (b)(2) and 152(d)(1)(b). 
Eligible employee means a person employed by the city meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  AFSCME Local 2491 Union Member. Who was a full-time Employee of the City of Rochester Hills on March 12, 2001 and who at that time had completed ten years of service; 
(2)  AFSCME Local 1917.28 Union Member. Who was a full-time Employee of the City of Rochester Hills on March 12, 2001 and who at that time had completed ten years of service; 
(3)  IAFF Local 3472 Union Member. Who was a full-time Employee of the City of Rochester Hills on March 12, 2001 and who at that time had completed ten years of service; or 
(4)  Nonunion employee. Who was a full-time Employee of the City of Rochester Hills on March 12, 2001 and who at that time had completed ten years of service (may include an elected or appointed official). 
Investment manager means an investment manager selected by the board of trustees. 
Participant means an eligible employee who participates in this supplemental program, or, after the death of an eligible employee, his/her dependents are considered participants for purposes of this program. 
Supplemental program or program means the supplemental retiree health benefit plan of the city as described in division 2 of this article and any subsequent amendments, and any contract(s) or other applicable materials incorporated by reference into the plan. 
Plan administrator or administrator means the person, persons, firm, corporation or insurance company or companies, appointed by the board of trustees to administer the plan. The plan administrator shall be responsible for the administrative functions of the plan and shall carry out the directives of the board of trustees. 
Plan custodian means a bank, trust company or other organization or agent responsible for safeguarding the financial assets of the trust. 
Plan year means the period commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31. 
Property means any property, real or personal, or part interest therein, wherever situated, including, but without being limited to, preferred and common stocks, shares of investment companies, bonds, notes, debentures and mortgages, equipment trust certificates, investment trust certificates, interest in partnerships whether limited or general or in any insurance contract, policy, annuity, or other investment media offered by an insurance company, in which trust assets may be invested pursuant to the Public Employee Retirement System Investment Act. 
Spouse means the legal spouse of the participant who has met all requirements of a valid marriage contract in the state of marriage. 
Trust means the Trust of the City of Rochester Hills Supplemental Retiree Health Benefit Program as provided for in division 4 of this article. 
Trustees or board of trustees refers to the board of trustees established in section 82-174 of this article. 
Year of service means the completion of 2000 hours of service in a 12-month period ending on the anniversary of the eligible employee's hire date. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-143. - Interpretation and law; construction. 
(a)  It is intended that this program shall be and remain a medical expense plan for tax purposes under Code Section 105(c) and other applicable Code provisions. The board of trustees shall promptly submit this plan and trust to the Internal Revenue Service for appropriate rulings under the Code and all expenses incident thereto shall be borne by the trust. The city council may make any modifications, alterations or amendments to the plan document and the trust that are necessary to obtain and retain approval of the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury or his/her delegate as may be necessary to establish and maintain the status of the program under the provisions of the Code or other federal legislation, as now in effect or hereafter enacted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(b)  Any modification, alteration, or amendment of the plan document and the trust made in accordance with this article, may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate. A certified copy of the resolution of the city council making such amendment shall be delivered to the board of trustees. 
(c)  Where not governed by Michigan law, the plan shall be construed and enforced according to the applicable federal laws, and all provisions hereof shall be administered according to such federal laws. If any provisions of the plan and trust shall be for any reason invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions nevertheless shall remain in effect. 
(d)  Neither the establishment of the plan nor the trust nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund or account shall be construed as giving to any person covered under the plan and trust or other person any legal or equitable right against the city, its elected or appointed officials or employees, the trustees or any individual trustee, except as may otherwise be provided in this article. 
(e)  Words used herein in the male gender shall be construed to include the female gender where appropriate, and words used in the singular or plural shall be construed as being in the plural or singular, where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-144. - Collective bargaining agreements. 
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to modify or limit in any way the rights that the parties to the collective bargaining agreements may have or any arbitrator's award to enforce collection of any amounts due to the trust, including the right of the parties to sue for same. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-145. - Notice. 
Notice given to all parties shall, unless otherwise specified in this article, be sufficient if in writing and delivered or sent by prepaid first class mail. Except as otherwise noted, the distribution or delivery of any statements or documents required under the plan and trust shall be sufficient if delivered in person or prepaid first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-146. - Reporting and disclosure. 
The city and the trustees, or their respective designees, shall complete and provide to participants, spouses and/or dependents and to the appropriate government agencies any reports as may be required by the code and applicable federal, state or local law. The city and trustees, respectively, retain the right to provide for disclosure of any information deemed in the best interest of the participants. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-147. - Amendments. 
The provisions of the plan and trust may be amended at anytime by ordinance adopted by the city council in accordance with applicable law and the tax exempt status of the trust. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
DIVISION 2. - SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREE HEALTH BENEFIT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 82-148. - Eligibility. 
To be eligible, the employee must have been actively employed with the city and have completed a minimum of ten years of service with the city as of March 12, 2001. The plan administrator shall prescribe the applicable form for eligible employees to become participants in the program. 
Participants with 70 points of combined age and years of service prior to separation of service (including a minimum of ten years of service as of March 12, 2001) are eligible for the supplemental benefit. 
An eligible employee who becomes totally and permanently disabled from service with the city will be immediately eligible to receive his/her supplemental benefit upon separation from employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-149. - Supplemental benefit amount and duration. 
The supplemental benefit amount is calculated using the following formula, based on years of service as of March 12, 2001: 
(Years of Service) 2 × .05 × 15 
The maximum number of years of service that may be used in the formula to calculate the supplemental benefit is 25. 
Example: Participant A completed 15 years of service as of March 12, 2001. Participant A is eligible to receive a monthly supplemental benefit of $169.00. 
The supplemental benefit is payable upon for a maximum period established by the participant's total years of service as of March 12, 2001. 
Example: Participant A completed 28 years of service as of March 12, 2001. Participant A retired on December 31, 2009. Participant A will receive a monthly supplemental benefit for 28 years commencing upon his retirement. 
The supplemental benefit amount and duration may be amended by a resolution of city council (for nonunion employees) or as negotiated through collective bargaining (for bargaining unit employees). The amount of the supplemental benefit may not exceed the actual cost of the applicable insurance premiums or reimbursable expenses. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-150. - Insurance premiums. 
Insurance premiums under the supplemental program shall be paid from the trust in accordance with this section. 
A participant's supplemental benefit will be paid directly to an insurance carrier providing benefits as part of the city's group health insurance benefit program or effective January 1, 2009, reimburse the cost of any individual medical plan premium payment including Medicare Advantage plans. The maximum benefit paid or reimbursed shall not exceed the participant's supplemental benefit amount. The participant will be required to provide the administrator with annual proof of coverage (subject to periodic audits) and notify the administrator immediately of any changes in coverage or termination of coverage. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-151. - Payouts—Proof of expenses. 
In order to receive reimbursement for allowable expenses, a participant must complete the applicable form. The plan administrator shall establish any procedures necessary to process payments and transfer funds to participants. Any claim that is denied can be appealed in accordance with the appeal process set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-152. - Termination of participation. 
An eligible employee shall cease to be a participant in the supplemental program and the plan administrator shall terminate all supplemental benefit payments for insurance premiums and/or medical expenses once the participant has received his/her maximum number of monthly benefit payments. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-153. - Death benefits. 
Upon the death of the participant, his/her surviving spouse and/or dependent are eligible to receive the participant's supplemental benefit for a maximum of 36 months, commencing when the participant would have attained 70 points of combined age and years of service. Years of service shall be established as of the date of the participant's death. If the participant retired prior to the date of his/her death, his/her surviving spouse and/or dependent is eligible to receive the participant's supplemental benefit for the remainder of the period during which the participant would have received the supplemental benefit to a maximum of 36 months after the death of the participant. If the participant's surviving spouse or dependent become totally and permanently disabled during the life of the participant, they may receive the full supplemental benefit for which the participant is entitled. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-154. - Supplemental program contributions. 
Employer contributions may be made to the program as authorized by city council resolution. It is the city's responsibility to correctly calculate and remit the appropriate employer contributions. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-155. - Delinquent contributions. 
The plan administrator shall notify the mayor and city council of any delinquency in the event it comes to the plan administrator's attention that Contributions are not being remitted in a timely manner. The plan administrator may, with the approval of the board of trustees, establish special enforcement procedures for prompt reporting and payment. 
The board of trustees has no liability for the delinquency of the employer's contribution. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-156. - Deposits. 
In all cases, deposits of contributions shall be treated as actually made only as of the date the funds are accepted as in good order by the plan administrator. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-157. - Employer contribution report. 
The plan administrator shall provide an annual report for the board of trustees and city council of the aggregate employer contributions made by the employer. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-158. - Valuation. 
The plan administrator shall receive quarterly reports from the plan custodian that show cost and marked to market valuation of the plan's investments. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009)  
Sec. 82-159. - Year-end reports. 
Within 180 days after the end of each plan year, a written report shall be prepared and maintained on file by the plan administrator showing the assets held under the program, a schedule of all receipts and disbursements, and all material transactions of the program during the preceding year. This report shall be in a form and shall contain other information as the plan administrator requires. The report shall also contain such information as is necessary to enable the board of trustees to prepare its accounting due under the trust. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-160. - Limitation of liability. 
The liability of the program, the employer, plan administrator, board of trustees, and the trust to any participant or dependent for health insurance premiums under the program shall be limited to the monthly benefit earned by the participant. The City of Rochester Hills, its agencies, the Board of trustees, and their officers, employees, and contractors shall not be responsible for any health insurance premiums and their funding under this program in any respect. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-161. - Claims procedure—Administrator. 
Any participant may present a claim in writing to the plan administrator for any issue involving the participant's supplemental benefit. The plan administrator shall resolve any such claim presented to it. If a participant is not satisfied with the resolution determined by the plan administrator, the participant may request in writing a claim review under section 82-162. A participant who requests a claim review is referred to in this article as the "claimant." 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-162. - Claim review. 
(a)  Within 60 days of the date of mailing a claim denial, the claimant may request a review of the claim by the board of trustees. If such request is not filed within 60 days, the decision of the plan administrator, as applicable, shall be final and binding. The 60 day period may be waived by the board of trustees for good cause shown. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall issue a final decision. 
(c)  A participant must exhaust his or her administrative remedies under this article before seeking judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 82-163. - Federal/state taxes. 
The board of trustees, the city, and the plan administrator do not guarantee that any particular federal or state income, payroll or other tax consequence will not occur because of participation in the program. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-164. - Entire agreement. 
The retiree health benefit plan and trust document, relevant collective bargaining agreements and employment agreements, including any properly adopted or executed amendments thereof, shall constitute the entire agreement between the city and any participant regarding the program. No oral statement regarding the program may be relied upon by any participant or other person. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-165. - Conflicts. 
In resolving any conflict between provisions of the program and in resolving any other uncertainty as to the meaning or intention of any provision of the program, the interpretation that (i) causes the program to constitute a medical benefits program under the provisions of Code and the trust to be exempt from tax under the Code, (ii) causes the program to comply with all applicable requirements of the Code, and (iii) causes the program to comply with all applicable statutes and rules, shall prevail over any different interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-166. - Limitation on rights. 
Neither the establishment nor maintenance of a program nor any amendment thereof nor any act or omission under the program (or resulting from the operation of the program) shall be construed: 
(1)  As conferring upon any participant, dependent, or any other person a right or claim against the trust, board of trustees, the city or plan administrator, except to the extent that such right or claim shall be specifically expressed and provided in the program; 
(2)  As being consideration for, or an inducement or condition of, employment of any participant or other person, or as affecting or restricting in any manner or to any extent whatsoever the rights or obligations of the city or any participant or other person to continue or terminate the employment relationship at any time; or 
(3)  As giving any participant the right to be retained in the service of the city or to interfere with the right of the city to discharge any participant or other person at any time. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-167. - USERRA compliance. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this plan and trust document that may be to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service shall be provided as required by the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act ("USERRA"). 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-168. - Erroneous payments. 
If the board of trustees or plan administrator makes any payment that according to the terms of a program and the benefits provided hereunder should not have been made, the board of trustees or plan administrator may recover that incorrect payment, by whatever means necessary, whether or not it was made due to the error of the board of trustees or plan administrator, from the person to whom it was made or from any other appropriate party. For example, if any such incorrect payment is made directly to a participant, the board of trustees or plan administrator may deduct it when making any future payments directly to that participant. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-169. - Release. 
Any payment to any participant shall, to the extent thereof, be in full satisfaction of the claim of such participant being paid thereby and the board of trustees or plan administrator may condition payment thereof on the delivery by the participant of the duly executed receipt and release in such form as may be determined by the board of trustees or plan administrator. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-170. - Liability. 
The plan administrator shall not incur any liability in acting upon any notice, request, signed letter, telegram or other paper or document or electronic transmission believed by the plan administrator to be genuine or to be executed or sent by an authorized person. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
DIVISION 4. - TRUST OF THE CITY OF ROCHESTER HILLS RETIREE HEALTH BENEFIT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 82-171. - Establishment of trust. 
(a)  The trust established in this article shall be irrevocable and shall conform to all applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code, the statement of purpose in section 82-140 of this article, and all laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, arbitrators' awards and judicial decisions interpreting the foregoing provisions. 
(b)  The trust shall consist of city contributions, all investments made or held under trust and all income therefrom, both received and accrued, and any other property, which may be received or held by reason of the trust. 
(c)  The board of trustees shall receive and accept for the purposes hereof all property paid to it by or at the direction of the city and shall hold, invest, reinvest, manage, administer, and distribute property and the increments, proceeds, earnings, and income thereof for the exclusive benefit of the participants, dependents and beneficiaries under the program. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-172. - Use of trust assets. 
(a)  No part of the net earnings of the trust may inure to the benefit of any participant or beneficiary other then by benefit payments or for services provided to the trustees in their administration of the trust. The trust assets shall not be used for or diverted to purposes other than to provide the benefits contemplated under the plan for the exclusive benefit of retired participants and their spouses and eligible dependents, except any administrative expenses for which the trust is liable. A portion of net earnings may be used for payment for reasonable and necessary professional services and costs and expenses related to assist the board of trustees and plan administrator in the operation of the trust. 
(b)  All income, profits, recoveries, contributions, forfeitures and any and all monies, securities and properties of any kind at anytime received or held by the trustees hereunder, shall become part of the trust when received, and shall be held for the uses and purposes hereof. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-173. - Exclusive benefit trust payments. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall delegate to the plan administrator the responsibility for making payments from the trust. The plan administrator shall make payments from the trust to participants and their dependents and beneficiaries as the program may provide. The plan administrator shall ensure that any payment directed under this section conforms to the provisions of the program, the trust agreement, and the provisions of any applicable law. 
(b)  Payments from the trust shall be made by check (or the check of an agent) or electronic funds transfer for the benefit of the payee. Payments or other distributions hereunder may be mailed to the payee at the address last furnished to the plan administrator. The board of trustees and plan administrator shall not incur any liability or other damage on account of any payment or other distribution made by the trust in accordance with this section. 
(c)  This trust is created for the sole purpose of providing health insurance premium payments for participants and their dependents under the program. No portion of the principal or income of this trust shall revert to the city/employer or be used for or diverted to any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of such participants and their dependents and beneficiaries and the payment of reasonable expenses of the program and trust. 
(d)  Any income or earnings of the trust shall be used to pay expenses and fees of the trust and offset future city contributions. The trust funds shall continue to be held by the board of trustees in trust and dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the trust. At no time prior to termination shall any part of the trust funds be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants and their dependents and beneficiaries, as applicable, under the program and defraying the reasonable expenses of administering the trust and the program. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-174. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The general administration, management and responsibility for the proper operation of the trust and for making effective and construing the provisions of the trust shall be vested in the board of trustees established by this section, consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. A trustee or other fiduciary under the trust shall discharge his or her duties with respect to the trust solely in the interest of the participants for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and paying reasonable expenses of administering the plan and trust. A trustee shall discharge his or her duties with the care, skill, and caution under the circumstances then prevailing, which a prudent person, acting in a like capacity and familiar with those matters, would use in the conduct of an activity of like character and purpose. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall consist of the city treasurer and city finance director, and shall also include one city councilmember and two city residents who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(c)  Each trustee shall be a fiduciary and have fiduciary responsibilities under applicable law and shall act prudently and in the best interests of the trust. Each trustee will receive and hold the trust as trustees by virtue of the terms, conditions and provisions of the trust and for the purposes, uses and trusts and with the powers and duties herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-175. - Administration. 
(a)  The principal office and site of the trust shall be 1000 Rochester Hills Drive, Rochester Hills, Michigan 48309-3033. The board of trustees shall have the power to move the principal office of the Trust to another location and to establish other offices, as they deem necessary. 
(b)  Consistent with applicable state and federal law, the board of trustees shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations for the day-to-day management of the trust, the investment of monies held by the trust, to determine all questions regarding the interpretation of the trust, and such other subjects as shall be deemed necessary and proper by the trustees. All such rules and regulations shall be reduced to writing and shall be kept in the permanent office of the trust and available for inspection by the city and the participants. Any such rule or regulation promulgated by the trustees shall be adopted, repealed or amended by an affirmative vote of three trustees. if any rule or regulation of the trust is found to be in conflict with any law, statute, judicial decision, arbitration decision or any other competent body or tribunal, such rule or regulation shall be deemed voided and all other rules and regulations of the trust shall remain in full force and effect. 
(c)  A written instrument signed by the trustees shall be evidence of the action of the trustees. Any such instrument so signed shall be conclusively presumed to be authentic and all facts and matters stated therein shall be conclusively presumed to be true, and persons, including any person doing business with the trustees, may rely on such instrument for all purposes. 
(d)  In the event of any suit brought against the board of trustees arising out of the acts within the scope and powers and duties of the board of trustees, or in the event of any lawsuit brought by the trustees as authorized by this article, the cost of the defense or prosecution of such lawsuit shall be charged to the trust, and shall be paid directly from the trust, provided such costs are not incurred by reason of bad faith, gross negligence, or breach of a fiduciary obligation to the trust or to the beneficiaries thereof. 
(e)  The board of trustees shall be a quasi-judicial body and its actions shall be reviewable by writ of certiorari only. 
(f)  The board of trustees may employ such clerical personnel or administrative personnel to perform whatever administrative activities are required in the proper performance of the trust. In addition thereto, the board of trustees may, if they desire, contract with a plan administrator to perform such clerical and administrative duties as they may, in their discretion, determine is reasonably and prudently necessary to carry out the trust's activities and purposes. The plan administrator so appointed, or with whom the contract was made, may be assigned the activities of receiving the city's reports, entering the information of those reports on permanent records, maintaining such records, receiving contributions from the city and/or on behalf of participants in the form of checks or drafts solely for the purpose of forwarding the contributions to the trust's bank accounts, preparation of governmental reports, furnishing reports required by law to participants, the preparation of checks for the payment of obligations of the trust, and all related activities and other activities necessary to help administer the trust. The board of trustees are further authorized to enter into contracts with such plan administrator for the administration of the trust for whatever periods, in their discretion, the said board of trustees deem advisable. The trustees shall be entitled to rely on the reports and recommendations of said plan administrator or any actions taken by said plan administrator with the authority granted him or her. The board of trustees shall not be responsible for any act taken with respect to the appointment, designation, retention, discharge, or employment of such administrator which is taken prudently and in good faith. Under no circumstances shall said administrator have control or authority with respect to the management of the trust or its assets. The plan administrator shall not be clothed with any type of authority or power which will constitute the plan administrator as a fiduciary. Said plan administrator will not have the power or authority to act as an investment counselor or manager and will not be authorized to furnish investment advice. In the event of the plan administrator's discharge, the board of trustees shall require the plan administrator to return all necessary books, records and documents in the possession of said plan administrator which are necessary for the proper administration, handling and operation of the trust. If the board of trustees have appointed, employed, hired or contracted with a plan administrator, a provision to this effect shall be incorporated in the written agreement between the board of trustees and plan administrator. The board of trustees may, in their discretion, assign certain administrative duties to the city; provided, however, that the direction and management of such activities shall be within the exclusive control of the board of trustees. 
(g)  The board of trustees may employ (an) investment manager(s) to manage the assets of the trust. Such investment manager(s) must be registered under the Investment Advisor's Act of 1940, as amended, and must meet any applicable state and federal requirements to act as investment manager. Such appointment may include the power to acquire and dispose of the assets of the trust; provided, however, that if any state or federal agency promulgates any rules with respect to limitation of liability on the part of the trustees in choosing an investment manager or counselor, then the trustees shall follow said regulations to the extent that they can maximize the protection available to them. If the trustees chose an investment manager or investment counselor, they shall enter into a written agreement with said investment manager or investment counselor or bank or insurance company, if such institutions act in such capacity, which will provide for the investment or reinvestment of the assets of the trust; and upon such execution, the trustees may convey, if it is so provided, to such investment manager, investment counselor, bank or insurance company, any assets of the trust so that said investment manager or counselor may engage in such transactions which are legal for trust funds in the State of Michigan and in the United States and which are prudent for the trustees to undertake. Specifically, in accordance with Section 5 of Michigan Public Act 149 of 1999, the assets of the fund shall be invested in accordance with Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended. The trustees shall not be liable for the acts or omissions of such investment manager, investment counselor, bank or insurance company or under any obligation to invest or otherwise manage the assets of the trust, which assets are subject to the management of such investment manager, investment counselor, bank or insurance company. The trustees may, if they deem proper in their discretion, or if the circumstances require it, appoint such investment manager, managers, banks or insurance companies as fiduciaries and enter into an agreement with such institution, naming it a fiduciary and conveying to such fiduciary all or a portion of the assets of the trust, so that said fiduciary may handle, manage and hold those assets conveyed to it. All assets conveyed to said fiduciary shall be subject to the provisions of the agreement or agreements between the trustees and the fiduciary. 
(h)  The board of trustees may employ legal counsel with whom they may seek advice, consult with, require attendance at trustees' meeting and to represent the trustees whenever necessary, including the preparation of any documents, legal or otherwise, which may have any legal consequences. In choosing said counsel, the trustees may, with prudence, give consideration to the developed skills and expertise of the attorney and experience and reputation he/she has achieved. The trustees may rely upon the opinion of such counsel so chosen in respect to any action taken or suffered by the trustees hereunder in good faith, in accordance with the opinion of said counsel, and the trustees shall not be liable therefor. 
(i)  The board of trustees may employ an independent certified or licensed public accountant or actuary to perform services as may be required by the board of trustees. 
(j)  The board of trustees may authorize the purchase of insurance for the program and for the board of trustees to cover liability or losses occurring for any reason, including but not limited to, an act or omission (errors or omissions) of a fiduciary, including the trustees. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-176. - Board of trustees' meetings. 
(a)  The trustees shall meet at least once in each calendar year. The trustees shall determine the time for the regular meetings of the trustees and the place or places where such meetings shall be held. The secretary of the trustees or his or her designee, shall be responsible for giving notice of the time and place of such meetings to the other trustees. 
(b)  Special meetings of the trustees may be held at the call of one trustee with or without notice to the other trustees, as long as the other trustees consent in writing thereto. 
(c)  All meetings shall be public, and notice of all meetings, both regular and special, shall be given in accordance with applicable law. 
(d)  Three trustees shall constitute a quorum. 
(e)  All decisions shall be made by at least three affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-177. - Compensation. 
The trustees shall not receive any compensation for performing any services for the trust. Each trustee shall be reimbursed for any expenses properly and actually incurred in the performance of his or her duties to the trust. Included in such reasonable expenses properly and actually incurred in the performance of services to the trust is the attendance at educational meetings and seminars organized and designed to instruct the trustees in the proper performance of their duties as trustees and fiduciaries and to instruct, familiarize and acquaint the trustees with all the provisions of all applicable laws. Reasonable costs and expenses will follow the city's established travel policy related to the participation in such educational conferences conducted and carried out for the purposes expressed herein. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-178. - Trustees' powers and responsibilities. 
The trustees shall hold all the powers of trustees that are necessary to carry out the purposes of the trust and are generally available to trustees under the laws of the State of Michigan, except as limited by the trust and by federal law and regulations. It is intended that the plan and trust shall be tax exempt and shall qualify under the Internal Revenue Code, particularly Section 115, and any amendments of the Code applicable to plans of this type. The trustees shall have the continuing power and duty to propose to the city amendments to this article, which amendments will be accomplished by ordinance which will include incorporation into this article, to amend the trust to the extent it becomes necessary to qualify said plan and trust under the Internal Revenue Code and to continue the tax exempt status of the trust. The board of trustees shall take no action nor make any determination inconsistent with any qualification or ruling of the Internal Revenue Service, an arbitrator or the courts with respect to the trust. In the case of amendments to the Internal Revenue Code or changes of regulations by the Internal Revenue Service, the board of trustees are empowered to take all necessary action authorized by this article and federal and state laws and regulations to continue the qualifications of the plan and trust as a qualified plan and trust. The board of trustees is also authorized to take all necessary action to maintain the plan and trust in compliance with applicable federal and state law. The trustees shall have exclusive responsibility for the investment, management and control of trust assets. In carrying out the purposes of the trust, the trustees shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  To make rules and regulations with respect to the trust not inconsistent with the program or the Code and to amend or rescind such rules and regulations; 
(b)  To determine, consistent with the applicable laws, rules or regulations, all questions of law or fact that may arise as to any person claiming rights under the trust, including without limitation, participants, former participants, dependents, former dependents, beneficiaries, eligible employees, and former eligible employees; 
(c)  Subject to and consistent with the Code, to construe and interpret the trust and to correct any defect, supply any omissions, or reconcile any inconsistency in the trust; 
(d)  Subject to and consistent with the Code, to construe and interpret the trust (except as to administrative issues) and to correct any defect, supply any omission, or reconcile any inconsistency with respect to the same; 
(e)  To acquire by purchase, exchange, subscription, or other means, any security or other property and to retain the security or other property in trust; provided, however, the board shall not maintain the indicia of ownership of any trust asset outside the jurisdiction of the district courts of the United States; 
(f)  To invest trust assets, including appointment of investment managers for specified portfolios; 
(g)  To adopt investment policies, guidelines, restrictions, and requirements; 
(h)  To sell at public or private sale for cash or on credit, convey, lease for long or short term or convert, redeem, exchange, or abandon all or any part of the trust fund; 
(i)  To hold part or all of the trust fund un-invested as may be appropriate to provide reasonable liquidity for the trust; 
(j)  To contract for, purchase, or otherwise procure insurance and investment products; 
(k)  To take, renew, extend, foreclose, or otherwise deal with any mortgage or other security; to reduce interest on obligations held by it; to bid in property foreclosure; and to take deeds in lieu of foreclosure, with or without paying a consideration therefore; 
(l)  To exercise, or by general or limited power of attorney, or to refrain from exercising any right, including the right to vote, incident to any security or other property held by them; 
(m)  To register any trust asset in the name of the trust, in the name of its agent or in the name of a nominee or to hold any instrument in bearer form (but the books and records of the program shall at all times show that such investments are part of the trust fund); 
(n)  To consult with and rely on the advice of legal counsel; 
(o)  To employ suitable agents in furtherance of duties hereunder; 
(p)  To make, execute, acknowledge, and deliver any and all instruments necessary or appropriate to carry out the powers herein granted; 
(q)  To collect any and all money and other property due to the trust and to issue full discharge therefore; 
(r)  To consent to or participate in a reorganization, recapitalization, consolidation, or merger; 
(s)  To exercise generally any of the powers of an owner with respect to all or any part of the trust fund; and 
(t)  To take all actions consistent with this trust agreement necessary or appropriate to administer or carry out the purposes of the trust and the program; provided, however, the board need not take any action unless in its opinion there are sufficient trust assets available for the expense thereof. 
(u)  The board of trustees shall establish a uniform system for the timely transmission of required reports and contributions from the city on behalf of participants. The trustees shall have the right and duty to enforce the performance of all obligations provided for in the trust. The trustees shall immediately notify the city and the plan administrator of a delinquency, mistake or discrepancy in any report or contribution. In a suit or action brought by the board of trustees commenced pursuant to this section, the party in default agrees to pay all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees. Delay by the trustees in bringing this suit to recover delinquent contributions from the city shall not be considered a waiver of any of the rights reserved to the trust. 
(v)  The board of trustees shall maintain proper books of accounts and records of administration of the trust, including the minutes of all meetings, and make them available for inspection at the permanent office of the trust during reasonable business hours by the city or any participant covered by the plan and trust. The trustees shall compile and furnish to each individual trustee copies of all records which they individually or collectively require to properly discharge their duties. The city shall be entitled to receive from the trustees records pertaining to the city's contributions, and any participant shall be entitled to receive records of the trustees relating to the activities of the trust. 
(w)  The board of trustees shall cause an annual audit to be made of the trust by a firm of independent certified or licensed public accountants, and a copy of such audit shall be made available at the principal office of the trust for inspection by interested persons. Such audit shall contain a summary of the assets and liabilities of the trust, a resume of the operations for the preceding year, together with such other data as the trustees request or is required by law. 
(x)  The board of trustees shall make reports to and file such information with the Internal Revenue Service, or any other appropriate public authority as may be required by state or federal law. 
(y)  The board of trustees may assign or allocate specific responsibilities or duties among the trustees, or appoint committees for the purpose of overseeing any activity or pursuing or investigating any activity or transactions in which the board of trustees are interested. The trustee or committee of trustees may be assigned the responsibility to take action without prior approval by the remainder of the board of trustees. Any such action taken under such circumstances shall be valid, proper and not a breach of fiduciary responsibility of the trustee or committee so appointed and so acting. The board of trustees may rely on the report of the individual trustee or committee of trustees who prepared the report or recommended the action which was undertaken by the full board of trustees after receiving the report of the trustee or committee of trustees. No trustee shall be liable for the acts of any trustee or committee of trustees under these circumstances because of any act or omission on the part of the trustee or committee of trustees to whom such responsibilities, obligations or duties have been assigned or allocated, unless he or she participates with the knowledge that such act or omission is a breach of fiduciary responsibility or if he or she has knowledge of a breach by such other fiduciary without making reasonable efforts under the circumstances to remedy the breach. 
(z)  The trust may cause the trustees, or any person, firm or organization with which it deals who has fiduciary responsibilities under the trust or under that person's, firm's or organization's arrangement with the board of trustees, to be bonded in an amount not less than ten percent of the funds handled, but in no event in excess of $500,000.00, unless an amount over and above that is prescribed by state or federal law. The corporation providing such bond shall meet applicable federal, state and local standards 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-179. - Trust liabilities. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for payment of contributions to the trust or of any expenses of the trust of any amounts other than those required of it by the trust. Neither the city nor any participant or trustee shall be liable for any debts, liabilities or obligations of the trust except as set forth in the trust. The city shall have no right to the return of any money properly paid into the trust, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, or to money improperly paid which has already been distributed. Any contribution improperly paid into the trust by the city shall be returned by the trustees upon the request of the city or upon discovery by the trustees that such monies have been improperly paid into the trust, unless those monies have already been distributed. 
(b)  No part of the trust or any benefits payable by the board of trustees shall be subject to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge or encumbrance charge by any person. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-180. - Termination of the trust. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations of this article, the parties hereby contemplate that new employment benefit decisions may be made by the city which may continue or modify the provisions of the trust. The trust shall continue during such period of time as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of any ordinance requiring payment to the trust and the fact that such employment benefit decisions are not extended shall not by itself terminate this trust, which shall continue for a period of time sufficient to wind up the affairs of the trust. 
(b)  Provided there are no longer any participants eligible for benefits from the trust, the trust may be terminated at any time by the trustees by the execution of an instrument in writing, so long as the termination is not inconsistent with any then-existing ordinance. It shall not be necessary for the city to execute such an agreement for the trust to terminate. 
(c)  The trust shall terminate in any case upon the death of the last survivor of such persons who are living at the time of its creation or entitled to receive benefits hereunder. 
(d)  Upon termination of the trust and satisfaction of all liabilities of the trust pursuant to this trust document, any remaining assets shall be returned to the city. Notwithstanding anything contrary in this trust, in no event will trust assets be distributed to an entity that is not a state, political subdivision of a state or an entity, the income of which is exclude from gross income under Section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 82-181. - Amendments to the trust. 
(a)  The provisions of the trust may be amended at anytime by ordinance adopted by the city council, upon recommendation by the board of trustees, provided, however, that such amendments do not adversely affect the tax exempt status of this trust. 
(b)  The trust may not be amended to the extent such amendment would: 
(1)  Alter the basic purpose of the trust, as set forth in this article, or divest any participant or beneficiary of any rights which have already vested and to which they have already become entitled to and for sums of money which they are entitled to receive then or in the future; or 
(2)  Conflict with any applicable law or government regulation; or 
(3)  Cause the use or diversion of any part of the trust for purposes other than those generally authorized in this article. 
(c)  Despite any provision to the contrary above, or which may be inconsistent herewith, the board of trustees may propose amendments and shall have the duty to propose amendments to the plan and trust to comply with any rule or regulation of the Internal Revenue Service for qualification under the Internal Revenue Code, for the continuation of tax exemption of the trust, for the deductibility of contributions made by the city under applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code, to obtain a favorable determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service, or to comply with applicable federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 6-29-2009; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 11-23-2009)  
Secs. 82-182—82-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 587 , § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2014, repealed art. VII §§ 82-190—82-218, entitled "Retiree Health Care Implicit Rate Subsidy Trust", which derived from Ord. No. 542, § 1, adopted Nov. 23, 2009. 
 
Secs. 82-190—82-218. - Reserved.  
Chapter 84 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 84-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjoining property owner means a person who solely or jointly holds an ownership interest in property adjoining or contiguous to a sidewalk or who is purchasing such property under a land contract. Where applicable, the term "adjoining property owner" shall include homeowners' associations and condominium associations. 
Brush means cut or broken branches. 
Building materials includes but is not limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, structural or miscellaneous steel, nails, or any other materials used in construction. 
Exotic invasive plant species means a plant species that is not originally native to the area and has no natural controls and is able to out-compete and gradually displace native plants. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
Fence means and includes any wall, barrier, screen or other structure installed for the purpose of separating, screening, obscuring or protecting property. 
Garage sale means a sale of used household effects, appliances, clothing, china, glassware and other such items by a person from their residence by means of a display of such items in the yard, garage, patio, parking area or other like place in, around or near such residence. "Garage sale" also means an estate sale and/or auction conducted at or around a residence or in a residential subdivision. It shall not mean the sale of a single automobile by means of a "For Sale" sign on the vehicle. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Infestation means the presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, sample, device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other writing intended for distribution, but not including signs or newspapers. 
Junk includes parts of machinery or motor vehicles; unused stoves, refrigerators or other appliances stored in the open; remnants of wood; metal; or any other material or castoff material of any kind, whether or not such could be put to any reasonable use at some future time. 
Landscaping materials included but is not limited to dirt, sand, stone, rocks, block, timbers, plantings, wood chips/mulch, or any other materials used in landscaping. 
Litter means all trash, rubbish, combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Native plant means a plant species that has naturally evolved in the local region over thousands of years under certain soil, hydrologic and other site conditions. 
Natural landscaped area means premises that are landscaped so as to exhibit the deliberate and conscious decision to plant, cultivate and maintain those native plant species identified as wildflower, grass, shrub or tree. This landscaping tries to capture the character and spirit of nature in a designed landscape by arranging plants in a community context, similar to their arrangement in nature. 
Newspaper shall mean and include any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal law or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by general law: and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold or distributed to the public. 
Noxious weeds includes Canada thistle (circium arvense), dodders (any species of cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and indian mustard, species of brassica or sinapis), wild carrot (daucus carota), bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1), poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix), oxeye daisies, goldenrod, all types of exotic invasive plant species, grass or weeds of a height exceeding eight inches, or other plant which is determined by the city to be deleterious to health, safety, or public welfare or a common nuisance. 
Occupant means any person living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable ownership interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Public place shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
Residential district means any R-1, R 2, R-3, R-4, RCD, RM-1, MH or SP elderly housing zoning district. 
Roll-off debris container means an open-top metal box used for the containment of construction or demolition debris, yard waste, or other similar waste and/or debris items. Such containers generally range in size between ten and 40 cubic yards and between three and six feet in height and are commonly transported by flatbed truck. 
Public sidewalk means a public pathway constructed of concrete for public use, five feet in width, and located on public streets. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed on the ground or a portion thereof. 
Swimming pool means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
Unlicensed/inoperable includes any motor vehicle that is kept, parked or stored, other than in a completely enclosed building, and is not in operating condition, is not properly licensed or is incapable of performing the transportation function for which it was manufactured. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which a person or property may be transported or drawn. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 180/593 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
Sec. 84-2. - Purpose. 
Blight, potential blight, certain environmental causes of blight, or blighting factors that exist or that may exist shall be prevented, reduced, or eliminated, consistent with the letter and spirit of Public Act No. 344 of 1945 (MCL 125.71 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-3. - Enforcement. 
Violations of this chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction and shall be enforced by such person as may be designated by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-4. - Blight. 
(a)  Causes of blight or blighting factors. It is determined that the following uses, structures and activities are causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods: 
(1)  Unlicensed/inoperable/unused/junk vehicles. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of unlicensed, inoperable, unused or junk vehicles, except as follows: 
a.  In a completely enclosed building. 
b.  A motor vehicle which does not otherwise comply with the requirements of this section may be stored outdoors if a family member is in active military service or other similar reason and the vehicle is determined by the building department to be not detrimental to the area. The building department may grant the right to store the vehicle for such period under the best conditions available, which shall be stated in writing. A vehicle shall not be stored unused in the front yard for more than 90 days. After 90 days, the vehicle must be stored in a side or rear yard. Unused vehicles stored under a tarp must be stored in a side or a rear yard. 
(2)  Building materials. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon the property and the materials are intended for use in connection with such construction. 
(3)  Junk. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage or accumulation of junk, trash, appliances, rubbish, or refuse of any kind, except for domestic refuse stored in a covered container for a period not to exceed 30 days; firewood that is neatly stacked so as not to provide harborage for rodents and vermin; and yard waste compost piles that are properly maintained to prevent odor, rodent, vermin or insect nuisances. 
(4)  Uninhabitable structures. 
a.  Due to disaster. In any area, the existence of any structure or part of a structure which, because of fire, wind, storm, or other disaster, is no longer habitable as a dwelling or is not safe or useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended and is left in that condition for a period of more than six months. 
b.  Due to physical deterioration. In any area, the existence of any structure or part of a structure which, because of physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling or is not safe or useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  Partially completed structures. In any area, the existence of any partially completed structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within the life of the building permit or a valid extension thereof. 
(6)  Public roads and utility rights-of-way. In any area, allowing any of the causes of blight or blighting factors in subsections (1) through (5), of this section to exist on any public road right-of-way located between private property and an existing or dedicated street, alley, road or highway or upon any public utility easement or right-of-way located adjacent to such property. 
(7)  Firewood. Storage of firewood; removal of cleared brush. 
a.  Firewood shall be stacked in a neat, orderly manner, and when outdoors at least six inches from any building or structure. Firewood shall not be stored in the front yard of any parcel occupied for single-family residential use. 
b.  Within 15 days of the cutting or clearing of any trees, brush or other vegetation (but not including farm products), wood to be retained as firewood shall be stacked in accordance with subsection a., above, and all other cleared brush and vegetation material shall be removed from the site. 
c.  Compliance with subsections a. and b. shall be the responsibility of both the owner and any occupant or other person in possession or control of the premises. 
(8)  Compost piles. Compost piles may include a combination of yard and garden waste (such as weeds, bark, grass clippings, stalks and stems, brush or vines), wood ashes, horse manure, coffee grounds, vegetable scraps, citrus rinds and fruit peelings, egg, peanut and nut shells. Compost piles shall not include meats, dairy products, vegetable oils, cooked foods, or plastics, synthetics or other non-biodegradable materials. Compost piles shall not be located within any drainage easement. Compost piles shall not be located in any side yard or closer than five feet to any property line. Compost piles shall not exceed four feet by eight feet or six feet in diameter and shall not exceed four feet in height. Double compost piles may be utilized, provided the total size does not exceed the above. Compost piles shall be maintained in a manner to prevent the escape of offensive odors to adjacent property. 
(9)  Landscaping. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from vegetation, weeds, bushes and tall grass and trees which present a visual blight upon the area, which may harbor insect or rodent infestations, or result in a condition which may threaten the health and safety or the economic welfare of adjacent property owners or occupants. 
(10)  Appliances. It shall be unlawful for any person to place at the roadside for collection by a solid waste contractor, any ice box, refrigerator, deep freeze or other device with doors within the city unless all doors of the icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze or other device with doors shall have been removed prior to such disposal. 
(b)  Responsibilities of property owners, tenants and occupants. 
(1)  Property owners. No property owner shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in chapter 84 or chapter 46 upon any property in the city owned by such person. 
(2)  Occupants. Any occupant of property in the city shall also be responsible for any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in chapter 46 that he creates or permits on the property leased or occupied by him. 
(c)  Applicability to non-residential areas. 
(1)  Generally. The causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in chapter 46 as applicable to areas zoned for residential purposes are also determined to be causes of blight or blighting factors and subject to the prohibitions of this chapter if located in areas zoned for non-residential purposes, unless such uses of property are incidental to and necessary for the carrying out of any business or occupation lawfully being carried on upon the property in question. 
(2)  Considerations. For purposes of this article, such business or occupation shall be considered lawful only when being carried out in a manner as prescribed by chapter 138 pertaining to zoning and any other applicable provisions, laws, or regulations of the city, county, state or federal governments. The proof that such use is incidental to and necessary for the carrying out of such business shall rest with the owner or user of the property and such use shall not, in any case, constitute a hazard to the health or welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 180/593 , § 2, 8-8-2016)  
Sec. 84-5. - Dogs and animals. 
(a)  Unclean housing. No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any dog or other animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome to an extent that it becomes a health problem or nuisance to abutting residences. 
(b)  Sanitary disposal of feces. It shall be unlawful for any person in control of a dog or other animal traveling upon a public right-of-way to fail to pick up and remove such animal's feces, manure or solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 605 , § 1, adopted June 18, 2018, deleted § 84-6 entitled "Fences," which derived from: Ord. No. 521, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2007; and Ord. No. 551, § 2, adopted May 3, 2010.  
Sec. 84-7. - Garage sales. 
(a)  Frequency. No person shall have more than four garage sales at any residence during a consecutive 12-month period. 
(b)  Duration. No garage sale may last more than 72 hours. 
(c)  Allowable sale items. Garage sales shall be limited to sales of items which had actually been used in the normal course of residential living in the home at which the sale is to occur and shall not be transported to such home for purposes of the sale. This does not prohibit minor joint garage sale activities among family or nearby neighbors. 
(d)  Hours. No garage sale shall continue later than one-half hour after sunset nor begin prior to 9:00 a.m. 
(e)  Traffic obstruction. No garage sale shall be situated so as to obstruct traffic, nor shall any garage sale patrons park their vehicle so as to obstruct traffic. 
(f)  Noise. Excessive noise emanation from the area of any garage sale is prohibited. 
(g)  Sign placement. The placing of signage shall be in compliance with subsections 134-7(5) and 134-109(b) of this Code. All signs must be removed at the end the sale. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-8. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide a procedure for the prevention, prohibition and removal of graffiti from walls, structures or surfaces on public and private property in order to reduce blight and deterioration within the city and to protect the public health and safety. 
(b)  Defacement of property. No person shall purposely damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-9. - Handbills. 
(a)  Throwing or scattering in public places prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any public place within this city. It shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill. 
(b)  Placing in vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who is willing to accept the same. 
(c)  Distribution on uninhabited or vacant private premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are uninhabited or vacant. 
(d)  Distribution on inhabited private premises. No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited, and posted prohibiting such distributions, or when requested by the owner not to do so. If the property is not posted then the handbill must be so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere. 
(e)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the distributions of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, nor to political candidates or issues or religious organizations. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-10. - Private sidewalks. 
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas on private property shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-11. - Public sidewalks. 
(a)  Maintenance by property owner. The adjoining property owner or occupant of the lot or premises shall maintain the sidewalk adjoining such property. Such sidewalk shall be kept as follows: 
(1)  Free from defects of every kind and nature and maintained in a condition of good repair. 
(2)  Free from any deposits of debris, rubbish, or other objects that might or could be hazardous to persons using the sidewalk. 
(3)  Free and clear from accumulations of snow, sleet, ice and water as follows: 
a.  When any snow or ice shall cease to fall or form during the daylight hours, such snow or ice shall be cleared from the sidewalk within 48 hours after such cessation. 
b.  When any snow or ice shall cease to fall or form during the nighttime, such snow or ice shall be cleared from the sidewalk within 48 hours after sunrise. 
(4)  Free from obstructions encroaching from adjoining or adjacent property, including but not limited to overhanging tree limbs, bushes and the like. The minimum clearances that shall be maintained free from such obstructions shall be eight feet vertical and one foot horizontal. 
(5)  Free from obstructions from adjoining or adjacent property interfering with site distance lines, at driveways and other sidewalks intersecting the sidewalk. A clear and unobstructed site triangle must be created using a base leg of 15 feet from the site obstruction to any sidewalk or driveways or sidewalks intersecting such sidewalk. 
(b)  Repair of damage by developer. Sidewalks provided by a developer that are damaged prior to occupancy shall be repaired by the developer prior to the date of final occupancy, or if repairs cannot be made, a cash escrow in an amount equal to 150 percent of the projected cost for such repairs shall be posted with the city. 
(c)  Repair or reconstruction by property owner. 
(1)  Written notice. Upon determination by the department of public service that any sidewalk or portion thereof is in need of repair or elimination from encroachment, the department shall serve a written notice upon the adjoining property owner to the portion of such sidewalk requiring repair or elimination of encroachment by first class mail to the owner in accordance with the following: 
a.  Determination of property owners. Adjoining property owners shall be determined from the current city tax roll. 
b.  Proration of cost among adjoining owners. When a sidewalk requiring repair or reconstruction is contiguous to more than one lot or parcel, costs of such repair or reconstruction shall be prorated between adjoining property owners on the basis of front footage repaired. 
1.  The failure of one adjoining property owner to undertake such repair where such sidewalk abuts more than a single parcel shall not excuse the remaining adjoining property owner from the duties established in this section. 
2.  Such notice shall require that the adjoining property owner shall perform such repairs within 45 days of the date of such notice; or the elimination of the encroachment within 14 days of the date of such notice. 
(2)  Failure to comply. Failure to comply shall subject the owner to the following: 
a.  Correction by city; owner billed cost. If the adjoining property owner fails to repair the sidewalk within 45 days of such notice, or remove the encroachment within 14 days of such notice, the city may perform the repair or remove the encroachment and bill such adjoining property owner the total cost thereof, together with an additional fee of 30 percent for engineering supervision and general administration expense. 
b.  Lien against property. If payment is not received by the city within 60 days after such billing, such amount shall become a lien on the property and shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as other taxes and assessments under the Michigan General Property Tax Act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 566, § 1, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 84-12. - Rodents. 
All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that are not to be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation. The owner or occupant of the property shall be responsible for compliance to this section. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-13. - Solid waste. 
(a)  Storage of refuse. For the purpose of this section, garbage and rubbish shall be stored as follows: 
(1)  Accumulation. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall permit garbage and/or rubbish to accumulate upon his premises, except in plastic bags, disposable cartons, or in strong metal or plastic containers. 
(2)  Containers. If containers are used, they shall: 
a.  Be rodent-proof and watertight. 
b.  Have a capacity of not more than 50 pounds by weight, unless they are on wheels and compatible with equipment of the licensed waste hauler servicing the property. 
c.  Have tight covers, which shall be in place whenever such containers are placed for collection or located out-of-doors, except when garbage is being deposited or removed. 
d.  Be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and stored when not in use in the side or rear yard. 
(b)  Containers standing for collection. 
(1)  Under this section, refuse, including garbage, may be deposited at the place for collection in plastic bags, disposable cartons, or metal or plastic containers, but shall not be left standing in the location for more than 24 hours. If after 72 hours the refuse is not removed, the city shall place a 24-hour notice on the premises advising of the violation. If after the issuance of the 24-hour notice, the refuse standing at the roadside has not been removed the city may cause the refuse to be removed at the owners expense. 
(2)  Recycling containers and yard clippings shall be placed on collection day at the street or authorized location, but shall not be left in the location for more than 24 hours. 
(c)  Covers. 
(1)  Securing. When plastic containers are used for mixed solid waste pursuant to this section, tops shall be secured to prevent paper or debris from spilling or otherwise escaping from the containers. Paper bags shall not be permitted, except to hold newspapers. 
(2)  Exclusions for building or demolition sites. No covers shall be required on containers used for refuse, except garbage, on a site for which a building or demolition permit has been issued and is outstanding. 
(d)  Newspapers. Stacks of newspapers may be placed at the street in a container or paper bag, or bundled with string. 
(e)  Yard clippings. 
(1)  Except as provided in this section, yard clippings shall be placed in specially designated bags or containers. 
(2)  If placed in disposable bags or containers, such bags or containers shall be biodegradable bags or containers. 
(3)  If permitted by the waste hauler, small tree limbs, two inches or less in diameter, may be collected only if cut into lengths not to exceed three feet and tied securely into bundles not to exceed three feet in girth. 
(f)  Ashes. Containers for ashes shall be of sturdy construction, made of metal, and shall have adequate handles to prevent spillage. 
(g)  Recyclable materials. 
(1)  Separation. Separation of recyclable materials shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Generally. The occupant of any single-family residence in the city shall separate recyclable materials and place them in properly marked containers at the street on normal refuse pickup days as established by contract with a licensed waste hauler. 
b.  Yard clippings. The occupants of any single-family residence who dispose of yard waste shall separate yard clippings from solid waste and prepare them for pickup as established by contract with a licensed waste hauler. 
(2)  Ownership. At the time any recyclable material is placed at curbside or another predetermined collection point, it shall become the joint property of the waste hauler and the generator of such recyclable material. It shall be a violation of this article for any person not authorized by the waste hauler or the generator of the recyclable material to collect or pick up or to cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials. 
(3)  Other disposal. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, any person who is a generator of recyclable materials may donate or sell recyclable materials to any recycling program lawfully operated for profit, nonprofit, or charitable purposes. The buyer or receiver of such recyclable materials, however, if not a licensed waste hauling unit, shall not pick up recyclable materials from the street or any other collection point in the city. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-14. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Maintenance of swimming and architectural pools. All swimming and architectural pools and spas shall be properly maintained so as not to create a safety hazard or harbor insect infestation, or create a visible deteriorated or blighted appearance. Water shall not be allowed to stagnate, or to become stale or foul through lack of circulation. The bottom and sides of the pool or spa shall be maintained reasonably free of sediment, dirt, slime and algae. The water shall be sufficiently clear so that the bottom of the pool in the deepest part is clearly visible to an adult standing on the pool deck. 
(b)  Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more that 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the poolside of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-15. - Vacant buildings. 
(a)  A structure shall be considered blight if: 
(1)  That dwelling is vacant, dilapidated and open at the door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers; or 
(2)  Has remained vacant and boarded up for more than 180 days. 
(b)  Within 180 days building that are boarded up must have windows that are properly glazed and operational. All exterior doors, door assemblies and door hardware must function properly and tightly secure the doors. 
(c)  Buildings that have remained vacant and boarded for more than 180 days will be considered as blight and the building department may seek an order to demolish the building. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 84-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 180/593 , § 3, adopted Aug. 8, 2016, repealed § 84-16 entitled "Vehicles", which derived from: Ord. No. 521, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2007; and Ord. No. 559, § 1, adopted July 26, 2010.  
Sec. 84-17. - Weed control. 
(a)  Purpose. Noxious weeds found growing in the city shall be controlled and eradicated as provided in this article. 
(b)  Growth of weeds prohibited. 
(1)  Subdivisions. The owner or occupant of any lot in any subdivision in the city in which buildings have been erected on 60 percent of the lots in that subdivision shall cut or destroy all noxious weeds growing on the lot and in the adjacent right-of-way between the lot and the street. 
(2)  Along improved streets. The owner or occupant of any land in the city which abuts an improved street in common usage shall cut or destroy all noxious weeds growing on the land for a depth of 100 feet from street edge. 
(3)  Abutting property of subdivision, school, park or occupied residential. The owner or occupant of any land, platted or unplatted, in the city which abuts a subdivision or condominium in which buildings have been erected on 60 percent of the lots in that subdivision or condominium or which abuts any school, park, playground or occupied residential property shall cut or destroy all noxious weeds growing on the land for a depth of 100 feet. 
(4)  Failure to cut and destroy. Any owner or occupant of land in the city who fails to comply with subsections (1) through (3), of this subsection will be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  Cutting and destruction by city. 
(1)  Action authorized. If the following notice or a substantially similar notice is published in the month of March of any year in a newspaper regularly distributed in the city and the owner or occupant of any land to which this article applies shall fail or refuse to comply with this section after due notice, any officer, inspector or other agent authorized by the mayor may enter upon such land after May 1 of that year and as many times thereafter as is necessary to cut or destroy any and all noxious weeds located thereon. 
(2)  Published notice. The notice as provided in subsection (1) of this section shall be substantially in the following form: 
"TO ALL OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS OF LAND IN THE CITY OF ROCHESTER HILLS: 
Notice is hereby given that after May 1 of this year the provisions of section 84-17, Weed Control, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rochester Hills will be enforced. This article requires the owner or occupant of: 
(1)  Any lot in any subdivision in the city in which buildings have been erected on 60 percent of the lots in that subdivision to cut or destroy all noxious weeds growing on the lot; 
(2)  Any land in the city which abuts an improved street in common usage to cut or destroy all noxious weeds growing on the land for a depth of 100 feet; and 
(3)  Any land, platted or unplatted, in the city which abuts a subdivision in which buildings have been erected on 60 percent of the lots in that subdivision, or which abuts any school, park, playground or occupied residential property to cut or destroy all noxious weeds growing on the land for a depth of 100 feet. 
If, after May 1 of this year, the owner or occupant of any land to which this section applies shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section, then any officer, inspector or other agent authorized by the City of Rochester Hills may enter upon the land as many times as is necessary, to cut or destroy all noxious weeds growing thereon. The owner or occupant of the land shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in connection with such cutting or destruction plus an administration and enforcement fee equal to 1.6 times the amount paid by the city to its weed cutting contractor. 
If the charges are not paid within 30 days after billing, payment shall be deemed delinquent and shall be enforceable as a tax lien against the land. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 84-17, Weed control, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rochester Hills, shall, in addition to the other obligations imposed thereby or by other applicable law, be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a civil fine. 
A copy of section 84-17 and additional information may be obtained from the Rochester Hills Clerk's Offices. 
(3)  Means to be utilized. In the discretion of the officer, inspector, or other agent authorized by the city, manual and/or mechanical means may be used, and all due care shall be taken to avoid unnecessary damage to any land. 
(4)  Responsibility for cost. Responsibility for cost of weed cutting pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Costs. The owner or occupant of land shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in connection with weed cutting or destruction, plus an administration and enforcement fee equal to 1.6 times the amount paid by the city to its weed cutting contractor. 
b.  Lien. From the time of the commencement of the cutting and destruction of such noxious weeds, the city shall have a lien upon the land for the amount arising under subsection (4)(a) of this subsection. 
(5)  Collection of costs. The city shall charge and collect all costs arising under subsection (c)(4) of this section in accordance with section 90-30 of this Code. 
a.  Billing and delinquent charges. If the charges arising under subsection (c)(4) of this section are not paid by the owner or occupant of the land within 30 days after the date of billing the owner or occupant by regular mail, payment shall be deemed delinquent. 
b.  Enforcement of lien. A lien created pursuant to this article shall be enforceable in the manner prescribed by the city Charter and state law for the enforcement of a tax lien against the land. 
(d)  Allocation of fines. Fines, when collected pursuant to this section, shall become a part of the city's noxious weed control fund. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 539, § 1, 9-28-2009; Ord. No. 544, § 1, 12-14-2009)  
Secs. 84-18, 84-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BLIGHT PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - BUILDING EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 84-20. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Guard means a building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
Habitable space means a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed on the ground or a portion thereof. 
Tenant means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
Workmanlike means executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-21. - General. 
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-22. - Protective treatment. 
All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from the requirement. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-23. - Structural members. 
All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-24. - Foundation walls. 
All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-25. - Exterior walls. 
All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breads, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-26. - Roofs and drainage. 
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-27. - Decorative features. 
All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-28. - Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. 
Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-29. - Overhang extensions. 
All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-30. - Chimneys and towers. 
All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-31. - Handrails and guards. 
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-32. - Window, skylight and door frames. 
Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
(1)  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(2)  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-33. - Doors. 
All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with the Michigan Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-34. - Basement hatchways. 
Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING INTERIOR MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 84-35. - General. 
The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, and in a structurally sound and sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure, which they occupy or control, in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-36. - Structural members. 
All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-37. - Stairs and walking surfaces. 
Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-38. - Handrails and guards. 
(a)  Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(b)  Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. 
(c)  Exception. Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-39. - Infestation. 
All structures shall be kept free from insects and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-40. - Plumbing. 
(a)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leads and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(b)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(c)  Toilet room privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathroom and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
(d)  Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-41. - Mechanical. 
(a)  Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the Michigan Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
(c)  Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-42. - Electrical. 
(a)  Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(b)  Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Sec. 84-43. - Fire safety requirements. 
(a)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue opening s shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(c)  Fire protection systems. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
(d)  Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
(1)  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
(2)  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
(3)  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split-levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
(e)  Power source. 
(1)  In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
(2)  Exception. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where not construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of building undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
(f)  Interconnection. 
(1)  Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
(2)  Exception. 
a.  Interconnection is not required in building which are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind. 
b.  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-21-2008)  
Chapter 86 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; litter, § 46-61 et seq.; littering in parks, § 74-98; littering on trailways, § 74-204; disposal of trash on trailways, § 74-205; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.361 et seq., 324.4301 et seq., MSA 5.2726(1) et seq., 13A.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management, MCL 324.11101 et seq., MSA 13A.11101 et seq.; solid waste management, MCL 324.11501 et seq., MSA 13A.11501 et seq.; waste management and resource recovery finance, MCL 324.11901 et seq., MSA 13A.11901 et seq.; recycling and related subjects, MCL 324.16101 et seq., MSA 13A.16101 et seq.; disposal of medical waste, MCL 333.13801 et seq., MSA 14.15(13801) et seq.; Low-Level Radioactive Waste Authority Act, MCL 333.26201 et seq., MSA 14.528(362) et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 86-1—86-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - [COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL REFUSE CONTROL;] GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 526, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2008, repealed Art. II, §§ 86-26—86-30, 86-56—86-64, 86-91—86-98; 86-126—86-86-130 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, § 3-07.01—3-07.03, 3-07.05, 3-07.07, 3-07.04.01—3-07.04.09, 3-07.06.04(A)—(E), 3-07.06.02, 3-07.06.03, 3-07.06.05—3-07.06.07, 3-07.06.01(A)—(C), 03-07.06.01(E) and Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.01.04), adopted Mar. 19, 1997. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 86-26. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act 451 means Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.101 et seq.) 
Commingled means recyclable materials that have been mixed at the site of generation and placed in the same container for curbside pickup. 
Compost means the humuslike product of the composting process. 
Compostables means yard clippings and residential compostables. 
Container means a verminproof, watertight, wooden, metallic, plastic or masonry receptacle for the storage and placement of solid waste. 
Curbside means a location near the traveled portion of the roadway used for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings. 
Garbage means rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables. 
Generator of solid waste means any person who has acquired or stored any litter, recyclable materials and yard clippings at a site of generation. 
Hazardous waste means waste or a combination of waste and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, that because of its quantity, quality, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. Hazardous waste does not include material that is solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage discharge, solid or dissolved material in an irrigation return flow discharge, industrial discharge that is a point source subject to permits under section 402 of title IV of the Federal Waste Pollution Control Act, chapter 758, 86 Stat. 880, 33 USC 1342, or is a source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, chapter 1073, 68 Stat. 919. 
Licensed waste hauler means a waste hauler who has been issued a waste hauler license by the city. 
Litter means all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
Newspaper means all newsprint and materials which are part of a newspaper except the glossy inserts placed in the newspaper. 
Premises means any area of land used for residential, commercial, industrial or governmental purposes, separately or in combination, to which a separate street address, postal address or box number, tax roll description, or other similar identification has been assigned or is in use by a person having control of such area. 
Recyclable materials means source-separated materials, site-separated materials, high-grade paper, glass, metal, plastic, aluminum, newspaper, corrugated paper, yard clippings and other material deemed to be recyclable materials by duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
Residential compostables means organic fruit and vegetable material which is produced incidental to the preparation of food for human consumption in residential structures. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
Site of generation means any premises in or on which litter is generated by any person. 
Site-separated material means glass, metal, wood, paper products, plastics, rubber, textiles, garbage, yard clippings or other material that may be recycled that is separated from solid waste for the purpose of conversion into raw material or new products. Site-separated material does not include the residue remaining after glass, metal, wood, paper products, plastics, rubber, textiles or other recyclable materials is separated from solid waste. 
Site separation means the act of removing source-separated or site-separated material from rubbish. 
Solid waste means solid waste as the term is defined in Act 451. 
Solid waste transporting unit means a container that may be an integral part of a truck or other piece of equipment used for the transportation of solid waste. 
Waste hauler means any person engaged in the business of collecting solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings within the city and hauling, transporting or disposing of such materials. 
Yard clippings means leaves, grass clippings, vegetables or other garden debris, shrubbery, brush or tree trimmings less than four feet in length and two inches in diameter, that can be converted to compost humus. This term does not include stumps, agricultural wastes, animal waste, roots, sewage, sludge or garbage. 
(b)  Terms, words and phrases not otherwise specifically defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Act 451. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-27. - Prohibited storage and disposal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or dispose of solid waste, recyclable material or yard clippings except as expressly authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-28. - Prohibited collection. 
All solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings shall become the property of the licensed waste hauler at the time the material is collected at curbside or other designated collection location. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed waste hauler or the generator of the solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings to collect or cause to be collected any solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings after it has been placed at curbside or other designated collection location. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-29. - Prohibited placement of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed waste for disposal upon the premises of another person or with the waste of another person placed at curbside. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-30. - Storage regulations. 
All waste at any site of generation shall be stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Solid waste. All solid waste shall: 
a.  Be gathered, stored and placed in a closed container or containers sufficient in number and size to store such waste; 
b.  Be shielded from public view upon the site of generation; and 
c.  Not be commingled with yard clippings. 
(2)  Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials not commingled with solid waste shall be: 
a.  Site-separated from other waste and stored and placed in a recycling collection container suitable for such purpose; or if newspapers or other recyclable paper products, be stored and placed in recycling collection containers, paper bags or tied into bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds; and 
b.  Rinsed and cleaned before storage if metal, glass or plastic. 
(3)  Residential compostables. All residential compostables not commingled with solid waste shall be collected, stored and disposed of in accordance with City Code section 84-4(a)(8). 
(4)  Yard clippings. All yard clippings shall be site-separated from other waste and: 
a.  Stored in accordance with section 86-6(3); and 
b.  Not commingled with solid waste or other recyclable materials. 
(5)  Other waste. All other waste at any site of generation shall be stored in accordance with Act 451. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-31. - Disposal regulations. 
All waste at any site of generation shall be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  Solid waste. All solid waste shall be removed from the site of generation at least weekly or before it becomes a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare by a licensed waste hauler. 
(2)  Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials not commingled with solid waste shall be removed from the site of generation at least weekly or before such materials become a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare by a licensed waste hauler. 
(3)  Yard clippings. All yard clippings shall be site-separated from other waste and, unless composted at the site of generation in accordance with City Code section 84-4(a)(8), removed from the site of generation at least weekly or before such clippings become a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare by: 
a.  A licensed waste hauler; or 
b.  A person engaged in the business of providing landscaping services. 
(4)  Preparation of yard clippings for disposal. Twigs, brush and branches not exceeding three inches in diameter shall be tied in bundles not more than four feet in length and 18 inches in diameter. All other yard clippings shall be placed in either containers or paper bags clearly marked as yard clippings. 
(5)  Other waste. All other waste at any site of generation shall be disposed of in accordance with Act 451. 
(6)  Curbside placement. 
a.  No solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings or containers for same shall be placed or left at curbside for more than 24 hours; 
b.  It shall be presumed that the owner, lessee or occupant in physical possession of a site of generation abutting a curbside where solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings are located is the person who placed such solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings at the curbside; and 
c.  The presumption of placement may be rebutted by competent evidence. 
(7)  Collection refusal by licensed waste hauler. A licensed waste hauler may refuse to collect solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings from any site of generation if such solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings are not prepared for disposal in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Secs. 86-32—86-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WASTE HAULERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 526, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2008, repealed Art. III, §§ 86-156—86-161, 86-191—86-200, 86-226—86-236, 86-266—86-272 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. III pertained to waste hauling for single-family residences and derived from Code 1976, § 3-14.01, 3-14-02, 3-14-05, 3-14-07, 3-14-08, 3-14-03.01, 3-14.04.01—3-14.04.10, 3-14.06.01(A)—(H), 3-14.06.02, 3-14.06.02(A)—(H), 3-14.06.03, 3-14.06.04, 3-14.06.05 
 
DIVISION 1. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
 
Sec. 86-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a waste hauler within the city without a license being issued to such person in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-62. - Application. 
(a)  Every waste hauler shall file a written application for a waste hauler license with the building department upon a form to be furnished by the building department. 
(b)  The application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  The full name, complete address and telephone number of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other form of business entity, and if a corporation, the state of incorporation; 
(2)  The name under which the applicant operates or will operate; 
(3)  The days and hours the applicant will service sites of generation within the city; and 
(4)  The capacity, make, model and year of manufacture or the solid waste transporting unit, as well as the capacity of the unit. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The application fee; 
(2)  Statistical data regarding the amount of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings collected, transported and disposed of from sites of generation in the city by the applicant; 
(3)  Statistical data regarding the amount of solid waste disposed of from sites of generation in the city at each licensed disposal area utilized by the applicant; 
(4)  Certificates of insurance evidencing insurance coverage for the applicant, its agents and employees, for the following coverages: 
a.  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance in accordance with state law; 
b.  Commercial general liability insurance on an "Occurrence" basis with limits of liability not less than $5,000,000.00 per occurrence; 
c.  Motor vehicle liability insurance including Michigan no-fault coverage for all vehicles used with limits of liability not less than $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and aggregate combined single limit, personal injury, bodily injury and property damage; 
d.  Commercial general liability and motor vehicle liability insurance shall include an endorsement stating the city shall be an additional insured. Such insurance shall be primary to the additional insured and not contributing with other insurance available to the city; and 
e.  The certificates shall provide that the city shall receive 60 days advance written notice of cancellation, nonrenewal, reduction or material change in any such insurance coverage for any reason. 
(5)  A written declaration duly dated and signed by the applicant and given under oath or affirmation and under penalty of perjury that the information contained in and attached to the application is true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-63. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The building department shall issue a waste hauler license to the applicant unless the investigation or recommendation finds any of the following: 
(1)  The application or the renewal application fee has not been paid, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, dishonored for payment upon presentment; 
(2)  Solid waste transporting units do not pass inspection; 
(3)  The applicant has knowingly made false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in the application or in any document required in conjunction with the application; 
(4)  The applicant has had a waste hauler license or other similar license or permit suspended or revoked by the city prior to the date of the application; or 
(5)  The applicant or application does not meet all of the requirements of this division or other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  If the building department denies the application, the reasons for the denial and the right to appeal such denial under the provisions of this division shall be specified in writing and mailed by first-class mail to the applicant at the address set forth on the application. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-64. - License fee. 
The application for the license required by this division shall be accompanied by the license fee for the first refuse transporting unit and the license fee for each additional unit sought to be licensed as set forth in City Code section 54-531. The fees shall be deposited to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-65. - Statistical data and fees and charges. 
In order to maintain the validity of a license under this division, the statistical data required in section 86-62 shall be submitted each year on November 1 and May 1 to the building department. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-66. - Inspection of solid waste transporting units. 
The building department and sheriff's department shall inspect each solid waste transporting unit to determine whether it is roadworthy, proper and hygienic according to this article and in compliance with applicable state law and city ordinances. The city shall provide a decal to be affixed to each solid waste transporting unit that passes inspection. Inspections shall be conducted during normal business hours. Other inspection times may be arranged upon request and payment of an additional fee. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Sec. 86-67. - Expiration. 
Each license issued under the provisions of this division shall expire on May 1 next following the date of issuance and shall be displayed on each solid waste transporting unit operated within the city. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-68. - Transfer prohibited. 
A license issued pursuant to this division confers authority only upon the waste hauler named in the license and shall not be transferred, assigned, separated or divided by the waste hauler. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-69. - Renewal. 
Any time after March 1 of each year but before the license expires, a waste hauler may file an application to renew its license on a form to be furnished by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-70. - Regulations. 
A licensed waste hauler shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Collection hours. 
a.  Domestic. Solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings shall be collected within the city from the curbside of residential sites of generation only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; except solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings may be so collected on a Saturday between those hours when a legal holiday has occurred on a weekday in the immediately preceding week or when scheduled weekday collections have been delayed in the immediately preceding week due to collection vehicle equipment failure beyond the control of the waste hauler. 
b.  Commercial and industrial. Solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings shall be collected within the city from commercial and industrial sites of generation only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(2)  Delivery to disposal areas. A waste hauler shall deliver all waste collected in the city to licensed disposal areas authorized to operate pursuant to Act 451. 
(3)  Compliance with applicable laws. A waste hauler shall comply with all federal and state laws, local ordinances and related rules and regulations in the collection, transportation and delivery of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings. 
(4)  Hazardous waste. A waste hauler shall not knowingly collect and deliver hazardous waste to a licensed disposal area. 
(5)  Solid waste transporting units and collection vehicles. All solid waste transporting units and collection vehicles shall: 
a.  Be kept clean and free from odors. 
b.  Bear on each side in letters at least three inches high the name of the waste hauler and the license decal issued by the building department. 
c.  Comply with all requirements of Act 451 related to solid waste transporting units. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-71. - Suspension. 
(a)  Any license issued under this division may be suspended by the mayor for a period not to exceed 90 days upon any violation of a federal or state law, local ordinance or related rules and regulations in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Written notice of such suspension shall be served upon the licensee by delivering the notice to the licensee or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the address shown on the application. Such notice shall be deemed served upon the licensee upon deposit in the United States mail. 
(2)  The notice shall inform the licensee of the reason for such suspension, the duration of the suspension, the beginning date of such suspension, and the right to appeal under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Suspension of a license shall be effective ten days after the written notice is served upon the licensee and may be appealed by the licensee to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-72. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued under this division may be revoked by the mayor upon any violation of a federal or state law, local ordinance or related rules and regulations in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Written notice of such revocation shall be served upon the licensee by delivery to the licensee or by depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the address shown on the application. Such notice shall be deemed served upon the licensee upon deposit in the United States mail. 
(2)  The notice shall inform the licensee of the reasons for such revocation, the beginning date of the revocation, and the right to appeal under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Such revocation shall be effective ten days after written notice is delivered to the licensee and may be appealed by the licensee to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-73. - Appeal to city council. 
Within ten days of service of a written notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this division, a licensee may appeal such action to the city council in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The appeal shall be initiated by filing a written objection to the action denying, suspending or revoking a license with the city clerk. The written objection shall state what action is being appealed and shall have attached a copy of the written notice of the action complained of and shall specifically state the reasons for believing the action was erroneous. An appeal of any suspension or revocation shall automatically stay such suspension or revocation pending the final decision of the city council. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an appeal, the city clerk shall schedule such appeal for a hearing before the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting and inform the person who initiated the appeal of the time and place of such meeting and of the opportunity to appear and be heard by the city council at such meeting. 
(3)  The city council may set aside the action appealed from and grant a license to an applicant, or reinstate a license which has been suspended or revoked, as the facts may warrant based upon the provisions of this division or other conditions as the city council may deem advisable. The decision of the city council shall be made within ten days of the date of the meeting, and the clerk shall notify the person who initiated the appeal of such decision in writing at such person's last known address. A decision by the city council shall be a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-74. - Appeal from final decision of city council. 
Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the city council may appeal the decision to the Oakland County Circuit Court. The time and procedure for filing such appeal shall be in accordance with the Michigan Court Rules. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-75. - Suspension and revocation by city council. 
The city council may, in its discretion, upon a hearing, suspend or revoke a license issued under this division if the city council determines the health, safety and welfare of the city would be best served by such suspension or revocation. Written notice of such proposed suspension or revocation and notice of the hearing shall be served upon the licensee in the manner provided in this division for a suspension or revocation of a license by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Secs. 86-76—86-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SINGLE HAULER WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL PROGRAM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
 
Sec. 86-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The terms, words and phrases as used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 86-1. 
Designated waste hauler means any person awarded a contract by the city to engage in the business of collecting solid waste, recyclable materials and yard clippings from single-family generation sites within the city and hauling, transporting or disposing of such materials. 
Single-family generation site means a single-family dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means, excluding dwelling units in mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-102. - Collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials. 
Commencing on March 30, 2009, collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials from single-family generation sites shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No person shall dispose of any solid waste or recyclable materials (excluding yard clippings removed by landscapers in accordance with section 86-6(3)(b)) generated from single-family generation sites within the city other than by means of the designated waste hauler contracted by the city for such purpose. 
(2)  The designated waste hauler shall deliver solid waste to a facility authorized under Act 451 for disposal of such materials. 
(3)  No person except the designated waste hauler shall engage in the business of collection, transporting, delivery or disposal of solid waste or recyclable materials generated by single-family generation sites within the city. 
(4)  The designated waste hauler shall comply with Act 451 and all applicable federal, state and county laws, local ordinances, and rules and regulations in the collection, transportation and delivery of solid waste and recyclable materials. 
(5)  No person shall knowingly place hazardous waste at curbside or other designated locations for collection, and the designated waste hauler shall not knowingly collect or deliver hazardous waste to a processing or disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-103. - Rates, charges and payments for solid waste and recycling collection and disposal service. 
The designated waste hauler shall charge fees for collection and disposal of waste and shall bill for such services in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The designated waste hauler shall charge fees for collection and disposal of waste placed for collection as set forth in the contract between the designated waste hauler and the city. 
(2)  The designated waste hauler shall send a quarterly invoice, in advance, to each single-family generation site for which services are provided in the city. Such invoice shall represent charges for services to be rendered in the following quarter. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specified by the city, the invoice shall be delivered by regular mail at least two weeks prior to the beginning of the quarter for which charges are imposed. 
(4)  If the invoice is not paid within 90 days after the due date, it shall be considered delinquent and a penalty set by the city council shall be added to the amount due. The penalty assessed shall be retained by the city and not paid to the designated waste hauler. 
(5)  The charges for collection and disposal fees relating to services to single-family generation sites by the designated waste hauler shall constitute a lien on the single-family generation site for which the services have been provided. Any charges and penalties delinquent for three months or more shall be certified annually by the city official in charge of collection to the tax assessing officer of the city to be entered upon the next tax roll against the single-family generation site for which the services have been rendered, and the charges and penalties shall be collected as part of the general city taxes against such single-family generation site and shall accrue further interest and penalties and shall be collected in the same manner as provided for delinquent real property taxes in the city. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 86-104. - Violations. 
(a)  Enforcement. Articles II and III shall be enforceable by the Oakland County Sheriff's Department, the city building department and enforcement officers designated by the mayor. 
(b)  Nuisance and abatement. Any disposal or collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard clippings from a single-family generation site in the city in violation of any section of articles II or III is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the city council may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in law or equity to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any such nuisance by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Penalties. Penalties for violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family generation site. All violations of this article by owners or occupants of single-family generation sites pertaining to solid waste and yard clippings collected or generated on the property of the single-family residence shall be municipal civil infractions and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00. 
(2)  Waste haulers. Penalties for violations by waste haulers shall be municipal civil infractions as follows: 
a.  All violations of this article by waste haulers shall be subject to sanctions as provided in subsection 1-16(c). 
b.  Repeated violations of this article by a waste hauling unit shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a waste hauling unit license. 
(3)  Each day separate offense. Every day that a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Secs. 86-105—86-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - COMPOSTING FACILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aerobic composting means the process of biologically decomposing organic matter in an environment with oxygen present. 
Anaerobic composting means the process of biologically decomposing organic matter in an environment with little or no oxygen present. 
Carbonaceous compostable material means the portion of the compostable material stream consisting primarily of carbon content, including leaves, straw, hay, wood chips, sawdust, cornstalks, or other typically brown material. 
Compostable material means leaves, grass clippings, brush, wood or wood byproducts, Christmas trees or wreaths, lumber and wood pallets that are ground or shredded, vegetable prunings, garden waste, yard waste, and any other material intended to be processed at a composting facility. 
Composting means the process by which biological decomposition of organic solid matter is carried out under controlled aerobic conditions and which stabilizes the organic fraction into a material that can easily and safely be stored, handled, and used in an environmentally acceptable manner. 
Composting facility means a publicly or privately owned site where compostable materials are processed, applying composting technology, over an area exceeding one-quarter acre. Processing may include physical turning, windrowing, aeration, or other mechanical handling of organic matter. For purposes of this article, the term "composting facility" does not include premises where compostable materials naturally grown on the same premises are composted. 
Curing means the last stage of composting that occurs after much of the readily metabolized material has decomposed. It provides for additional stabilization and pathogen destruction via soil-dwelling microorganisms. 
Curing area means an area where organic material that has undergone the rapid initial stage of composting is further stabilized into a humuslike material, typically by allowing piled material to simply remain untouched for a month or more. 
Leafate means the liquid that has come in contact with or percolated through yard clippings and thereby has extracted dissolved and suspended material. 
Nitrogenous yard wastes means the portion of the yard waste stream consisting primarily of nitrogen content, including grass clippings or other typically green material. 
Operator means the person responsible for the operation of a composting facility. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-302. - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds that, although there is a public need for the establishment and operation of composting facilities to reduce dependence on landfills, the operation of composting facilities, if not properly controlled or regulated, can cause significant odor, noise, insect, rodent, debris, visual and other nuisances which may adversely affect the use and enjoyment of nearby properties and the health, welfare, and safety of city residents. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to require a license, to establish requirements for a license, and to regulate composting facilities in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.01)  
Sec. 86-303. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all composting facilities located in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.03)  
Sec. 86-304. - Person responsible for compliance. 
The operator of a composting facility and the owner of the site shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this article and all other applicable local, state and federal laws, provisions, and regulations and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.07)  
Sec. 86-305. - Violations. 
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or when a violation of this article occurs or continues. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.08)  
Secs. 86-306—86-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 86-331. - Required. 
No person shall operate a composting facility in the city except under and in accordance with an annual license issued by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.04.01)  
Sec. 86-332. - Application. 
The operator of a composting facility shall submit to the city planning department an application for a license containing the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of any party having a property interest in the composting facility site, identifying the party's legal interest. Proof of such legal interest shall be provided. 
(2)  A detailed and full legal description of the property where the facility is to be operated. 
(3)  A topographical survey map at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing existing and proposed grades on a two-foot contour interval. Such map shall be prepared and sealed by a civil engineer or land surveyor, registered as such by the state. 
(4)  A site plan prepared in conformance with the applicable requirements of section 138-141, which requirements are incorporated in this article by reference. The site plan shall depict all areas where composting activities will be conducted and all improvements to be made. 
(5)  A detailed statement as to what procedures will be followed and what methods and equipment will be used to ensure that: 
a.  There will be a sufficient supply of oxygen to keep the process aerobic. 
b.  Sufficient airspace and permeability will be provided so as to have an adequate supply of oxygen available to the composted materials. 
c.  The bacteriological action will not exceed 70 degrees Celsius. 
d.  Sufficient air movement to carry away excess moisture will be provided. 
e.  There will be adequate turning of the materials being composted. 
(6)  Details of any similar operations carried on by the operator, and the operator's training and experience in composting. 
(7)  Source of compostable materials. 
(8)  Estimated types and quantities of materials to be delivered to the composting facility in weight and volume, including documentation that carbonaceous compostable material will be available on site prior to the introduction of nitrogenous yard wastes. 
(9)  The type and daily number of vehicles to be used in the proposed operations quantified by season. 
(10)  Identification of access roads, on-site roads, grades for proper drainage and any special draining devices, fencing, any existing or proposed structures on site, and any existing and proposed utilities. 
(11)  An environmental impact statement and a statement concerning trees and/or other vegetation as required by section 138-142. 
(12)  A statement which specifies in detail the proposed use of the land after the composting operation is completed. 
(13)  If the compostable materials are to be delivered to the facility in bags, a statement describing the type of bag that will be used and when the compostable materials will be removed from the bags. 
(14)  A statement as to what will be done with the finished compost once composting has been completed. 
(15)  Such other pertinent information as the city council may require. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.04.02)  
Sec. 86-333. - Specific site plan improvements required. 
In addition to all other applicable requirements for a site plan, as specified in this division and in section 138-141, a site plan for a composting facility shall conform to and shall include and depict the following: 
(1)  On-site roads. All on-site roads shall be constructed with concrete or asphalt paving and shall be designed and constructed so that traffic will flow smoothly and will not be interrupted by inclement weather. 
(2)  Setbacks. Active composting operations and storage of compostable materials shall not take place closer than 150 feet from any boundary of the composting facility site. The setback from active composting operations shall be increased to 500 feet from the boundary of any land where a residential use takes place. 
(3)  Operations area. Areas of the composting facility used for composting operations shall meet or exceed the minimum ratio of one acre per every 3,500 cubic yards of compostable material. In addition, adequate space, which shall meet or exceed the minimum ratio of one acre for every four acres used for composting operations, shall be required for equipment storage and for staging, curing, and storage areas. 
(4)  Topography. The composting facility site shall be graded to provide an adequate drainage pattern for runoff, as well as protection to adjoining properties from stormwater runoff. No composting operations or storage of compostable material shall take place on hills or inclined surfaces or on surfaces that do not provide sufficient stability, in all weather, for heavy equipment used in the composting operation. 
(5)  Fence and visual screening. The composting facility shall be fenced around the perimeter with a cyclone fence of at least six feet in height. A berm or landscaping shall also be installed around the perimeter to shield the composting facility and operation from the view of any public right-of-way or nearby residential land uses. 
(6)  Compost pad. Composting operations and storage of compostable materials shall take place on a prepared pad. The surface of the pad shall be capable of withstanding wear and tear from normal operations and shall allow for year round operations. Unless soils are sufficiently permeable to not allow standing water, the pad shall be graded at a minimum of 1½ percent slope to minimize ponding of water where composting material is received, processed, composted, cured or stored. 
(7)  Access. Access to a composting facility shall be gained only from a major thoroughfare with a planned right-of-way of at least 120 feet. The city council may waive this requirement if access is onto a paved road and the use of that road will not unreasonably interfere in the use of nearby properties. 
(8)  Stormwater runoff. All stormwater runoff generated during mixing or composting which is collected shall be reintroduced into the compost pile, directed to a sanitary sewer if permitted, or transported by a liquid industrial waste hauler who is properly licensed under the Michigan Liquid Waste Haulers Act. Such leafate shall be considered to be a high-strength biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) solution, subject to site-specific testing which shall not exceed the allowable limits for stormwater discharge as contained in federal and state law if discharged into a surface water body. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.04.03)  
Sec. 86-334. - Fees. 
(a)  Application fee. At the time of filing the application for the license required by this division, a nonrefundable application fee as provided in section 54-533 shall be paid for the processing of the application by the city. 
(b)  Annual license fee. Before the issuance of a license for any annual renewal, the composting facility operator shall pay an annual license fee to the city as provided in section 54-533. 
(c)  Other fees. Fees for public hearings, plan review, or any necessary land use approval shall be paid in the amounts established for such services in other applicable sections of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.04.04; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.22), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 86-335. - Procedure and decision on application. 
(a)  Hearing and referral by planning commission. Before the granting of a license by the city council for any composting facility or for any additional area of a facility not previously under a license, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedure and requirements of subsection 138-1306(b) and shall make findings and recommendations as to whether the granting of the license, as proposed, would: 
(1)  Detrimentally affect the use, enjoyment or value of adjoining properties; and 
(2)  Be consistent with the existing land uses and character and expected development of the surrounding area. 
(b)  Basis for issuance of license. The city council shall authorize the issuance of a license only if it finds that the granting of the license will: 
(1)  Not create a nuisance to nearby residents and property owners, which nuisance shall be defined as any activity or composting that creates odors or insect, dust, noise or other annoyance which either constantly or occasionally unreasonably interferes in the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
(2)  Not be injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare of the city and its residents. 
(3)  Be in compliance with all the requirements and standards of this article and other applicable provisions, standards, and regulations of this Code. 
(4)  Not have a significant adverse impact on the existing character or expected future development of the surrounding neighborhood, nor unreasonably reduce the value of nearby property. 
(c)  Duration, expiration and renewal. After referral to the planning commission and receipt of its recommendation and after considering all the available facts and circumstances, the city council may issue a license for a period of up to one year. The license shall expire on March 15 of each year and may be renewed annually by the city council without further public hearing. 
(d)  Conditions attached by council. Conditions may be attached by the council as follows: 
(1)  Grant of authority. The city council may attach such conditions to the granting of the license under this section that the city council deems necessary to ensure that the intent and purpose of this article will in all respects be observed. 
(2)  Violation. Any violation of a condition attached to the license shall be construed as a violation of this article and shall give rise to the penalties provided in this article and, further, shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(e)  Approval of changes in operation. The operator shall submit a written request to the city council for approval of changes to the original plans, specifications, reports and methods of operation submitted with a license application. No such change shall be implemented until city council approval has been obtained. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.04.05)  
Sec. 86-336. - Performance guarantee. 
(a)  Required. The operator of a compost facility shall post a cash deposit, bank letter of credit, surety bond or other security satisfactory to the city council naming the city as the beneficiary or obligee thereof in an amount of $5,000.00 per acre of the area approved for composting determined by the city council to be reasonably necessary to guarantee compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Conditions. Conditions of the performance guarantee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Guarantee of compliance. The performance guarantee shall guarantee compliance with this article and any license conditions and, further, that the operation will be carried out according to the approved plans and specifications. 
(2)  Guarantee of work performance. The performance guarantee shall further guarantee the performance of whatever work needs to be done to prevent contamination of the groundwater or surface water and/or environment during operations and for five years after the completion of the composting operation. 
(3)  Forfeiture of performance guarantee. Upon the neglect or failure of the operator to perform the obligations guaranteed by the performance guarantee, the city may use the proceeds to the extent necessary to bring the facility into compliance with this article. 
(c)  Noncompliance enforcement. By filing an application, the owner and operator shall be deemed to have granted permission to the city and its agents and contractors to enter the property and to use the performance guarantee proceeds. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.05)  
Sec. 86-337. - Revocation for violation. 
(a)  Notice of violation. The mayor may, in his discretion, notify the owner and operator in writing of any violation of the license and/or this article. 
(b)  Failure to abate violation. Upon failure of the owner or operator, after the mailing or delivery of the notice, to abate the violation within a reasonable time as determined by the mayor, considering the nature of the violation and attendant circumstances, the composting facility may be summarily closed by the mayor and the license suspended upon the mayor determining the violation and circumstances justify such action, pending a hearing, considering nuisances created and the effect on nearby residents and properties. As an alternative or if the violation does not justify a summary closure of the site, the mayor may give notice of a hearing before the city council. After the hearing, the city council may abate any nuisance or violation by a summary closure or by suspending or revoking the license. 
(c)  Hearing request. Any owner or operator aggrieved by any notice sent by the mayor pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the city council. The request shall be made in writing and delivered to the city clerk. The request must set forth why the composting facility should not be summarily closed and the license not suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Action pending hearing. In any case, if the city council determines the operation of the composting facility is in violation of this article and such violation is detrimental to the health, welfare, or safety of the city or its residents, the city council may summarily suspend the license, but shall grant a hearing upon request as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Hearing. If a request for a hearing is received, the city council shall hold a hearing within seven days and may after the hearing, if it determines the nuisance created or the violation unreasonably interferes with the use and comfortable enjoyment of nearby properties, institute or continue a license suspension, revoke the license, or take such other action as appears appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.04.06)  
Secs. 86-338—86-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 86-366. - Compliance. 
(a)  Generally. The operation of any composting facility shall at all times comply with this division. 
(b)  Site plan and license. The operator of a composting facility shall be responsible for and shall conduct the composting operation and storage of compostable material in full compliance with the approved site plan, license approval, and any conditions attached to the license. 
(c)  State and federal standards. Composting facility operations shall be conducted in accordance with current federal and state environmental protection agency (EPA) standards and criteria, including but not limited to air and water quality standards. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-15.06.01, 4-15.06.10)  
Sec. 86-367. - Fires. 
No fires or open burning shall be permitted at a composting facility, and all reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent combustion from taking place. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.02)  
Sec. 86-368. - Debris on public roads. 
(a)  Prevention. The operator of the composting facility shall take whatever steps are necessary to prevent the tracking onto any public road from the site of any mud, dirt, clay, refuse, etc. 
(b)  Obligation to clean. If mud, dirt, clay, refuse, etc., is carried or tracked onto a public road from the composting facility, the operator shall promptly clean the road, weather conditions permitting. In any case, the operator shall not leave any such mud, dirt, etc., on a public road beyond the end of any working day. 
(c)  Notice from city. If notified during a working day by the city of a condition which requires cleaning, the matter shall be taken care of within one hour, weather permitting. 
(d)  Violations. If a nuisance or hazardous condition is left after a working day or not cleaned up within one hour after receiving a request from the city, and weather does not prevent the cleanup, the city may issue a citation for the violation of this section due to the allowance of the condition to remain on the public road and charge the operator with the cost thereof, which may be collected in any court having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.03)  
Sec. 86-369. - Drainage. 
Natural drainage at a compost facility shall not be blocked, diverted, or altered in such a manner as to cause the natural water to flow onto adjacent property or to flow in a different course or rate of flow upon leaving the composting facility, unless an application is made and a land improvement permit is issued by the city pursuant to plans which provide for drainage flow that will not be detrimental to surrounding properties. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.04)  
Sec. 86-370. - Drifting and blowing material. 
The drifting or airborne transmission beyond the property line of the compost facility of dust, particles, or debris from any stockpile, working areas, or storage areas shall be unlawful and shall be summarily abated. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.05)  
Sec. 86-371. - Lights. 
Any exterior lighting of the compost facility shall be directed or shielded so that it will not shine through any bedroom window and shall be arranged as far as practical to direct light away from any residential use. No more than one footcandle of light shall cross a lot line five feet above the ground in a residential district. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.06)  
Sec. 86-372. - Air pollution; odors. 
No composting facility shall cause the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of air contaminants in quantities or characteristics and under conditions and circumstances and of duration that are or can become injurious to human health or welfare, to animal life, to plant life or to property, or that unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.07)  
Sec. 86-373. - Noise. 
(a)  The level of noise at any compost facility shall not exceed the following decibel levels at the common property line when adjacent to the following types of uses: 
Noise Level 
(db) 	  Adjacent Use 
65 	Residential 
75 	Commercial 
75 	Industrial and other 
 
(b)  The noise level shall be measured using a weighted decibel measurement (referenced to 20 micropascals) and with a type of audio output meter approved by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. Additionally, noises that may be objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.08)  
Sec. 86-374. - Vibration. 
All machinery and equipment at a compost facility shall be so mounted and operated as to prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of 0.003 of one inch measured at any property line of its source. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.09)  
Sec. 86-375. - Compostable material height. 
No compostable material at a compost facility shall be placed, stored or maintained in windrows, piles, or sheets higher than seven feet. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.11)  
Sec. 86-376. - Security. 
Fencing around the perimeter of the compost facility and any visual barrier shall be maintained as originally approved, and gates shall be kept locked at all times when the facility is closed in order to prevent trespassing and unauthorized dumping. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.12)  
Sec. 86-377. - Hours of operation. 
Composting facility operations shall be restricted to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No composting operations shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays, except as necessary to remedy odor or other nuisances. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.13)  
Sec. 86-378. - Standing water. 
Standing water shall not be allowed to collect around compost windrows of a compost facility. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.14)  
Sec. 86-379. - Aerobic composting. 
A composting facility shall be designed and operated for aerobic composting only and as provided for in the plan required by section 86-332. Anaerobic composting shall not be permitted, and composting facilities shall be operated in a manner that prevents anaerobic composting from occurring. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.15)  
Sec. 86-380. - Confinement of bagged material. 
Any area of the compost facility used for unloading bagged compostable material shall be confined with a barrier at least 12 feet high in order to prevent bagging or other debris from leaving the unloading area. Any area where compostable material is removed from bags or shredded while in bags shall be confined by a 12-foot-high barrier. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.16)  
Sec. 86-381. - Insect control. 
Appropriate precautionary and control measures shall be taken at all times in the compost facility so that insects and flies caused by or related to the composting operation or compostable materials shall not leave the composting facility. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.17)  
Sec. 86-382. - Contamination. 
Leachate and leafate shall be controlled so that it does not leave the composting facility, and the contamination of soils and surface waters and groundwaters due to toxic substances in compostable material, degradation of toxic substances in compostable material during composting, leaching of toxic substances during and after the composting process, or concentrations of toxic constituents in finished compost shall be monitored and prevented. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.06.18)  
Chapter 90. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Special assessment bonds, § 5.2; general powers relative to special assessments, § 6.6 et seq. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance relating to any specific local improvement saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(2); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power regarding special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5, MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084; special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 90-1—90-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— General powers relative to special assessments, § 6.6 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means an owner and spouse, if any, who file an application for deferral under this article. 
Assessor means the director of the department of assessing. 
Boulevard lighting system means any design or method of providing light to a street; provided, however, that such system shall be provided only by Detroit Edison. 
City engineer means the director of the department of engineering. 
Continuing assessment means an assessment made for the cost of operating and maintaining a boulevard lighting system which is to be paid annually on an ongoing basis so long as such system is maintained. 
Cost, when referring to the cost of any improvement, includes the cost of surveys, plans, right-of-way, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, legal fees, administrative expense, condemnation and all other costs incidental to condemnation; all other costs incidental to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof; and the cost of the installation, operation and maintenance of any boulevard lighting system by Detroit Edison, whether that service is provided directly by Detroit Edison, its franchisee, or under contract to the city. If service is rendered by the city, costs may include the fair and reasonable cost of rendering the service. 
Cost formula means, when referring to an assessment for boulevard lighting where continuing assessments are made for the cost of operating and maintaining such system, the annual amount charged to the city by an investor-owned or public utility or by a private contractor for such operation and maintenance plus an annual percentage established by the council in the resolution of necessity for the cost to the city of administering such boulevard lighting system. 
Homestead means a dwelling owned and occupied as a home by the owner thereof, including all contiguous unoccupied real property owned by the person. 
Household means a housing unit consisting of related persons residing in a homestead who are aged 18 or older and who are not claimed as dependents on the owner's state or federal income tax returns. 
Household income means all income received by all members of a household in a tax year while members of a household. If any household member has become unemployed or has resigned from employment within the six-month period prior to the application date, the household income shall be computed at the rate of pay immediately prior to the termination or resignation from employment with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The applicant has permanently retired. 
(2)  The applicant has received a permanent medical leave due to total disability. 
Improvement means a public improvement of such a nature as to benefit especially any real property, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land in proportion to the benefit derived therefrom. 
Income means the sum of federal adjusted gross income as defined in 26 USC 1 et seq. of the Internal Revenue Code, plus all income specifically excluded or exempt from the computations of the federal adjusted gross income. The term does not include the following: 
(1)  The first $300.00 of gifts in cash or kind from nongovernmental sources or the first $300.00 received from awards, prizes, lottery, bingo, or other gambling winnings. 
(2)  Surplus foods; relief in kind supplied by a governmental agency; payments or credits under this article; any governmental grant which has to be used by the claimant for rehabilitation of the homestead; amounts deducted from monthly social security or railroad retirement benefits for Medicare premiums; or contributions by an employer to life, accident, or health insurance plans. 
(3)  Energy assistance grants and energy assistance tax credits. 
Net worth means the total value of assets owned less total liabilities. The term "net worth" does not include the value of the homestead and the value of any one automobile registered in the name of the owner of the homestead. 
Owner means a person who holds solely or jointly a fee interest in a homestead or who is purchasing a homestead under a mortgage or land contract. 
Street means a public avenue, street, highway, road, path, boulevard, or alley or other access used for travel by the public. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-27. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted to comply with section 6.8 of the Charter to provide by ordinance for a complete special assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and specifications, estimates of cost, notice and hearings, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors, contested assessments, financing of improvements made by special assessment, collection of special assessments and all other matters concerning such improvements. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.01)  
Sec. 90-28. - Council authority. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to determine that the whole or any part of the cost of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessments upon the property especially benefitted, consistent with the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.03)  
Sec. 90-29. - Violations. 
Violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.19)  
Sec. 90-30. - Assessing single lots. 
(a)  Billing of expense. Whenever any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against such premises and the owner thereof under the Charter or any city ordinance or law of the state and is not of that class required to be prorated among several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material or service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the city treasurer who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. 
(b)  Annual preparation of roll. The mayor shall annually, on or before August 15 or at such other times as he may deem advisable, direct the city assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges that shall not have been paid. The roll shall be filed with the city clerk who shall present the roll to the council. 
(c)  Exemptions. The sections of this article with reference to special assessments generally and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvements shall not apply to assessments contemplated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Payment. Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll authorized by this section, the assessment shall be charged and added to the tax roll and thereafter be paid as otherwise provided for payment of assessments as provided in subsection 90-114(d). 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.17)  
Sec. 90-31. - Hazards and nuisances. 
(a)  Notice to remove. Whenever any lot, building, or structure within the city, because of the accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or dilapidation or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the city council, a public hazard or nuisance that is dangerous to the health or safety of the city inhabitants or those of them residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the council may, after investigation, give notice to the owner of the land upon which such hazard or nuisance exists or the owner of the building or structure itself specifying the nature of the hazard or nuisance and requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down, or remove the hazard or nuisance promptly and within a time to be specified by the council, which shall be commensurate with the nature of the hazard or nuisance. 
(b)  Abatement by city. If, at the expiration of the time limit on the notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof or when the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known, the council may order such a hazard or nuisance abated by the proper city department or agency which is qualified to do the work required and the costs of such abatement assessed according to section 90-30 against the lot, premises or description of real property upon which the hazard or nuisance was located. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.16) 
Charter reference— Nuisances and hazards, § 6.3.  
Secs. 90-32—90-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 90-61. - Initiation of improvement. 
(a)  Generally. Proceedings for the making of public improvements within the city may be commenced by resolution of the city council, on its own initiative. 
(b)  Request and/or receipt of petitions. The council, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive a petition voluntarily presented. 
(c)  Petitions advisory. The council shall give careful consideration and review to any petition received, but any petition shall be advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional. Petitions shall not be mandatory upon the council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.04)  
Sec. 90-62. - Petitions. 
(a)  Form and content. All petitions made pursuant to this division shall be circulated and signed on blank forms furnished by the city clerk. Such petitions shall contain, in addition to the signature of the owners, a brief description of the property owned by the respective signers thereof. 
(b)  Affidavit of ownership. Such petitions shall be verified by the affidavit of one or more of the owners or by some person with knowledge that the signers are such owners and that such signatures are genuine. 
(c)  Filing. Petitions shall be addressed to the council and filed with the city clerk. 
(d)  Referral to assessor. All petitions shall be referred by the city clerk to the assessor. The city assessor shall check the petitions to determine whether they conform to the requirements of this section and shall report the findings to the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.05)  
Sec. 90-63. - City engineer's report. 
(a)  Survey. Before the city council shall decide on making any local or public improvement, it shall be referred by resolution to the city engineer directing the preparation of a report which shall include necessary plans, specifications and detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the proposed assessment district, in the case of a continuing assessment for boulevard lighting, the estimated annual cost of the operation and maintenance of the improvement, and such other pertinent information as will permit the council to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or proportion, if any, thereof should be paid by the city at large. 
(b)  Costs of condemned property. Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation or otherwise, for the purpose of any public improvement, the cost thereof and of the proceedings required to acquire such property may be added to the cost of such public improvement. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.06)  
Sec. 90-64. - Tentative determination. 
(a)  Council resolution to proceed. After the filing of the city engineer's report required by section 90-63 and prior to the holding of the public hearing as required by section 90-65, the council may, by resolution, tentatively determine to proceed with the improvement, setting forth the nature thereof, and causing the information contained in the report of the city engineer to be filed in the office of the clerk for public examination. 
(b)  Notice of public hearing. The resolution provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the advisability of proceeding to establish a special assessment district for the making of such public improvement, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been given as provided in sections 90-73 and 90-74. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-12.07.01, 6-12.07.02)  
Sec. 90-65. - Hearing on necessity. 
The hearing required by section 90-64 may be held at any regular or special meeting of the council. At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.07.03)  
Sec. 90-66. - Final determination. 
(a)  Deferral before proceeding. No sooner than the time period for filing objections following the hearing pursuant to section 90-65, the city council may determine to proceed or to modify the scope of the public improvement, if necessary, in such a manner as it shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole, provided that if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, another hearing shall be held pursuant to notice as prescribed in sections 90-73 and 90-74. 
(b)  Ending procedure. A decision by the council to end the procedure may be made immediately following the public hearing, without waiting the time period for filing objections. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-12.08.01—6-12.08.03)  
Sec. 90-67. - Resolution to proceed. 
If the determination of the council shall be to proceed with the public improvement, a resolution shall be passed as follows: 
(1)  Determining the necessity of the improvement. If the improvement is the installation of boulevard lighting, the council shall also determine the necessity of operation and maintenance of the improvement. 
(2)  Approving the necessary plans, specifications and detailed estimates of cost. If the improvement is the installation of boulevard lighting, the council shall also approve the projected cost formula to be utilized in computing continuing assessments for operation and maintenance of the improvement. 
(3)  Prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted, determination of benefits received by affected properties and what part or proportion, if any, shall be paid by the city at large. 
(4)  Delineating the limits of the special assessment district. 
(5)  Determining the method to be used to make the assessment. 
(6)  Directing the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination and report the roll for confirmation. The assessor shall file the roll with the city clerk for presentation to the council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.08.04)  
Sec. 90-68. - Modification of resolution. 
The council may modify the resolution to proceed adopted pursuant to section 90-67 at any time. However, if any modification increases the cost or scope of the improvement or adds to the assessment district, a new hearing shall be held and notice given as prescribed in sections 90-64, 90-65, 90-73 and 90-74. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.08.05)  
Sec. 90-69. - Objections to improvement. 
(a)  Notice of proposed special assessment. After the public hearing on necessity has been held by the city council pursuant to section 90-65, the city clerk shall send notice of the proposed special assessment to all property owners within the proposed special assessment district, advising them of such proposed special assessment and of the procedure by which objections to such special assessment may be filed as provided in this section. 
(b)  Written petitions submitted. If, after the public hearing has been held by the city council pursuant to section 90-65, there is a desire by the property owners within the limits of the proposed special assessment district to terminate the project, written petitions objecting to the proposed improvements shall be available from the city clerk's office commencing on the 14th day after the public hearing. Such petitions shall be circulated for a period not to exceed 14 days, which period shall commence on the 14th day after the public hearing. The signed petitions shall be delivered to the city clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the 28th day, or the next city business day if the offices are closed on the 28th day, immediately following the public hearing. 
(c)  Discontinuation of proceedings. The improvement shall not be made by proceedings authorized by this article if, within the time period for filing objections as provided for in this section, the owners of more than 50 percent of the following shall object in writing to the proposed improvement: 
(1)  The total land area; 
(2)  Front footage; or 
(3)  Number or parcels or units to be assessed, as determined by the council in a resolution adopted following the public hearing held pursuant to section 90-65. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.09; Ord. No. 580, § 1, 9-30-2013 )  
Sec. 90-70. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
(a)  Authorized by council. No substantial deviation from original plans or specifications as adopted under this article shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the city without authority of the city council by resolution. 
(b)  Certification of resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the city clerk and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in the clerk's office. 
(c)  Distribution of information. The council may, in its discretion, distribute information concerning any change to the property owners within the district. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.10)  
Sec. 90-71. - Special assessment roll generally. 
(a)  Limitations on preliminary expenses. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary plans, specifications and estimates of costs, for any public improvement to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment shall be made before the confirmation of the special assessment roll for such improvement. 
(b)  Assessment by benefit established. The city assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefitted by the proposed improvement and shall assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount benefitted thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of the city engineer as approved by the council. 
(c)  Filing with city clerk. When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, it shall be certified by the assessor and filed with the city clerk for presentation to the council for review and confirmation by it. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-12.11.01—6-12.11.03)  
Sec. 90-72. - Acceptance of special assessment roll by council. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the assessment roll as provided in section 90-71, the council by resolution shall accept the roll and order it filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination, 
(b)  The council shall fix the time and place at which the council will meet to review such special assessment roll and to give interested persons an opportunity to be heard, which meeting shall not be less than ten days after notice thereof has been given as provided in sections 90-73 and 90-74. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-12.11.04, 6-12.11.05)  
Sec. 90-73. - Notice by publication. 
Under this article, notice shall be published in a newspaper published or circulated in the city not less than ten days before the meeting. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.11.05)  
Sec. 90-74. - Mailing of notice of hearings. 
(a)  Notice of hearings and special assessment proceedings under this division shall also be given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records by mailing by first class mail addressed to that owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of such hearing. For purposes of this section, the term "last local tax assessment records" means the last assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes which has been reviewed by the local board of review, as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the names or the addresses of such owners or parties listed on that roll. 
(b)  The notice of hearing shall include a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing in the special assessment proceedings is required in order to appeal the amount of the special assessment to the state tax tribunal and shall include a statement that the owner or any person having an interest in the real property may file a written appeal of the special assessment with the state tax tribunal within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll if that special assessment was protested at the hearing held for the purpose of confirming the roll. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.11.05) 
State Law reference— Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741, MSA 5.3534(1); statement of right to file written appeal, MCL 211.746, MSA 5.3534(6).  
Sec. 90-75. - Review meeting for special assessment roll. 
(a)  The meeting required by section 90-72 may be held at any regular or special meeting of the city council. The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll. 
(b)  At such meeting or a subsequent meeting, the council shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing or orally at the meeting. An owner or party in interest or his agent may appear in person at the hearing to protest the special assessment or shall be permitted to file his appearance or protest by letter, and his personal appearance shall not be required. The city council shall maintain a record of parties who appear to protest at the hearing. If a hearing is terminated or adjourned for the day before a party is provided the opportunity to be heard, a party whose appearance was recorded is considered to have protested the special assessment in person. 
(c)  The council may correct the roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. 
(d)  The council may, by resolution, annul such assessment roll, and the same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-12.11.05, 6-12.11.06.) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 211.741(3), (4), MSA 5.2524(1), (3), (4).  
Sec. 90-76. - Confirmation of special assessment roll by council. 
If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll prepared pursuant to this division and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determination and confirming such roll. The resolution shall also provide for the following: 
(1)  Directing the city assessor to spread the various sums and amounts appearing thereon on a special assessment roll. 
(2)  Placing the roll on file in the office of the city clerk and directing the city clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy within ten days. 
(3)  Providing, if the council determines construction of part or all of the improvement is not to occur soon after the confirmation of the roll and the council deems it is not necessary to collect the assessment forthwith, that the roll shall not be billed and collected for part or all of the assessment district until the time of construction of the improvement, in which case the council shall at or near the time of construction adopt a further resolution directing the billing and collection of the assessment. 
(4)  Commanding the city treasurer to bill and collect the special assessments or installments as provided in this article, to be due on the next April 1 or the April 1 following a further resolution of the council at a later date close to the time of construction of the improvement. 
(5)  Directing the city treasurer to give notice by first class mail to each property owner on the special assessment roll that the roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and when and how it is to be paid. If the payment of the assessment is to commence on the next April 1 following confirmation of the roll, only the notice provided for in section 90-109 shall be sent. When a continuing assessment for boulevard lighting has been made, the treasurer shall in such notice inform each property owner of the cost formula which shall be used in assessing the portion of the roll for the operation and maintenance of the improvement and when and how it is to be paid. 
(6)  When a continuing assessment for boulevard lighting has been made, directing the director of the department of public service, on February 1 of each year, to establish the operation and maintenance cost based on the cost formula established by the city council. 
(7)  When a continuing assessment for boulevard lighting has been made, commanding the city treasurer to collect such continuing assessment for each year such boulevard lighting is provided. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.11.07)  
Sec. 90-77. - Confirmation of special assessment roll final and conclusive. 
Whenever any special assessment roll shall be confirmed by the council as provided in this division, it shall be final and conclusive. Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 90-80 and division 5 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.11.08)  
Sec. 90-78. - Appeals or claims to test validity. 
Special assessments and all proceedings upon which such special assessments are based pursuant to this division shall be incontestable, unless an appeal or claim to test the validity thereof is instituted within 30 days after the date of confirmation of such special assessment roll. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.11.09)  
Sec. 90-79. - Failure to give or receive notice. 
Failure on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof to give or to mail any notice required to be given or mailed by this article or failure by any property owner to receive any such notice shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.11.10)  
Sec. 90-80. - Change in assessment. 
After confirmation of the special assessment roll pursuant to this division, the council, without a hearing, may reduce the amount to be assessed. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.11.11)  
Secs. 90-81—90-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 90-106. - Single payment assessments. 
(a)  Due and payable date. All special assessments made pursuant to this article shall be due and payable on April 1 following a resolution of the city council directing the billing and collection of the assessment, except for installment payment assessments, continuing assessments, and assessments authorized for billing and collection in the month of March, which shall be due the April 1 of the next year. 
(b)  Interest rate. All special assessments not paid when due shall bear interest at a rate as specified by council, not in excess of that permitted by law. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.12.01)  
Sec. 90-107. - Annual installment payment assessments. 
(a)  Number and due date. The council may provide for the payment of special assessments made pursuant to this article in annual installments in a number as determined by the council, the first of which shall become due on the next April 1 following confirmation of the roll, if the assessment is to be due forthwith, or on the next April 1 following the date of resolution of the council directing the billing and collecting of the assessment, if it is not to be collected until a later date close to the time of construction. Subsequent yearly installments shall be billed and shall become due on April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(b)  Interest rate on unpaid installments. All unpaid installments shall bear interest at a rate as specified by council, commencing on the first day of the next month following the expiration of 30 days after the date of confirmation of the roll, if the assessment is to be due forthwith, or on the first day of the next month following a resolution of the council directing the billing and collecting of the assessment, if it is not to be collected until a later date close to the time of construction. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.12.02)  
Sec. 90-108. - Continuing assessments for boulevard lighting. 
For special assessments for boulevard lighting, the city council may provide for the payment of continuing assessments for the operation and maintenance of such lighting. Such assessments shall be billed and shall become due yearly on April 1. Late fees may be imposed by the council for failure to pay such assessments when due. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.12.03)  
Sec. 90-109. - Notification of property owners. 
(a)  Generally. After the council has directed the billing and collection of the special assessment made pursuant to this article, the city treasurer shall notify by first class mail each property owner on the roll of the obligation of paying the amount assessed. 
(b)  Penalty-free single payment period. When the assessment is not payable in installments, the notice shall state the time within which the assessment may be paid without interest or fees. 
(c)  Installment due dates. When such special assessment is payable in installments, the notice shall state the due date of the first installment and the date from which interest is to be charged on future installments. 
(d)  Continuing assessment due date and penalties. When the special assessment is a continuing assessment for the operation and maintenance of boulevard lighting, the notice shall state the due date of the first payment and that interest and fees may be imposed for late payments. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.12.04)  
Sec. 90-110. - Administrative fees. 
(a)  Penalty-free period. Each special assessment made pursuant to this article and all installments, when installment payments are provided for, shall be collected by the city treasurer without an administrative fee for a period ending June 30 following the due date thereof. 
(b)  Percentage rate. On July 1 following the due date of any special assessment and following the due date of any installment and on the first day of each month thereafter, until paid, the city treasurer shall add to such assessment or installment thereof an administrative fee of one-half percent of the amount thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.12.05)  
Sec. 90-111. - Advance payment of unpaid installments. 
With the exception of continuing assessments for the operation and maintenance of boulevard lighting, at any time after the first installment of any special assessment made pursuant to this article shall become payable, any property owner may pay the installments then due together with all installments to become due in the future by payment to the city treasurer of the principal of all unpaid installments and at the same time paying all interest to date of payment which the city has obligated itself to pay upon the description of the property because of financing the improvement. However, in computing the cost of such financing, no credit shall be given for any administrative fees accrued against the premises because of the nonpayment of any installment when due. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.12.06)  
Sec. 90-112. - Lands divided after assessment. 
Under this article, if any lots or lands shall be divided in compliance with this Code after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and before the collection of all installments, the city assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts or, if a continuing assessment for the operation and maintenance of boulevard lighting, the amount of the continuing assessment upon the several parts of lots and lands so divided. The report of such apportionment, when confirmed, shall be conclusive upon all the parties, and all assessments thereafter made upon such lots or lands shall be according to such division. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.12.07)  
Sec. 90-113. - Accounts. 
(a)  Fund use restricted. Except as otherwise provided by law or the Charter, monies raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be segregated in a special fund or account and may be used only to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto or to repay any money borrowed thereafter. 
(b)  Separation of combined projects. The council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs. However, for each district, there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the project. 
(c)  Bond proceeds and accrued interest use. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Charter or this article, bond proceeds raised in connection with special assessment for any public improvement and interest accrued thereon shall be segregated in a special fund or account and may be used only to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto or to repay any money borrowed. 
(d)  Interest rebate. Unless expressly prohibited by the terms of indebtedness, the city council may return excess interest accrued on bond proceeds to residents of the special assessment district. The timing of such distributions is solely within the discretion of the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.13)  
Sec. 90-114. - Lien until paid. 
(a)  Debt to city. Upon confirmation of each special assessment roll made pursuant to this article, the special assessments, except continuing assessments, shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and shall until paid be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by the Charter for city taxes. 
(b)  Delinquent assessments. Special assessments due on April 1 that are unpaid on September 1 of any year shall be certified as delinquent to the council by the city treasurer, and the council shall place such delinquent assessments on the tax roll for that year together with all accrued administrative fees, plus a charge equal to the interest rate provided in subsection 90-106(b) on the delinquent installment as a charge for tax assignment fee. 
(c)  Collection when part of tax roll. Special assessments or installments, together with accrued administrative fees and interest which have been placed on the city tax roll, shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on such date and shall be returned to the county treasurer with such taxes if unpaid on the following March 1. 
(d)  Collection by court action. In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If, in any such action, it shall appear that because of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(e)  Character of continuing assessment liens. Continuing assessments shall become a debt to the city from the person to whom they are assessed when they become due and payable and shall until paid be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by the Charter for city taxes. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.14)  
Secs. 90-115—90-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEFERRED PAYMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq. 
 
Sec. 90-141. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  Generally. Nothing in this article shall give any person a vested right to receive a deferment or in the standards to be applied in granting such a deferment. 
(b)  Change without notice. The city council may change, modify, or delete any of the terms and conditions of this division or repeal it in its entirety at any time without notice to any applicant or recipient of a deferment. 
(c)  Granted deferment irrevocable. However, once a deferment is granted, it cannot be revoked and payment shall be required prior to the time set forth in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.14)  
Sec. 90-142. - Penalties. 
(a)  False statement on application. In addition to all other penalties imposed by this article, if any person shall make a false or misleading statement on an application for deferment under this division, the city treasurer shall notify such person that all amounts deferred are immediately due and payable. 
(b)  Failure to pay on time. Failure to pay such deferrals within 30 days of receiving notice from the city treasurer shall result in the foreclosure of the liens placed upon the subject property pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.15)  
Sec. 90-143. - Hardship deferrals. 
The city may grant deferrals of installment payments of special assessments made pursuant to this article of persons who, in the opinion of the city, because of hardship are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof, in accordance with this division. Continuing assessments shall not be deferred. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.01)  
Sec. 90-144. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. An owner may apply for deferment of any or all installment payments of special assessments made pursuant to this article that are due in a particular year on the owner's homestead. The application shall be made upon an affidavit form available from the city treasurer. 
(b)  Affidavit form. The affidavit form shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, or names if owned jointly, and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The homestead address and Sidwell Number. 
(3)  The home and business telephone number of the applicant. 
(4)  The length of ownership of the homestead by the applicant. 
(5)  Total household income for the past calendar year. The applicant shall attach copies of the most recently filed federal and state income tax forms of all members of the household, including all schedules, to the application. 
(6)  Current place of employment. If the applicant is unemployed, the date of termination or resignation from employment shall be stated. 
(7)  A statement of the net worth of all household members as of the date of the application. 
(8)  The number of dependents, as defined in 26 USC 1 et seq. of the Internal Revenue Code, residing with the applicant at the homestead. 
(9)  If the applicant is over 65 years of age or totally and permanently disabled, the applicant shall attach a copy of the notice from the city treasurer denying deferment of special assessment under Public Act No. 255 of 1976 (MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq.) to the application. 
(10)  The amount of the special assessment installment payment for which deferment is requested and the date such installment comes or was due. 
(11)  A statement located immediately above the applicant's signature: "If this deferment is authorized, the City will place a lien on your property." 
(12)  A statement that: "Any false or misleading information on this application is a misdemeanor and shall result in prosecution and the immediate repayment of any assessments illegally deferred based upon such misrepresentations." 
(13)  The signature of the applicant and notarization. If the homestead is owned jointly by husband and wife, each applicant shall sign and file the affidavit. 
(c)  Other attachments. In addition to the form provided for in subsection (b) of this section, copies of the following documents shall be attached to the application: 
(1)  Recorded deed and land contract or mortgage for the homestead property. 
(2)  The cover page of the current homeowner's or fire insurance policy covering the homestead. 
(3)  A death certificate or divorce decree, if such document affects the title to the homestead property. 
(4)  Any other document the city may require to process the application for deferment. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.02)  
Sec. 90-145. - Time of application. 
Application for deferment of an installment payment of a special assessment must be made between April 15 and May 31 of the current special assessment year for which the deferment is requested. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.03)  
Sec. 90-146. - Eligibility requirements. 
To qualify for a deferment of an installment payment as provided in this division, the applicant must meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Total household income attributed to the applicant in the past calendar year cannot exceed the level adopted by the state for its special assessment deferral program, plus an additional amount equal to the deduction allowed by state income tax law for each dependent residing with the applicant at the homestead. 
(2)  Total net worth of all members of the household cannot exceed $10,000.00. 
(3)  The homestead must be the primary residence of the applicant. 
(4)  The homestead must have been owned and occupied by the applicant for at least three years. 
(5)  The applicant cannot be eligible for deferment of special assessment under Public Act No. 255 of 1976 (MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq.). 
(6)  The amount of the installment payments to be deferred on special assessments exceeds $300.00 per year. 
(7)  Property taxes on the homestead property should not be more than two years delinquent. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.04)  
Sec. 90-147. - Resolution of maximum deferrable amount. 
(a)  Council authority. The city council shall, by resolution, designate the maximum monetary amount available annually for special assessment deferments. Such resolution shall be adopted by the council at the time of the approval of the yearly budget. 
(b)  Basis for grant. The city treasurer shall grant deferments to eligible applicants on a first come, first served basis and shall not grant any deferment in excess of such maximum deferrable amount. 
(c)  Requests in excess of maximum amount. If applications for deferments are received requesting deferments in excess of the maximum deferrable amount set by resolution of the council, the treasurer shall inform the council of the requests for deferments in excess of such amount, and the council may, by resolution, designate an additional monetary amount for such deferments. 
(d)  Added deferments for previous denials. If, prior to the designation by council of an additional monetary amount for such deferments, the city treasurer denies one or more applications for the sole reason that such applications requested deferments in excess of the maximum deferrable amount set by the council and the council subsequently designates an additional amount for deferment, the city treasurer shall reevaluate such denied applications in order of denial and shall grant such requests for deferment, but in no case shall such additional deferments exceed the additional monetary amount set by the council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.05)  
Sec. 90-148. - Determination of eligibility; decision. 
(a)  Examination of applications. Immediately upon receipt of the affidavit form made pursuant to this division, the city treasurer shall stamp the application with the time and date of receipt. The city treasurer shall promptly examine the application to determine if the applicant meets the requirements of this article and if there are sufficient funds remaining in the amount set by resolution of the council as the maximum deferrable amount for that year. 
(b)  Inspection and investigation. The city treasurer shall make an inspection of the property and property records and conduct an investigation and survey as the city treasurer deems necessary. An applicant shall not be compelled to supply information not reasonably essential to a proper determination of the eligibility of the owner and the homestead for the relief provided under this division. 
(c)  Final decision and notice by city treasurer. The city treasurer shall promptly make a decision and shall notify the applicant of this decision not later than 30 days after the receipt of the application by the city treasurer. The decision of the city treasurer shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.06)  
Sec. 90-149. - Due date. 
The payment of any installment payment on a special assessment due and payable on a homestead in a year in which the owner meets all the eligibility requirements of this division shall be deferred until the occurrence of the first of the following events: 
(1)  The homestead or any part of the homestead is conveyed or transferred to another; provided, however, that: 
a.  The original applicant for the deferral may convey or transfer an interest in the homestead to another person jointly with the applicant, provided that the original applicant continues to reside at the homestead; or 
b.  An owner who owns the property jointly with another may convey or transfer that interest to the original applicant for the deferral, provided that the original applicant to whom the property is conveyed continues to reside at the homestead; 
(2)  A land contract selling the homestead is entered into; 
(3)  The owner fails to maintain adequate fire and hazard insurance as required in this division; or 
(4)  One year after the original applicant's death, subject to further order of the probate court; however, the death of a spouse shall not terminate the deferments of special assessments for a household owned by husband and wife as long as the spouse does not remarry. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.07)  
Sec. 90-150. - Payment of deferred amounts. 
(a)  Payable at any time. Any special assessment deferred under this division may be paid at any time. 
(b)  Event terminating deferment. Upon the occurrence of any one of the events terminating a deferment of an installment payment under section 90-149, the deferred amount plus interest shall be paid in full. 
(c)  Failure to pay when deferment terminated. If the owner fails to make such payment when the deferment is terminated, the sections of this article regarding the collection of special assessments shall again apply to the deferred payment as if no deferment had been granted, and the city may enforce the lien upon the property in any manner permitted by law. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.08)  
Sec. 90-151. - Interest. 
Interest shall accrue on deferred installment payments of special assessments at the monthly rate provided for nondeferred installment payments within the same special assessment district. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.09)  
Sec. 90-152. - Yearly statement of amount due. 
The city treasurer shall send to the owner, by first class mail, a yearly statement showing the amounts of deferred assessments on the homestead and the interest outstanding thereon no later than June 1 of each calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.10)  
Sec. 90-153. - Notice of lien. 
(a)  Filing of notice. Upon grant of a deferment pursuant to this division or grant of the initial deferment if deferments are granted in subsequent years, the city shall file a notice of lien in its favor with the county register of deeds stating that there exists a lien upon such property for deferred special assessments. The lien created shall include the amount of interest provided in this division. 
(b)  Signature of owner. The owner shall sign all documents necessary for the filing of such lien as a condition to receiving a deferral. 
(c)  Subsequent deferments. If subsequent deferments are granted, the city treasurer shall ascertain that the notice of lien previously filed with the register of deeds is still in effect. If it is not, a new notice of lien shall be filed against the property with the register of deeds. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.11)  
Sec. 90-154. - Yearly grant of deferments. 
All deferments made under this division apply only to the installment payment for the year granted and for the specific special assessment district for which the deferment has been granted. An owner can apply for further deferments in any given year that installments are due if the eligibility requirements are met and this article remains in effect. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.12)  
Sec. 90-155. - Annual report of city treasurer. 
For the purposes of this division, on or before July 15 of each year, the city treasurer shall submit to the city council a report which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The number and the total monetary amount of outstanding deferments and the interest which has accrued thereon. 
(2)  The number and the total monetary amount of deferments approved for the current year. 
(3)  The number of applications and the total amount of deferments requested in the current year. 
(4)  The administrative cost to the city of the deferment program to date. 
(5)  The city treasurer's recommendation as to the advisability of continuing the deferment program. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.18.13)  
Secs. 90-156—90-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REFUNDS, REASSESSMENTS AND ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Additional assessments, refunds, § 6.7. 
 
Sec. 90-181. - Excessive assessments. 
(a)  Five percent or less. The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the public improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment. 
(b)  More than five percent. If the assessment proves larger than necessary by more than five percent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis according to assessments to the owners of the property assessed as shown by the current assessment roll of the city; provided, however, no refunds shall be made of less than $5.00. The refunds shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Credit or cash refunds. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist, and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. 
(2)  Secured indebtedness excepted. No refund may be made which contravenes the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.15.01)  
Sec. 90-182. - Additional pro rata assessments. 
Additional pro rata assessments may be made when any special assessment roll made pursuant to this article proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incident thereto, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed 25 percent of the total assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the council is held to review such additional assessment. Notices of the meeting shall be published and mailed as provided for the review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.15.02)  
Sec. 90-183. - Invalid assessments. 
(a)  City council authority to reassess. Whenever any special assessment made pursuant to this article shall, in the opinion of the city council, be invalid because of irregularity or informality in the proceedings or, if any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. 
(b)  Proceedings. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment. 
(c)  Disposition of payments. Whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property under the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment or, if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
(d)  City lien rights unimpaired. No judgment or decree nor any act of the city council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the premises or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
(Code 1976, § 6-12.15.03)  
Chapter 94 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; moving of buildings, § 18-396 et seq.; street addresses, § 18-566 et seq.; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 74; peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; utilities, ch. 102; vegetation, ch. 106; floods, ch. 114; land division, ch. 122; natural resources, ch. 126; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 94-1—94-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
 
Sec. 94-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the city department of public service. 
Director means the director of the department of public service. 
Street, highway and alley mean the entire width of any property subject to an easement for public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress to and egress from a property and is included in the definition of the term "street." The definition of the term "street" includes any major thoroughfare. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-27. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate openings, curb cuts and activities in the city streets and to otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents in regard to the construction, maintenance, use and occupancy of streets. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.01)  
Sec. 94-28. - Applicability. 
Streets regulated by this article shall include all areas defined as a street. Whenever a street is owned by or under the jurisdiction of a public agency other than the city, permits and approvals, if any, shall be obtained from such other public agency in accordance with any regulations it may have in effect. The use, repair, improvement or maintenance of streets by the city or its authorized agents or employees shall not be regulated by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.03)  
Sec. 94-29. - Authority for additional regulations. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the mayor may adopt additional rules, standards, specifications, procedures and regulations pertaining to the following: 
(1)  Improvements and construction of streets, sidewalks and pathways; 
(2)  Conditions for dedication and acceptance of streets, sidewalks and pathways; 
(3)  Openings and excavations in the streets; 
(4)  Curb cuts; and 
(5)  Street obstructions. 
(b)  Such rules, standards, specifications, procedures and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city council. No person shall fail to comply with any such rules, standards, specifications, procedures and regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.18)  
Sec. 94-30. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Excavation or damage. No person shall make any excavation in or cause any damage to any street in the city, except as specifically permitted by this article. 
(b)  Obstructions. No person shall place or maintain any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except as specifically permitted by this article, but this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of vehicles and things along streets and to and from abutting premises nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street where parking is permitted so long as there are no signs prohibiting parking. 
(c)  Suspension of objects. No person shall suspend anything above any street unless expressly authorized by this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.04)  
Sec. 94-31. - Inspection of work. 
Whenever any work is done in the streets under a permit that requires inspection by the director, the cost of the inspection, plus an administrative fee, shall be paid as provided in sections 54-591 and 54-592. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.16.01; Ord. No. 446, § 3, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 94-32. - Certifying streets. 
(a)  Application. Any person owning property adjacent to or requiring access by use of an uncertified street may apply for certification of the street by filing an application with the director and paying the fees as provided in section 54-590. 
(b)  Report of compliance with city standards. The applicant shall at his cost furnish a report including a soil analysis substantiating the compliance of the pavement section with current city standards for the existing street to be certified. 
(c)  Upgrading of improvements. If the street requires improvements, the applicant shall supply engineering plans and specifications with the report for review and approval, shall obtain necessary permits and shall upgrade the street. 
(d)  Compliance with city standards. Certification will be granted only when the street meets city standards. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.16.02; Ord. No. 446, § 3, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 94-33. - Landscaping, markers and trees. 
Except for utility companies operating under an annual systems maintenance and improvement permit, before placing landscaping or subdivision entrance markers in streets or trimming, tunnelling under or removing any trees in streets, a permit shall be obtained from the director and the applicable fees as provided in section 54-590 shall be paid. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.16.03; Ord. No. 446, § 3, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 94-34. - Permits required by article. 
(a)  Application form and fees. Whenever permits are required by this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the director upon such forms as the director shall prescribe and upon payment of the fees as required in division 2 of article XI of chapter 54. 
(b)  Basis for revocation. Such permit shall be revocable by the director for failure to comply with this article; rules, standards, specifications, procedures and regulations adopted pursuant to this article; and the lawful orders of the director. 
(c)  Time limits. A permit shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. 
(d)  Terms. Application for a permit under this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to: 
(1)  Promptly complete the work permitted; 
(2)  Observe all pertinent laws, rules, standards, specifications, procedures and regulations of the city in connection therewith; 
(3)  Repair all damage done to the street and installations on, over or within such street, including trees; and 
(4)  Protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith by the applicant or a subcontractor of the applicant. 
(e)  Liability insurance. Whenever liability insurance is required in connection with a permit, it shall be, except as otherwise specified in this article, comprehensive liability insurance, with combined single limit coverage of at least $500,000.00 and umbrella liability coverage of at least $1,000,000.00, for a driveway improvement within a street, and $5,000,000.00 for all other construction or improvement of a street, unless the director determines that amount is not necessary. A certificate of insurance shall be filed before obtaining a permit. The city shall be named as a certificate holder and shall be entitled to at least 30 days' written notice of cancellation or material change in the insurance. 
(f)  Cash deposit or performance bond. Whenever a cash deposit or a performance bond shall be required in this article in connection with a permit, it shall be in an amount equal to the work to be done, which shall be used to defray any expenses to the city arising out of work done under the permit. Whenever a performance bond is filed, it shall have a corporate surety acceptable to the director. Twelve months after the completion of the work under a permit, any balance of such cash deposit or bond unexpended shall be refunded. When the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.06; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 94-35. - Property adjacent to street. 
(a)  Maintenance of trees, shrubs, etc. It shall be the duty of each owner of property adjacent to a street to maintain that property, including the adjacent public right-of-way located between the adjacent property and the inside edge of the pathway or sidewalk, so that trees, shrubs and other vegetation do not obstruct the passage of vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians on streets, pathways and sidewalks. Streets, pathways, and sidewalks shall be maintained in order to achieve a clear height of 14 feet over the travelled portion of the street and three feet from the edge of the street, ten feet over pathways, and eight feet over sidewalks. A clearance of at least one foot off the edge of the pathway or sidewalk shall be maintained. 
(b)  Compliance after notice. 
(1)  If a property owner fails to maintain the property as required by this section after written notice by the city requesting work to be done, the city may do the work necessary to bring the property into compliance and charge the property owner for the reasonable cost of the work, with an additional fee of 30 percent for supervision and administrative expenses. If the charges are not paid, they may be assessed against the property in accordance with section 90-30 of this Code. 
(2)  If the work involves a violation of subsection (e) of this section, the owner or occupant of the property shall be given 30 days written notice ordering the removal of a nonconforming mailbox structure. Such notice shall give the following information: 
a.  The width of the road; 
b.  A description of the structure; 
c.  The location of the structure and its relation to the centerline of the road; and 
d.  The section and fraction in which it is located. 
(3)  This subsection shall not limit the city's authority to issue citations for the violation of this section or to utilize any other remedy available to it at law. 
(c)  Assessment of unpaid charges. If the charges for the work are not paid, they may be assessed against the property, as provided in section 90-30 of this Code. 
(d)  Rocks, stones or minerals placed in public right-of-way. Rocks, stones or minerals may be placed within a public right-of-way under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Rocks, stones or minerals placed within a right-of-way shall not exceed 30 inches in total height; 
(2)  Rocks, stones or minerals shall not be placed closer than three feet from the curb or shoulder of the paved surface of a street or the traveled portion of an unpaved street. However, if placement of the rocks, stones or minerals, at the minimum distance set forth in this subsection would locate them in or on a swale or ditch, the rocks, stones or minerals, may be placed so that they are no closer than 18 inches from the curb or shoulder of the paved surface of a street or the traveled portion of an unpaved street; 
(3)  Placement of rocks, stones or minerals within a public right-of-way pursuant to this subsection shall be allowed only on residential streets having a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less; 
(4)  Placement of rocks, stones or minerals shall not obstruct or interfere with drainage; 
(5)  Rocks, stones or minerals placed in the public right-of-way shall not be placed closer than three feet from a bicycle path or sidewalk; 
(6)  If placement of rocks, stones or minerals within a public right-of-way pursuant to this subsection would be inconsistent with or contrary to the corner clearance requirements of other sections of this Code or any city ordinance, the corner clearance requirements shall control; and 
(7)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, restrictions on rocks, stones and minerals placed in the right-of-way shall not apply to or include rocks, stones or minerals being used as mailbox support structures. 
(e)  Mailbox supports within public right-of-way. No mailbox support structure shall be placed, constructed or maintained within the public right-of-way of a street, highway or alley with an established speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour unless it conforms to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Mailboxes shall be supported by a single post. The following materials and dimensions may be used for such support, and no other materials or dimensions of supports shall be used: 
a.  A four-inch by four-inch wooden post; 
b.  A 4½-inch diameter wooden post; 
c.  A standard steel pipe with an inside diameter not to exceed two inches; or 
d.  Perforated tubing not to exceed 2½ inches by 2½ inches. 
(2)  Mailbox supports shall not be set in concrete. 
(3)  No more than two mailboxes shall be mounted on a mailbox support structure as permitted by subsection (e)(1) of this section. Mailbox assemblies of three or more mailboxes may be permitted by the traffic engineer if the support structure and mailbox mounting have been shown to be safe by crash testing. However, lightweight newspaper boxes may be mounted below the mailbox on the side of the mailbox support. 
(4)  Post-to-box attachment details shall be of sufficient strength to prevent the box from separating from the post top if the installation is struck by a vehicle. 
(5)  No rocks, stones or minerals shall be used as mailbox support structures. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.05; Ord. No. 566, § 2, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-36. - Street openings. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a permit from the director. 
(b)  Permit conditions. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit or performance bond and file a liability insurance policy as required by this article. 
(c)  Public utility company agreement. A permit may be issued to a public utility company without the posting of a deposit if such a company has filed with the city an agreement to be responsible for all street, sidewalk, and pathway repairs required as a result of the street openings. 
(d)  Approval of plans. No such permit shall be granted until the plans and specifications for the work proposed shall have been approved by the director as conforming to uniform grades. 
(e)  Warnings. A permit holder and any other person responsible for making any opening in any street shall provide an adequate warning of such opening, at all times, for the protection and safety of the public, and no such person shall fail to close the opening as soon as possible. All warning devices shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted pursuant to section 608 of Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.608, MSA 9.2308). 
(f)  Emergency openings. The director may, if public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and there shall be compliance with this article. 
(g)  Backfilling. All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission of the director, shall be filled in compliance with applicable rules and standards adopted by the city. 
(h)  Utility relocation. Utility poles, equipment, and installations may be placed in streets, at no cost to the city, as the director shall prescribe. Such poles, equipment and installations shall be removed or relocated as the director shall direct at no cost to the city, except when such cost is incurred as a result of city-ordered relocation of streetlights used in public ways. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.07)  
Sec. 94-37. - Maintenance of installations. 
(a)  Utility systems maintenance permit. Utility companies, such as electric, telephone, gas and cable television companies, shall obtain from the director an annual systems maintenance and improvement permit to cover all emergency repairs, replacements, equipment changes, necessary tree trimming or removal, joint holes, bore pits and general maintenance to existing utility systems, which shall take place in or be located in any street, but excluding underground road crossings. 
(b)  Maintenance covenant by others. Every owner and every person in control of any property, maintaining a manhole, excavation or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon any street that is adjacent to or a part of the property shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city for him to keep such and the covers thereof and any gas, and electric boxes and tubes thereon in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought because of such excavation or being under, over, in or upon the street or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.08)  
Sec. 94-38. - Underground work prior to paving. 
(a)  Notice to utilities. Whenever the city council shall determine to pave or resurface any street, the director shall, not less than 90 days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public utilities, requiring them to install all necessary underground work in advance of the paving or resurfacing. 
(b)  Sewer and water connections. When such paving or resurfacing shall have been ordered or declared necessary by resolution of the city council, such sewer and water connections as are necessary, only to the extent a later connection would require opening the paving or resurfacing, which obligation shall not include construction of a water or sewer lateral, shall be made in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the premises adjacent thereto or to be served thereby and against the owner of such premises. Financing of such work shall be as follows: 
(1)  Special assessment. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the cost of such sewer and water connections may be made chargeable against the premises served or adjacent thereto, as a part of the special assessment for such paving or resurfacing. 
(2)  Other than special assessment. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed otherwise than by special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed shall be a lien on the premises adjacent thereto or to be served thereby and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to section 90-30 of this Code. 
(c)  Determination of necessity. The necessity for such sewer and water connections shall be determined by the department of public service in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Criteria. The determination shall be based upon the size, shape and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land; the lawful use of such land under the city zoning regulations; the character of the locality; and the probable future development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. 
(2)  Written notice of intent. The department shall give written notice of the intention to install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost of the connections to the premises to each owner of land abutting the street to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the records of the city assessor. 
(3)  Objections and final determination. Any owner objecting to the installation of any such sewer or water connection shall file any objections in writing within seven days after service of such notice with the director of the department of public service who shall, after considering each such objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections to be installed. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.09)  
Sec. 94-39. - Curb cuts. 
(a)  Permit required. No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(b)  Permit conditions. Before a permit is issued, the permit fee as provided in division 2 of article XI of chapter 54 shall be paid, and a certificate of insurance and a cash deposit or performance bond shall be filed. 
(c)  Approval of plans. All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director. 
(d)  Public improvement adjustments. The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catchbasins, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(e)  Agreement to install driveway apron. No permit to cut any curb shall be issued by the director unless the applicant shall agree in such application and file a cash deposit or bond to guarantee, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to install a driveway apron in accordance with standards and specifications for the type of driveway being constructed within six months after completion of the cut. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.10)  
Sec. 94-40. - Unsafe driveways or crosswalks. 
(a)  Repair after notice. Whenever any driveway, crosswalk or paved area between a pathway or sidewalk and the edge of pavement of a street is so defective that it is not reasonably safe or fit for travel and, in the opinion of the director, it should be immediately repaired, the director shall give the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to such driveway, crosswalk or paved area notice to repair the driveway, crosswalk or area within 30 days, and in default thereof, the director may cause the driveway, crosswalk or area to be repaired. 
(b)  Costs. The cost and expense shall be charged to such owner or occupant in the manner provided in section 90-30 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.11)  
Sec. 94-41. - Access for other than single-family residence purposes. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct, alter or change any driveway or private street or road or opening upon any public street, road or highway from any property used or to be used for other than single-family residential purposes without first procuring a permit from the director. 
(b)  Permit conditions. Before a permit is issued, the permit fee as provided in division 2 of article XI of chapter 54 shall be paid, and a certificate of insurance and a cash deposit or performance bond shall be filed. 
(c)  Design approval. The director shall not issue such a permit unless such driveway, private street, road or opening is designed to minimize vehicular traffic and pedestrian danger and congestion. 
(d)  Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes. When the director determines that acceleration and deceleration lanes and/or passing lanes are necessary to alleviate vehicular traffic and pedestrian danger and congestion, the installation of acceleration and deceleration lanes and/or passing lanes shall be required as a condition of the granting of the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.12)  
Sec. 94-42. - Openings, excavations and obstructions. 
(a)  Permit required for obstructions during construction. No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building located on the property adjacent to the street or for any other purpose without first obtaining a permit from the director and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by this article. 
(b)  Safeguards. All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off and at night shall be provided with prescribed warning lights, in conformity with the state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  Shoring. All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced in compliance with the state occupational safety and health act, Public Act No. 154 of 1974 (MCL 408.1001 et seq., MSA 17.50(1) et seq.), as a safeguard to workers and to prevent cave-ins or washouts that would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(d)  Removal or refilling expenses. Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting landowner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in section 90-30 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.13)  
Sec. 94-43. - Temporary street closings. 
(a)  Authority of director. The director shall have authority to temporarily, on a full or a limited basis, as necessary close any street or portion thereof when the director shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. 
(b)  Barriers and signs. The director shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on the street, indicating that the street is closed or limited to public travel. 
(c)  Travel prohibited. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed or limited to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the street in violation of the signs or barriers, except as may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. 
(d)  Barrier or sign removal prohibited. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the director. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.14)  
Sec. 94-44. - Street signs. 
(a)  Application to director. Whenever a sign to be located in a street is desired, an application shall be made to the director. 
(b)  Payment of cost. If the sign is approved, the cost of the sign as provided in division 3 of article XI of chapter, if it is to be paid for by the person making application, shall be paid before the sign is erected. Payment for other signs shall be as follows: 
(1)  Optional for safety purposes. Signs determined not to be mandatory, but optional, for safety purposes shall be paid for by the person or organization requesting the signs; and 
(2)  New subdivision. Signs in a new subdivision or development shall be paid for by the person or entity developing the property. 
(c)  Erection and maintenance. Erection and maintenance shall be as follows: 
(1)  City responsibility. All signs shall be erected and maintained by the city, except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Subdivisions. A subdivision association or other private party may be allowed by the director to erect and maintain street signs on the internal streets of a subdivision, specifically not including street signs on major thoroughfares, if the subdivision association or private party enters into a written agreement with the city, in a form acceptable to the city council, to be responsible for the cost of any such signs and for the placement, replacement, repair and maintenance of the street signs. Any such street signs shall be: 
a.  Approved by the director; and 
b.  Consistent with the standards of the most recent edition of state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices relating to safety. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.15; Ord. No. 446, § 2, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 94-45. - Street occupancy permits. 
The director may issue revocable permits to occupy a portion of any city street under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Standards. Such permits shall be issued if the occupancy shall not: 
a.  Interfere, more than reasonably necessary under the circumstances, with the use of the street for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
b.  Unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to or use of property adjacent to the street. 
c.  Reduce any pathway or sidewalk width to less than six feet (five feet for an existing five-foot sidewalk or pathway). 
d.  Interfere with street cleaning or snow removal activities. 
e.  Cause damage to the street or to trees, benches, landscaping or other objects lawfully located therein. 
f.  Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
g.  Be used for off-premises advertising. 
h.  Conceal or detract from the appearance of landscaping features in or adjacent to the street. 
i.  Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
j.  Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
k.  Violate regulations adopted by the mayor to interpret and implement this section. 
(2)  Notice to adjacent owners. Except in instances involving utility companies operating under an annual systems maintenance and improvement permit, written notice to adjacent property owners or occupants within 300 feet shall be given by the director before another person may be issued a permit to occupy any street area between the edge of the vehicle use area of the street and the right-of-way or property line for more than a period of five days. 
(3)  Fee and insurance. Prior to issuance of a street occupancy permit, a permit fee shall be paid in accordance with section 54-590, and a certificate of insurance shall be filed evidencing insurance coverage in an amount deemed reasonable and appropriate by the director. 
(4)  Closing vehicle use area. The vehicle use area shall be closed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Sale of goods or services. In addition to the other requirements specified in this section, the approval of the city council shall be required for all such street occupancies involving the closing of the vehicle use area of any street in connection with the sale of goods or services. 
b.  Block party. City council approval shall not be required when the permit is for an event such as a block party in a street on no more than one consecutive day. 
(5)  Application information. Any group or association applying for a permit in connection with the sale of goods or services shall supply with its permit application all rules by which members of the group are permitted to participate in the activities involving the street occupancy. No permit shall be issued if such rules violate any section of this Code. 
(6)  Dates and duration. All permits shall specify the dates and duration of the permitted street occupancy, and the permits shall be valid only for such specified period. 
(7)  Display. Permits shall only be valid if displayed in a manner visible to the public. 
(8)  Revocation. Any street occupancy permit may be revoked by the director upon a finding that the occupancy does not meet the standards of this section, any other section of this Code or provisions of other applicable law, or that the space is needed for other street purposes. Upon such a revocation, the fee paid shall not be refunded. 
(9)  Appeal. A person who is refused a street occupancy permit or who has the street occupancy permit revoked may have a hearing on that determination before the mayor. The decision of the mayor may be appealed to the city council. Requests for a hearing or an appeal shall be made within five days of the questioned decision. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.17; Ord. No. 446, § 4, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 94-46. - Protection of streets during certain activities. 
(a)  Generally. During any construction, landscape activities or building project in the city, including but not limited to the installation of utilities, building construction or preparation of a site for a single-family residence, the person responsible under subsection (c) of this section for compliance with this section shall keep all streets, highways, pathways and alleys free from mud, dirt, debris or any other material that may result from work activity on the premises. 
(b)  Cleanup. Any person depositing or allowing the depositing of any mud, dirt, debris or any other material on a street, highway, pathway or alley shall clean the street, highway, pathway or alley before the end of the workday. 
(c)  Responsibility. Whenever work or construction in the city causes the deposit of mud, dirt, debris or any other material on a street, highway, pathway or alley, the developer, builder, contractor and permit holder, as well as the owner of the premises where the work or construction is taking place, shall be responsible for cleanup and compliance with this section. 
(d)  Dangerous accumulation. Upon receiving notification from the city that a dangerous condition exists due to the accumulation of mud, dirt, debris or any other material on a street, highway, pathway or alley, the person responsible under subsection (c) of this section shall immediately clean the street, highway, pathway or alley within two hours. 
(e)  Debris. Neither the person responsible under subsection (c) of this section nor any other persons shall allow debris, construction material or any other scrap, refuse, waste, junk or similar material to accumulate during work or construction in such a manner that the debris, etc., may blow, wash or travel onto a street, highway, pathway, alley or adjoining property; become unsightly; or adversely affect the health, safety, welfare or property of other residents. 
(f)  Responsibility for cost of cleanup. Payment of the cost of the cleanup required by this section shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  One person responsible. If it becomes necessary for the city to clean an accumulation of mud, dirt, etc., from a street, highway, pathway or alley because of the failure of the person responsible under subsection (c) of this section to do so, the city shall request the person responsible to pay to the city the cost of the cleanup as follows: 
a.  Use of building permit cash deposits. The city may use any cash deposit filed with the city in connection with a building permit or other permit issued for the building or construction activity on the premises in order to obtain reimbursement for the cost of cleanup. 
b.  Immediate replenishment of cash deposit. If it becomes necessary for the city, pursuant to this subsection, to use a cash deposit on file with the city, the permit holder shall be required to immediately replenish and replace the cash deposit. 
(2)  Multiple persons responsible. If an accumulation of mud, dirt, etc., appears to be the responsibility of more than one person or is related to building or construction activities on more than one site, the cost of cleanup by the city shall be prorated and charged against the cash deposits of all the persons appearing to be responsible. 
(g)  Enforcement. Enforcement of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Actions ordered by mayor. In addition to the city's use of cash deposits, pursuant to subsection (f) of this section, the mayor, upon determining there has been a failure to comply with this section, may order the stoppage of work, the withholding of inspections, and/or the staying or revocation of the building permit issued for the work site until compliance is obtained. 
(2)  Citations for violations. This subsection does not limit the city's authority to issue citations for the violation of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 4-09.19)  
Secs. 94-47—94-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE-PEDESTRIAN PATHS AND SIDEWALKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjoining property owner means a person who holds solely or jointly a fee interest in property adjoining or contiguous to a sidewalk or a nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path or who is purchasing such property under a land contract. Where applicable, the term "adjoining property owner" shall include homeowners' associations and condominium associations. 
Construct means any action taken in the course of construction. 
Construction means the replacement, repair or realignment of existing nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths or sidewalks. 
Nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths means asphalt or concrete nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian pathways abutting either existing or planned rights-of-way of 120 feet in width or greater, as designated on the city-adopted master right-of-way plan and as designated for nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths on the nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian pathway plan for the city as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
Sidewalk means a public walk constructed of concrete for public use, five feet in width, and located on public streets. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.02; Ord. No. 566, § 3, 4-2-2012) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-77. - Purpose. 
The city council finds and determines that the construction, maintenance, and repair of sidewalks and nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths is necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare. Certain acts and conditions occurring on or affecting nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks in the city which may endanger bicyclists or pedestrians or cause damage to or prevent or inhibit public use of nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.01; Ord. No. 566, § 3, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-78. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforceable by the mayor, the county sheriff's department, the building department, and other enforcement officers as the mayor may designate. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.07; Ord. No. 566, § 3, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-79. - Citation of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Owner presumed responsible. When a motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of this article, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be presumed responsible. 
(b)  Identifying information recorded. The officer who finds the vehicle shall take down its license plate number and any other information displayed on the vehicle that might identify its owner. 
(c)  Appearance citation. The officer shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle an appearance citation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.08; Ord. No. 566, § 3, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-80. - Prohibitions. 
Except for utility company vehicles being used in the performance of utility maintenance or repair or except when necessary to comply with the law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device or as authorized by the mayor or a department of the city, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand, or park a vehicle on or overhanging a nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path or sidewalk in the city; 
(2)  Operate a vehicle on or across a nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path or sidewalk in the city, except to enter or leave adjacent property at a driveway or when necessary for access to a subdivision common area for purposes of lawn maintenance; 
(3)  Cause the commission or occurrence of any act or condition which creates a hazard on or near any nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path or sidewalk in the city; or 
(4)  Cause the commission or occurrence of any other act or condition which damages any nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path or sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.06; Ord. No. 566, § 3, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 94-81—94-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 94-106. - Permit required. 
No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk pursuant to this article without a permit. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.03.01; Ord. No. 566, § 4, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-107. - Application for permit. 
An applicant shall submit a written application to the department of public service before a sidewalk construction permit may be issued. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the property owner adjoining the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired; 
(2)  The name and address of the contractor installing or repairing the sidewalk; 
(3)  A description of the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired, including estimated square footage of work to be done and a description of location relative to the public right-of-way; and 
(4)  A statement signed by the adjoining property owner and contractor agreeing to conform to the specifications and regulations of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.03.02; Ord. No. 566, § 4, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-108. - Inspection fees. 
An inspection fee per property address, as provided in section 54-651, shall be charged at the time application for the permit required by this division is made. If the city's inspection cost is less than the fee provided in section 54-651, the city shall refund the difference. If the city's inspection cost exceeds the fee provided in section 54-651, no additional amount shall be charged. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.03.03; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.32), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 566, § 4, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-109. - Written approval required. 
Where the sidewalk to be constructed will be located in whole or in part in the right-of-way adjacent to the road under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation or the county road commission, no sidewalk permit shall issue from the department of public service until written approval of such applicable government entity is obtained. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.03.04; Ord. No. 566, § 4, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-110. - Insurance required. 
If construction under this article is to be performed by a contractor who is not the adjoining property owner, prior to the issuance of a permit, the contractor shall file a certificate of insurance with the city clerk evidencing comprehensive liability insurance, with combined single limits coverage of at least $500,000.00 and umbrella liability coverage of at least $1,000,000.00. The city shall be named as certificate holder and entitled to at least 30 days' written notice of cancellation or material change in the insurance. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.03.05; Ord. No. 566, § 4, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-111. - Liability. 
(a)  Applicant. The applicant for the permit required by this division shall remain liable for any and all defects and repairs for a period of 18 months after the date of final inspection and approval, including defects and repairs occasioned by settling, weather, erosion, tree roots, or any other cause. 
(b)  Adjoining property owner. This section shall not relieve the adjoining property owner from liability as provided in this article. 
(c)  Indemnification. The adjoining property owner shall be entitled to indemnification from the contractor for any repairs to the sidewalk for a period of 18 months after the date of final inspection and approval. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.03.06; Ord. No. 566, § 4, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-112. - Standard specifications. 
The city engineer shall keep on file in his office standard specifications for the construction of sidewalks. All such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with such specifications. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.04; Ord. No. 566, § 4, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 94-113—94-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE-PEDESTRIAN PATH MAINTENANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 566, § 5, adopted April 2, 2012, renamed Ch. 94, Art. III, Div. 3 from "Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair" to "Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair; Nonmotorized Vehicle-Pedestrian Path Maintenance." 
 
Sec. 94-141. - Maintenance by property owner. 
The adjoining property owner or occupant of the lot or premises shall maintain the sidewalk adjoining such property. Such sidewalk shall be kept as follows: 
(1)  Free from defects of every kind and nature and maintained in a condition of good repair. 
(2)  Free from any deposits of debris, rubbish, or other objects that might or could be hazardous to persons using the sidewalk or nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path. 
(3)  Free and clear from accumulations of snow, sleet, ice, and water as follows: 
a.  When any snow or ice shall cease to fall or form during the daylight hours, such snow or ice shall be cleared from the sidewalk within 48 hours after such cessation. 
b.  When any snow or ice shall cease to fall or form during the nighttime, such snow or ice shall be cleared from the sidewalk within 48 hours after sunrise. 
(4)  Free from obstructions encroaching from adjoining or adjacent property (including adjacent public right-of-way located between the adjacent property and the inside edge of the pathway or sidewalk), including but not limited to overhanging tree limbs and shrubs. The minimum clearances that shall be maintained free from such obstructions shall be eight (8) feet vertical and one (1) foot horizontal. There shall be maintained a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet vertical and one (1) foot horizontal for nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. 
(5)  Free from obstructions from adjoining or adjacent property (including adjacent public right-of-way located between the adjacent property and the inside edge of the pathway or sidewalk) interfering with site distance lines, at driveways and other sidewalks intersecting the sidewalk. A clear and unobstructed sight triangle must be created using a base leg of fifteen (15) feet from the sight obstruction to any sidewalk or driveways or sidewalks intersecting such sidewalk, or fifteen (15) feet from the sight obstruction to any nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path or driveways or nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path intersecting such nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian path. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.05.01; Ord. No. 566, § 5, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-142. - Repair of damage by developer or builder. 
Sidewalks provided by a developer or builder that are damaged prior to occupancy shall be repaired by the developer or builder prior to the date of final occupancy. The builder shall be responsible for repairing defects in the sidewalk for 18 months after a final certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.05.02; Ord. No. 565, § 3, 1-9-2012; Ord. No. 566, § 5, 4-2-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 565, § 3, adopted Jan. 1, 2012, retitled § 94-142 from "Repair of damage by developer" to "Repair of damage by developer or builder".  
Sec. 94-143. - Repair or reconstruction by property owner. 
(a)  Written notice. Upon determination by the department of public service that any sidewalk or portion thereof is in need of repair or elimination from encroachment, the department shall serve a written notice upon the adjoining property owner to the portion of such sidewalk requiring repair or elimination of encroachment by first class mail to the last known address of such owner in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Determination of property owners. Adjoining property owners shall be determined from the current city tax roll. 
(2)  Proration of cost among adjoining owners. When a sidewalk requiring repair or reconstruction is contiguous to more than one lot or parcel, costs of such repair or reconstruction shall be prorated between adjoining property owners on the basis of front footage repaired. 
a.  The failure of one adjoining property owner to undertake such repair where such sidewalk abuts more than a single parcel shall not excuse the remaining adjoining property owner from the duties established in this section. 
b.  Such notice shall require that the adjoining property owner shall perform such repairs within 45 days of the date of such notice; the elimination of encroachments shall occur within 14 days of such notice. 
(b)  Failure to comply. Failure to comply shall subject the owner to the following: 
(1)  Correction by city; owner billed cost. If the adjoining property owner fails to repair the sidewalk within 45 days of such notice, or remove the encroachment within 14 days, the city may perform the repair or remove the encroachment and bill such adjoining property owner the total cost thereof, together with an additional fee of 30 percent for engineering supervision and general administration expense. 
(2)  Lien against property. If payment is not received by the city within 60 days after such billing, such amount shall become a lien on the property and shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as other taxes and assessments under the Michigan General Property Tax Laws, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 7-17.05.03; Ord. No. 500, § 1, 7-20-2005; Ord. No. 566, § 5, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 94-144. - Violations. 
Any person who violates this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-28-2009; Ord. No. 566, § 5, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 94-145—94-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VACATING STREETS, ALLEYS OR PUBLIC GROUNDS 
 
Sec. 94-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a minor thoroughfare, under the jurisdiction and control of the city, open to public use, for the purpose of ingress and egress to service adjacent buildings or property. 
Public ground means any real property or interest therein owned or possessed by the city, other than an alley or a street. 
Public utility means any person, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing to the public, under federal, state or municipal regulations, gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
Street means the entire width between boundary lines of every way, other than an alley, that is publicly maintained and under the jurisdiction and control of the city, when any part thereof is open or may be open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-172. - Purpose. 
As it is occasionally necessary for the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the people of the city to vacate, discontinue or abolish an existing street, alley, public ground, or part thereof, a procedure is established as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.01)  
Sec. 94-173. - Request for vacation of public property. 
(a)  Submission of application and fee. A property owner whose property abuts a street, alley, or public ground may request that such street, alley, public ground or part thereof be vacated by submitting an application to the department of public service. Such application shall describe the street, alley, public ground, or part thereof to which the application applies; the name of the abutting property owner; and a description of his property. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 54-681. 
(b)  Review. Upon receipt of an application for vacation, the department of public service shall review the application and shall submit the application to the city council with any objections the department may have to such vacation. If there is any current or possible future use of the area proposed to be vacated for utilities, access or similar purposes, the department shall report any easements that should be retained by the city in the street, alley, public ground, or part thereof in case of vacation. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.03; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.18), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 94-174. - Preliminary resolution of city council. 
(a)  Declaration of intent. Whenever the city council shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any street, alley, public ground, or part thereof, the city council shall, by resolution, declare its intention to vacate, discontinue, or abolish the street, alley, public ground, or any part thereof. 
(b)  Public hearing. In the declaration of intent, the city council shall schedule a time and place for the city council to meet and hold a public hearing to hear and consider comments and objections submitted in writing or orally pertaining to the proposed vacation, discontinuance or abolition. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.04)  
Sec. 94-175. - Notice of public hearing. 
(a)  Publication in newspaper. At least ten days prior to the date of public hearing under this article, notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  Written notice. In addition to the notice in subsection (a) of this section, notice shall also be given as follows: 
(1)  Adjacent property owners. Written notice shall be given either personally or by regular mail to the owners and occupants of all property abutting or located within 300 feet of such street, alley, public ground, or part thereof, as shown on the current assessment rolls of the city, if within the city, or of the municipality where the property is located, if not within the city. 
(2)  Adjacent municipality. Written notice shall be given to an adjacent municipality if any property located within that municipality is to be given notice of the hearing. 
(3)  County and state officials; public utilities. Written notice shall be provided at the same time and in the same manner to the following: 
a.  The state treasurer, the drain commissioner and the chairperson of the board of county road commissioners having jurisdiction over any abutting land or land included in an affected plat; 
b.  Each public utility known to have installations or equipment in abutting land or an affected subdivision or that has a recorded easement or franchise right that would be affected; and 
c.  The director of the state transportation department if any of the abutting land or affected subdivision includes or borders a state highway or federal aid road. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.05)  
Sec. 94-176. - Final resolution of city council. 
(a)  Action to vacate, discontinue or abolish. If, after the public hearing held under this article, the city council determines it is necessary for the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the people of the city to vacate, discontinue or abolish an existing street, alley, public ground, or part thereof, the city council shall so vacate, discontinue or abolish by resolution. 
(b)  Reservation of easement. In the same resolution, the city council may reserve an easement in the street, alley, or public ground for public utility purposes and other public purposes within the right-of-way of the street, alley, or public ground being vacated, discontinued or abolished. 
(c)  Extinguishment of easement. The city council may by resolution extinguish any such easement whenever the easement ceases to be useful for public utility purposes or other public purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.06)  
Sec. 94-177. - Recording of resolution. 
Whenever the city council by resolution vacates, discontinues or abolishes a street, alley, public ground, or part thereof, the city clerk shall, within 30 days, record a certified copy of the resolution with the county register of deeds and shall send a copy to the state treasurer. Until recorded, the resolution shall not have force or effect. 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.07)  
Sec. 94-178. - Sites near bodies of water excluded. 
No existing street, alley, public ground, or part thereof, which is located in a recorded subdivision and within 25 meters (82.021 feet) of a lake or the general course of a stream, and no street which is located outside of a subdivision and within five rods (82.500 feet) of a lake or the general course of a stream shall be vacated, discontinued or abolished, however, except by order of the circuit court pursuant to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.255a, MSA 26.430(255a)) and Public Act No. 341 of 1927 (MCL 247.41 et seq., MSA 9.51 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 4-10.08)  
ARTICLE V. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
 
Sec. 94-179. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-180. - Conflict. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-181. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
City means the City of Rochester Hills. 
City council means the City Council of the City of Rochester Hills or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services means those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-182. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the mayor, one copy with the city engineer, and one copy with the city attorney. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, that is exempt from public disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The city may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-183. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The mayor shall have the authority to approve or deny an application for a permit. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the mayor shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 94-182(b) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the mayor shall notify the MPSC when the mayor has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The mayor shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the mayor shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the mayor may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond Requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the mayor may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-184. - Construction/engineering permit. 
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter 94 of the Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No additional fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-185. - Conduit or utility poles. 
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-186. - Route maps. 
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper and electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-187. - Repair of damage. 
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-188. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 94-182(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-189. - Modification of existing fees. 
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-190. - Savings clause. 
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 94-189 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-191. - Use of funds. 
Pursuant Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major roads fund and/or the local route fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-192. - Annual report. 
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-193. - Cable television operators. 
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-194. - Existing rights. 
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-195. - Compliance. 
The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Exempting certain route maps from public disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in subsection 94-182(c) of this article; 
(b)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with subsection 94-182(f) of this article; 
(c)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with subsection 94-182(g) of this article; 
(d)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 94-183(a) of this article; 
(e)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with subsection 94-183(a) of this article; 
(f)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with subsection 94-183(a) of this article; 
(g)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in subsection 94-183(b) of this article; 
(h)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with subsection 94-183(c) of this article; 
(i)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with subsection 94-183(d) of this article; 
(j)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 94-184 of this article; 
(k)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 94-189 of this article; 
(l)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 94-192 of this article; and 
(m)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 94-193 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-196. - Reservation of police powers. 
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-197. - Authorized city officials. 
The mayor or mayor's designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-198. - Municipal civil infraction. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to a civil fine, sanctions and remedies as prescribed in section 1-16 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 12-18-2002)  
Sec. 94-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PIPELINES 
 
Sec. 94-200. - Definitions. 
City regulated pipelines means those pipelines within the city that under federal and state laws and regulations are not exempt from city regulations and ordinances regarding mapping, inventorying, locating or relocating of pipelines, including, but not limited to, pipelines over, under, along, or across a public street or alley, pipelines from the well to the first point of custody transfer or in residential areas in the city. 
Pipeline means all parts of those physical facilities through which oil, gas, other hydrocarbons, hazardous liquids, fresh water, salt water, or chemicals are transported, including but not limited to, pipe, valves, other appurtenance attached to pipe, and ancillary equipment such as pigging stations and compressors, whether or not laid in public or private easement or public or private right-of-way in the city, and also including but not limited to, flow lines, gathering lines, production lines and transmission lines. This definition does not include pipelines associated with franchise utilities. 
Pipeline construction means the initiation of any excavation or other disturbance of property for the purpose of installation, construction, maintenance, repair, replacement, modification or removal of a pipeline. 
Pipeline emergency means a pipeline incident that is required to be reported to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or any other federal, state or local regulatory agency, and/or which may endanger the health, safety or welfare of persons or property. 
Pipeline operator means any person owning, operating or responsible for operating a pipeline. 
Residential area means any area in the city zoned or used for single or multi-family residential use. 
Well site means the physical location where an oil or gas well is drilled. 
Wellhead means the assemblage of equipment attached to the opening of an oil or gas well. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-201. - City regulated pipelines—Permit required. 
(a)  City regulated pipelines shall adhere to all standards outlined in section 94-202. Federal and state statutory or regulatory requirements shall apply to pipelines between the well and/or wellhead and the point of custody transfer. Prior to the transport of gas, oil, liquids or hydrocarbons, the pipeline operator shall provide to the city certification from a registered professional engineer that the design and installation of the pipelines meet all state and federal requirements. 
(b)  Prior to pipeline construction and the issuance of notice required in subsection 94-202(d) of this article, a pipeline operator shall obtain a pipeline permit from the city engineer for all city regulated pipelines. An exception to this permitting is construction necessary to respond to a pipeline emergency. 
(c)  At the same time the pipeline operator submits an oil or gas well drilling permit application to the state pursuant to Part 615 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.61501 et seq., and the administrative rules promulgated thereunder, the pipeline operator shall submit to the city a proposed pipeline route from the well bore, wellhead and/or well site to the transmission line, for all city regulated pipelines. 
(d)  The pipeline operator shall be required to submit an application for a pipeline permit to the city and obtain a pipeline permit prior to making any offer or initiating any negotiation or action to acquire any easement or other property right to construct, install, maintain, repair, replace, modify, remove or operate a pipeline in residential areas. Prior to commencing pipeline construction, the pipeline operator shall provide to the city a copy of any easements obtained. A condition of the permit is that the pipeline operator shall relocate the pipeline at its sole cost as directed and in the sole discretion of the city. 
(e)  Review and approval by the city council for all proposed pipelines through residential areas shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit for the commencement of pipeline construction. 
(f)  A pipeline permit application shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Applications for a city regulated pipeline or other activities regulated by this subsection shall be submitted to the city in a form prescribed by the city. 
(2)  Plans submitted with each application for a pipeline permit shall be in a format approved by the city showing the dimensions and locations of the pipeline and related items or facilities, as well as all proposed lift stations, pumps or other service structures related to such pipeline and the location, type and size of all existing utilities, drainage, right-of-way and roadway improvements. The plans must additionally show the elevation and location of all known public utilities within 15 feet of the centerline of the proposed pipeline. Any application that fails to meet these requirements will be returned unfiled to the applicant. 
(3)  The following information shall be provided in the application: 
a.  The name, business addresses and telephone numbers of the pipeline operator; 
b.  The names, titles and telephone numbers of the following: 
1.  The person signing the application on behalf of the pipeline operator; 
2.  The person designated as the principal contact for the submittal; and 
3.  The person(s), located within Oakland County, Michigan, designated as the 24-hour emergency contact. 
c.  The origin point and the destination of the proposed subject pipeline; 
d.  A text description of the general location of the proposed subject pipeline; 
e.  A description of the substance to be transported through the proposed subject pipeline; 
f.  A copy of the GHS (globally harmonized system) safety data sheet; 
g.  Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths and location of shutoff valves of the proposed subject pipeline. To the extent that information can be obtained, drawings shall show the location of other pipelines and utilities that will be crossed or paralleled within 15 feet of the proposed subject pipeline right-of-way; 
h.  A description of the consideration given to matters of public safety and the avoidance, as far as practicable, of existing habitable structures and private residential areas; 
i.  Detailed cross section drawings for all public street right-of-way and easement crossings; 
j.  The proposed method or methods to be used for the installation of the pipeline; 
k.  Methods to be used to prevent both internal and external corrosion; 
l.  A binder or certificates of all bonds and insurance; and 
m.  A proposed alignment strip map showing name and address of all affected and adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-202. - General regulations. 
(a)  As determined in the sole, but reasonable, discretion of the city, pipelines shall not interfere with or damage existing utilities, including but not limited to: water, sewer or gas lines, storm drains, electric lines, telecommunications, public lighting, traffic control devices or equipment, or the facilities of any public utilities located in public rights-of-way, utility easements or other city-owned property or in residential areas. 
(b)  The pipeline operator shall backfill all trenches and compact such trenches to 95 percent standard density proctor in eight-inch lifts and construct the pipeline so as to maintain a minimum depth of ten feet below the finished grade except in public rights-of-way, where minimum cover to the top of the pipe shall be at the discretion of the city based on existing or planned utilities. During the backfill of any pipeline excavations in open cut sections, the pipeline operator shall bury a magnetic buried pipeline warning tape one foot above any such pipeline to warn future excavators of the presence of a buried pipeline. The city may also require that a proposed or existing pipeline be relocated at the sole cost of the pipeline operator should it conflict with the proposed alignment and depth of a gravity dependent utility. 
(c)  The pipeline operator shall equip all city regulated pipelines with an automated pressure monitoring system that detects leaks and shuts off any line or any section of line that develops a leak. 
(d)  The pipeline operator shall be responsible to grade, level and restore the property affected by pipeline construction to the same surface condition, as nearly practicable, as existed before operations were first commenced. 
(e)  The pipeline operator shall construct, repair and/or maintain all pipelines so as to meet or exceed the applicable minimum criteria established by the statutory or regulatory requirements of the state and federal governments for such pipeline. 
(f)  At least 20 days prior to the commencement of any pipeline construction, the pipeline operator shall give written notification to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the proposed pipeline and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the proposed pipeline. 
(g)  The pipeline operator shall provide the city the following information, including GPS (global positioning system) information sufficient to locate the pipelines in the future, including the beginning and end points of the pipeline and sufficient points in between the pipeline route and the depth of cover information. This information shall be submitted to the city in a format compatible with the city's own GIS (geographic information system) system. 
(1)  As-built or record drawings of the pipelines. Accuracy of the record drawings shall meet a survey level of one foot to 50,000 feet. The scale of the record drawings shall be a minimum of one inch to 40 feet. The drawings shall also be supplied in a DFF (digital file format) with the location tied to at least one nearby GPS city monument. If the new pipeline length exceeds 1,000 feet within the city, the pipeline shall be tied to at least two GPS city monuments; 
(2)  The origin point and the destination of the pipeline; 
(3)  The substance to be transported; 
(4)  A copy of the GHS safety data sheet; 
(5)  Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths, and location of shutoff valves of the subject pipeline. Drawings shall show the location of other pipelines and utilities that are crossed or paralleled within 15 feet of the pipeline right-of-way; 
(6)  Detailed cross-section drawings for all public rights-of-way and easement crossings on city property as permitted by the city; and 
(7)  A list of the names and mailing addresses of all the property owners, residents and tenants adjacent to the pipeline construction. 
(h)  A pipeline operator that transports gas, oil, liquids or hydrocarbons through a pipeline located in the city shall be a member in good standing with the Miss Dig System or other approved excavation monitoring system as required by state law. The pipeline operator that transports gas, oil, liquids or hydrocarbons through a pipeline shall contract for service with the selected underground utility coordinating system for a minimum of five years unless there is an agreement to change to an alternate system between the city and the pipeline operator. The pipeline operator shall maintain such services without interruption for the life of the pipeline permit and as required under this section. 
(i)  At the time of permitting and each year thereafter that the pipeline remains active, each pipeline operator shall provide to the mayor, city engineer, fire chief and Oakland County Sheriff the names, mailing and email addresses and telephone numbers of at least two primary persons, officers or contacts who will be available on a 24-hour basis and at least two alternative persons, officers or contacts to be reached in the event that the primary contacts are unavailable who: 
(1)  Can initiate appropriate actions to respond to an emergency; 
(2)  Have access to information on the location of the closest shutoff valve to any specific point in the city; and 
(3)  Can furnish the common name of the material then being carried by the pipeline. 
Any change in the above information must be provided to the city by contacting the gas inspector prior to such change. 
(j)  Each pipeline operator shall file a copy of all initial or follow-up reports provided to state or federal agencies about unsafe pipeline conditions, pipeline emergencies, pipeline releases, pipeline safety violations or pipeline incidents in the city concurrently with the city. 
(k)  A city regulated pipeline shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from a residential dwelling, place of worship, school, child care center or public park. A city regulated pipeline for purposes of this subsection does not include those pipes which are part of the well and regulated by the State of Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-203. - City engineer review. 
After the filing of an administratively complete application, the city engineer shall review all applications. If deemed necessary by the city, a third-party technical consultant may be engaged by the city. The costs associated with the consultant shall be borne by the pipeline operator. Any decision by the city engineer is final. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-204. - Abandoned pipelines. 
(a)  All pipelines shall be maintained in an active condition unless abandoned according to applicable state and federal regulations. The pipeline operator shall notify the city of abandonment of any pipeline. 
(b)  Reactivation of abandoned pipelines shall require notification to the city and a new permit pursuant to the standards and requirements of this article at the time of the new permit application. Reactivation shall require pressure testing for integrity and compliance with state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-205. - Emergency response plans and emergency incident reporting. 
(a)  Each pipeline operator shall maintain written procedures to minimize the hazards resulting from an emergency. The pipeline operator must provide a copy of the written procedures to the city prior to commencement of pipeline construction. These procedures shall at a minimum provide for the following: 
(1)  Prompt and effective response to emergencies including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Leaks or releases that can impact public health, safety or welfare; 
b.  Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of a pipeline or pipeline easement; 
c.  Natural disaster; 
d.  Effective procedures and protocols to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire, police, public officials and affected residents during an emergency; 
e.  The availability of personnel, equipment, tools and materials as necessary at the scene of an emergency; 
f.  Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and probability of accidental death or dismemberment; 
g.  Emergency shut down and pressure reduction of a pipeline; 
h.  The safe restoration of service following an emergency or incident; and 
i.  A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the implementation of corrective measures. 
(b)  Upon discovery of a pipeline emergency or incident, any affected pipeline operator shall immediately communicate to the 911 system the following information: 
(1)  A general description of the emergency or incident; 
(2)  The location of the emergency or incident; 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the person reporting the emergency or incident; 
(4)  The name of the pipeline operator; 
(5)  Whether or not any hazardous material is involved and identification of the hazardous material so involved; and 
(6)  Any other information as requested by the emergency dispatcher or other such official at the time of reporting the emergency or incident. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-206. - Protection and painting of structures. 
A pipeline operator shall keep protected and painted all pipeline risers and all appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations which are composed of materials which are generally protected or painted. Such operator shall repaint all such items at sufficiently frequent intervals to maintain same in good condition. It shall be a violation of this article for any pipeline operator to permit any pipeline riser and/or appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations to be in a state of disrepair or to have chipped, peeling or unpainted portions. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-207. - Markers. 
It is the joint and several responsibility of the owner and the pipeline operator of any and all pipeline to maintain markers in accordance with this article. The location of all new or replacement pipe and pipelines shall be marked by the owner(s) thereof or by the person installing or operating such pipelines as follows: 
(1)  Marker signs shall be placed at all locations where pipe or pipelines cross property boundary lines and at each side of a public street or road right-of-way which the pipe or pipeline crosses; 
(2)  The top of all marker signs shall be a minimum of four feet above ground level, and the support post must be sufficient to support the marker sign and shall be painted yellow or such other color as may be approved by the city engineer or his designee; 
(3)  All marker signs shall be a minimum of 12 inches square and shall be marked as "Gas Pipe Line;" 
(4)  All marker signs shall contain the name of the owner and operator of the pipeline and a 24-hour local contact number; 
(5)  Pipelines shall be marked along their entire length with a buried magnetic metal wire and metallic flag tape; 
(6)  All signs shall also contain a "Call Before You Dig" statement; and 
(7)  The pipeline operator shall annually replace signage that has been lost, damaged or removed. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-208. - Performance guarantee. 
Prior to issuance of a pipeline permit, the pipeline operator shall provide to the city, and thereafter keep in force, a cash or surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit acceptable to the city as a performance guarantee that the pipeline operator will comply with the provisions of this article. The city shall be authorized to draw upon the cash or surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit to recover the cost of correcting or remedying any default or violation by the pipeline operator of any provision of this article, including but not limited to, the cost of repair and replacement of any property damaged or destroyed as a result of the construction of the pipeline or a pipeline emergency. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-209. - No implied grant of use of public rights-of-way, utility easements or other city owned property. 
Nothing in this section grants permission for the use of any street, public rights-of-way, utility easements, or city owned property. In the event a pipeline operator wishes to undertake any pipeline construction on, over, under, along, or across any public rights-of-way, utility easements or other city owned property, the pipeline operator shall apply for and execute a written agreement with the city governing the terms and conditions for such use; obtain all required permits; and comply with any other applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-210. - Expiration of pipeline permit. 
If construction of a pipeline has not commenced within one year of the date of issuance of the pipeline permit, or if the pipeline has not been completed and the surface restored within two years, the pipeline permit shall expire; provided, however, that the city engineer may grant an extension of time not to exceed an additional one year if the city engineer determines weather or other unforeseen conditions justify such an extension. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 94-211. - No assumption of responsibility by city; hold harmless. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption by the city of any responsibility of a pipeline operator of a pipeline not owned by the city. Further, by accepting a permit under this article, the pipeline operator agrees to hold harmless the city from any claims or causes of action which arise out of the construction or operation of the pipeline. 
(Ord. No. 589 , § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Secs. 94-212—94-235. - Reserved.  
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations, including through streets, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(10); authorized emergency vehicles and equipment, § 58-90; driving over fire hoses, § 58-92; offenses, ch. 70; motor-driven vehicles in parks, § 74-63; bicycles in parks, § 74-64; motor vehicles on trailways, § 74-241 et seq.; obstructing traffic by charitable solicitors, § 78-95; obstructing traffic by itinerant merchants, § 78-200; refuse transporting unit license, § 86-56 et seq.; operating requirements for licensed refuse transporters, § 86-91 et seq.; operating requirements for licensed waste haulers, § 86-226 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks, § 94-76 et seq.; traffic interference by signs, § 134-110; B-5 automotive service business districts, § 138-656 et seq.; parking and storage of commercial and recreational vehicles and equipment and junked vehicles, § 138-1141 et seq.; off-street parking and loading, § 138-1266 et seq. 
State Law reference— Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610, MSA 9.2305, 9.2306, 9.2310. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 98-1—98-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC AND SAFETY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor to approve administrative rules and regulations of all boards and commission, § 8.3.10. 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-141 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-26. - Purpose. 
A traffic and safety board shall be established for the city to study and recommend traffic and safety measures and programs to enhance traffic safety within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.01)  
Sec. 98-27. - Established. 
The traffic and safety board for the city is established, pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.02)  
Sec. 98-28. - Scope of authority. 
The traffic and safety board shall be a nonadministrative board serving solely in an advisory capacity. The board may make recommendations to the city council but may not assume any legislative nor administrative authority of the city council, the mayor or any city department. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.03)  
Sec. 98-29. - Composition and tenure. 
(a)  Generally. The traffic and safety board shall consist of seven voting members and two nonvoting ex officio members. The voting members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by the city council. 
(b)  Voting members. All board members shall be electors of the city. Four of the voting members shall reside in and be appointed to represent each of the four voting districts under the Charter. The other three members may represent the interests of the two school districts situated within the city and of the business community. 
(c)  Terms of office. The voting members shall be appointed to three-year terms expiring on June 30 of the year of expiration. 
(d)  Ex officio members. The two ex officio members shall be the city traffic engineer and a member of the city council appointed by the city council. 
(e)  Vacancies. Any vacancies shall be filled as provided in this section for appointments for the expiration of the term of office for which the appointment is made. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.04) 
Charter reference— Appointment to boards and commissions not established by state law shall be in accordance with the ordinance or resolution of the council providing for such appointments, § 8.7.5.  
Sec. 98-30. - Officers. 
(a)  Chairperson and vice-chairperson. The traffic and safety board shall, from its appointed members, elect a chairperson who shall be the presiding officer of the board and a vice-chairperson who shall serve as presiding officer of the board in the absence of the chairperson. 
(b)  Secretary. A secretary, who shall keep and maintain the proceedings of the board, shall be appointed by the board. The secretary need not be a member of the board. 
(c)  Terms of office. The terms of office for such officers shall be one year and until their successors have been elected. 
(d)  Ex officio members excluded. An ex officio member of the board shall not act as the chairperson or vice-chairperson but may serve as secretary. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.05)  
Sec. 98-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular. The traffic and safety board shall hold at least one regular meeting each month at such time and place as may be established by the board. 
(b)  Special. Special meetings may be called by the secretary at the written request of the chairperson or any three members of the board on at least two days' notice. 
(c)  Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business at the regular and special meetings shall be four appointed members and at least one ex officio member. 
(d)  Open to public. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.06)  
Sec. 98-32. - Compensation. 
Voting members of the traffic and safety board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.07) 
Charter reference— Compensation for members of boards and commissions, § 8.8.  
Sec. 98-33. - Objectives. 
(a)  Resolving traffic problems. The traffic and safety board shall review and evaluate traffic problems that exist, anticipate those that may occur and recommend to the city council corrective measures or programs to resolve the problems. 
(b)  Endeavoring to decrease accidents. In addition, the board shall endeavor to serve the city by planning, conducting, promoting and assisting activities designed to decrease the number, severity and cost of accidents in the community. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.08)  
Sec. 98-34. - Duties. 
In carrying out its objectives, the traffic and safety board may: 
(1)  Safe traffic and safety promotion. Receive and review questions having to do with traffic and safety matters and make recommendations to the city council where action is deemed necessary to promote safe and efficient movement of traffic. 
(2)  Traffic condition improvement. Recommend to the city council ways and means for improving traffic conditions. 
(3)  Effective street usage. Recommend and monitor programs that will encourage and help to create the most effective use of existing streets. 
(4)  Street and intersection improvement. Review methods to improve streets and intersections. 
(5)  Sign or signal effectiveness improvement. Review the adequacy or effectiveness of existing or requested traffic signs, markings and signals. 
(6)  Accident cause review and prevention. Review causes of accidents and recommend how they can be prevented. 
(7)  Safety education. Conduct and promote safety education of the public by all available means for the purpose of obtaining remedial and preventative action. 
(8)  Volunteer coordination. Provide a means for voluntary coordination of planning and executing projects by the many groups interested in traffic and safety problems. 
(9)  Agency jurisdiction coordination. Establish communication and encourage coordination between governmental agencies having jurisdiction over streets in the city. 
(10)  Council or planning commission support. Pass upon all matters referred to it by the city council or planning commission and give the city council or planning commission the benefit of its judgment with relation to such matters so referred. 
(Code 1976, § 2-08.09)  
Secs. 98-35—98-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE 
 
Sec. 98-61. - Adoption by reference. 
The Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 through 257.923, as amended and as may be amended in the future, is adopted by reference. Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, being MCL 257.625(1)(c), is specifically adopted by reference in accordance with 2012 PA 7. 
(Ord. No. 458, § 1, 2-23-2000; Ord. No. 492, § 1, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 495, § 1, 5-4-2005; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 98-62. - Reference to local authorities. 
References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the city. 
(Ord. No. 458, § 1, 2-23-2000; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 98-63. - Publication of notice. 
The city clerk shall publish this article in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the clerk's office for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 458, § 1, 2-23-2000; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 98-64. - Penalties. 
The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference; provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment exceeds 93 days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a violation of Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code is punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than 180 days. 
(3)  A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. No. 458, § 1, 2-23-2000; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 98-65—98-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a), MSA 9.2306, (1)(a). 
 
Sec. 98-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parking violation means a notice, other than an appearance citation, directing a person to appear at the city parking violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the Michigan Vehicle Code or this Code for parking, stopping, or standing of a motor vehicle in violation of the Michigan Vehicle Code or this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 7-11.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-102. - Parking violations bureau. 
(a)  Established. A parking violations bureau, authorized by section 8395 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8395, MSA 27A.8395), is established. 
(b)  Designated office. The office of the city treasurer shall be the parking violations bureau, which office shall be authorized to accept civil infraction admissions in parking violations cases and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Operating expense. The expense of operating the parking violations bureau shall be borne by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-11.03) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish parking violations bureaus, MCL 600.9395, MSA 27A.9395.  
Sec. 98-103. - Parking violations. 
(a)  Civil infractions. All parking violations provided for in the Michigan Vehicle Code as adopted by the city, with modifications, and in any chapter of this Code shall be civil infractions as defined and provided for in sections 6a and 907 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.6a, 257.907, MSA 9.1806(1), 9.2607). A violation of a parking regulation of the city shall be processed in the same manner as a civil infraction under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.). 
(b)  Persons authorized to issue. Persons authorized to issue parking violations shall be the following: 
(1)  A deputy sheriff of the county sheriff's department, a state police officer and a limited duty officer, authorized by the mayor, shall have authority to and may issue a parking violation notice. 
(2)  The mayor may appoint a limited duty officer to issue parking violation notices and otherwise comply with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Service of notice and presumption. In a civil infraction action involving the parking, stopping, or standing of a motor vehicle, a copy of the notice of parking violation need not be served personally upon the defendant, but may be served upon the registered owner by attaching a copy to the vehicle. 
(d)  Payment of fine. If the parking violation fine is paid to the parking violations bureau, the city treasurer shall accept the fine and deposit the monies to the city's general fund or fire fund as the city council may determine. 
(Code 1976, § 7-11.04)  
Sec. 98-104. - Uniform traffic citation or complaint. 
(a)  Failure to pay fine. If the parking violation fine is not paid by the date indicated on the parking violation notice, the parking violations bureau shall return the notice to the officer who issued the violation, requesting the officer to: 
(1)  Verify the vehicle's ownership with the secretary of state; 
(2)  Obtain the registered owner's name and address from the secretary of state; 
(3)  File with the district court a uniform traffic citation, properly filled out, or a sworn complaint which contains the allegations stated in the parking violation notice and fairly informs the defendant how to respond. 
A copy of the citation or complaint, whichever is utilized, shall be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle at his last known address. 
(b)  Persons authorized to issue. A uniform traffic citation may be issued by a deputy sheriff, state police officer or any other person authorized by this article, in lieu of a parking violation notice. 
(c)  Processing. Whenever a uniform traffic citation or a sworn complaint, as provided for in subsection (a)(3) of this section, is filed with the district court, the violation shall be processed in the same manner as a citation issued personally to the defendant, pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) of section 742 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.742, MSA 9.2442). 
(Code 1976, § 7-11.05)  
Sec. 98-105. - Parking fines. 
(a)  Schedule. The schedule of fines payable to the parking violations bureau for parking violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Parking within 500 feet of fire apparatus ..... $ 40.00 
(2)  Parking in front of fire hydrant ..... 40.00 
(3)  Parking in front of fire stations ..... 40.00 
(4)  Parking in posted fire lane ..... 40.00 
(5)  Blocking fire department connection ..... 40.00 
(6)  Blocking crosswalk, sidewalk, alley, drive or traffic ..... 40.00 
(7)  Double parking ..... 40.00 
(8)  Improper parking ..... 40.00 
(9)  Parking over 24 hours ..... 40.00 
(10)  Prohibited parking ..... 40.00 
(11)  Prohibited parking, handicapped ..... 100.00 
(12)  Parking in violation of winter weather emergency ..... 40.00 
(13)  Other violation ..... 40.00 
(b)  Other fines under Michigan Vehicle Code or this Code. All parking violations that are paid to or settled with the city parking violations bureau shall be as provided in this section, unless another fine is specifically provided for in the Michigan Vehicle Code or another section of this Code, which other provisions shall prevail over what is set forth in this section. 
(c)  Unpaid or unsettled parking violations under Michigan Vehicle Code. If the parking violation is not settled or paid to the city parking violations bureau as provided in this article before it is reported to the district court, the fine and costs for the civil infraction shall be as is provided in section 907 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.907, MSA 9.2607). 
(d)  Other procedures. All other procedures provided by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 7-11.06; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 12-3-1997)  
Sec. 98-106. - Handicapped parking spaces. 
In accordance with section 942a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.942a, MSA 9.2642(1)), the owner and the lessee, in the case of a leasehold, of all public and private property having parking facilities available to the public shall set aside sufficient number of parking spaces according to the requirements and specifications for handicapped parking spaces as contained in section 315.3 of the state construction code and shall comply with the signage requirements for the handicapped parking spaces, as required by state laws. 
(Code 1976, § 7-11.07)  
Sec. 98-107. - Parking on private property. 
(a)  No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property in the city without the expressed or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, leasee, agent or trustee of such property. 
(b)  No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property, with or without consent of the owner, within 100 feet of a street right-of-way for the principal purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale, displaying, advertising, or selling merchandise from such vehicle, except within the defined limits of a duly established new or used automobile dealership or sales lot, which shall not include bike paths adjacent to any automobile dealership or sales lot, or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinance code provisions of the city. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-5-2001)  
Sec. 98-108. - Winter weather emergencies. 
(a)  While a winter weather emergency is in effect, no person shall park or leave any vehicle on any city street or portion thereof to which the parking prohibition applies. 
(b)  As used in this section, "street" means the portion of any city street, highway or roadway that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including the shoulder, if any. 
(c)  Whenever the mayor finds, on the basis of snow, sleet or freezing rain accumulation, or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet or freezing rain that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city streets be prohibited for snow plowing, de-icing and other purposes, the mayor shall declare a winter weather emergency and put into effect a parking prohibition on all or any portion of city streets as the mayor determines necessary by declaring such emergency as provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the mayor in accordance with this subsection, except that any street which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb, or to the edge of the shoulder for streets without curbs, for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom. 
(e)  Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled or disabled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this subsection, on any portion of a city street to which the parking prohibition applies, the person operating the vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the street. No person shall abandon or leave their vehicle in a city street (regardless of whether the person indicates, by raising the hood or otherwise, that the vehicle is stalled), except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, automobile service station or other place of assistance and return without delay. 
(f)  (1)  Declaration. The mayor shall cause each declaration of a winter weather emergency made pursuant to this section to be publicly announced, between 6:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M., by means of broadcasts or telecasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and the mayor may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the mayor, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets affected. 
(2)  Time of effect. The parking prohibition resulting from the mayor's winter weather emergency declaration shall go into effect two hours after it has been first announced. 
(3)  Record. The mayor shall make a record of each time and date when any winter weather emergency declaration is announced to the public pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Whenever the mayor shall find that some or all of the conditions which give rise to a winter weather emergency declaration no longer exist, the mayor may declare the winter weather emergency and parking prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, effective immediately upon announcement. 
(h)  Any provision of this section which becomes effective by declaration of the mayor or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting city ordinance code provisions normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over city ordinance code provisions relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel or authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. 
(i)  (1)  Enforcement authority. This section 98-108 shall only be enforceable by the county sheriff's department, who shall have the authority to issue and serve parking violation notices or appearance tickets for violations of this section 98-108. 
(2)  Civil infraction. Any person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(3)  Presumption of responsibility for parking or leaving vehicle. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this section. 
(4)  Service of appearance ticket. An appearance ticket for a violation of this section need not be served personally upon the violator, but may be served by attaching a copy to the subject vehicle. 
(5)  Impounding of vehicle. Any vehicle parked or left on any city street in violation of this section may be towed and impounded, and no person may recover any impounded vehicle without first paying the cost of removal and storage, notwithstanding, and apart from, any fine which may also be imposed for violation of this section. The impoundment fee may be waived at the mayor's sole discretion if the person in violation of this section can demonstrate that he or she was taking responsible steps to remove the vehicle from the street. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-5-2001)  
Secs. 98-109—98-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLES ON SCHOOL PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of motor vehicles on school district property, MCL 257.961, MSA 9.2660. 
 
Sec. 98-136. - Purpose. 
The operation, parking, and speed of vehicles on school property shall be regulated as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-05.01)  
Sec. 98-137. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Standing or parking violations. All violations of this article pertaining to standing or parking of vehicles are declared to be civil infractions as provided for in the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), and article IV of this chapter. The procedure for issuing parking violation notices or appearance citations, the procedure after their issuance, fines to be assessed and all other provisions relating to violations of standing or parking sections of this article shall be in accordance with and pursuant to article IV of this chapter, which article is incorporated in this section by reference. 
(b)  Other violations. For violations other than parking, standing and stopping, this article shall be enforced only by any deputy sheriff of the county sheriff's department or any state police officer. 
(Code 1976, § 7-05.04)  
Sec. 98-138. - Towing. 
(a)  Authority granted. The city police and the county sheriff's department are authorized to remove and tow away or to have removed and towed away by a commercial towing service any car or other vehicle parked in violation of this article where such parked vehicle: 
(1)  Creates or constitutes a traffic hazard. 
(2)  Blocks the use of a fire hydrant. 
(3)  Obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle. 
(b)  Impounding. Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place. 
(c)  Payment of fine and charges. Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be restored to the owner or operator of such car upon payment of the fine as provided in subsection 98-137(a) and the reasonable towing and storage charges. 
(Code 1976, § 7-05.05)  
Sec. 98-139. - Speed limit. 
(a)  Reasonable and proper operation. Any person operating a motor vehicle on property of a board of education in the city shall operate the vehicle at a careful, prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, the surface and width of the traffic lane in which the vehicle is traveling and of any other conditions then existing. 
(b)  Ability to stop. In no event shall any such person operate a motor vehicle on such properties at a speed greater than that which will permit him to bring the vehicle to a stop within an assured clear distance ahead. 
(c)  Maximum unposted speed. In no event shall the speed of any vehicle operated on such properties exceed 15 miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. 
(Code 1976, § 7-05.02)  
Sec. 98-140. - Parking. 
(a)  Marking of spaces. The boards of education having jurisdiction in the city shall cause lines or marks to be painted on the surface of the parking areas located on their respective properties within the city to designate the spaces to be used for vehicular parking thereon. 
(b)  Parking across lines. On the property that is so marked, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such lines or marks or to park any vehicle in such a way that the vehicle shall not be within the area so designated by such lines or markings unless such vehicle is too large to be confined in one such space. 
(c)  Prohibited areas. No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle where official signs prohibit parking, standing or stopping, except as follows: 
(1)  As directed by officer. In compliance with the directions of a city police officer or the county sheriff or his deputy at any place upon the property of a board of education. 
(2)  Designated areas. When parking is not adequate for a specific event such as a football game or a baseball game, there may be parking in areas designated by school authorities for additional parking, so long as the additional areas are clearly marked for parking and/or school personnel direct cars to the additional parking areas. 
(d)  Time limit. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any property of a board of education in the city for a period longer than one hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless otherwise provided by signs erected and maintained by a board of education giving notice of such exception. However, this prohibition shall not apply to any vehicle which has displayed on its windshield a sticker or emblem issued by the board of education upon whose property the vehicle is parked, giving permission to the operator of the vehicle to park such vehicle for longer periods of time. 
(Code 1976, § 7-05.03)  
Secs. 98-141—98-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SHOPPING CENTER PARKING LOTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic control in shopping center parking lots, MCL 257.941 et seq., MSA 9.2641 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-166. - Purpose. 
Traffic in shopping center parking areas shall be regulated as provided in this article, an authorized representative of each of the shopping centers specified in this article having requested in writing this regulation at each of the named shopping centers. 
(Code 1976, § 7-06.01)  
Sec. 98-167. - Traffic control devices and signs. 
(a)  Posting to notify or clarify prohibitions. The chief of police or any other person authorized by the mayor shall cause signs or other traffic control devices required in a parking area to be posted along those areas in front of the buildings or at other specified locations in order to notify the public of the prohibitions as set forth in this article. Signs may be posted in other areas if it appears necessary in order to clarify the prohibitions to the public. 
(b)  Conformance to requirements. A sign or other traffic control device required in a parking area shall conform to the requirements of the state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Code 1976, § 7-06.04)  
Sec. 98-168. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Civil infractions. All violations of this article pertaining to standing or parking of vehicles or traffic control are declared to be civil infractions as provided for in the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), and articles III and IV of this chapter. 
(b)  Procedures relating to violations. The procedure for issuing parking violation notices or appearance citations, the procedure after their issuance, fines to be assessed and all other provisions relating to violations of the standing or parking or traffic control sections of this article shall be in accordance with and pursuant to articles III and IV of this chapter, which articles are incorporated in this section by reference. 
(Code 1976, § 7-06.05)  
Sec. 98-169. - Towing. 
(a)  Authority granted. The city police and the county sheriff's department are authorized to remove and tow away or to have removed and towed away by a commercial towing service any car or other vehicle parked or abandoned in violation of this article where such vehicle: 
(1)  Creates or constitutes a traffic hazard. 
(2)  Blocks the use of a fire hydrant. 
(3)  Obstructs traffic or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle. 
(b)  Impounding. Cars and other vehicles so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place. 
(c)  Payment of fines and charges. Cars or other vehicles so towed away for illegal parking shall be released to the owner or operator of such car or other vehicle upon payment of the fine as provided for in section 98-168 and the reasonable towing and storage charges. 
(Code 1976, § 7-06.06)  
Sec. 98-170. - Unlawful standing or parking. 
(a)  Areas designated. At any time, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand or to park in any of the following areas: 
(1)  North Hill Shopping Center. Any marked entrance and/or exit lanes and marked driving aisles in the parking lot of the shopping center commonly known as the North Hill Shopping Center, which is located in the southwest quadrant of the intersection of Rochester Road and Tienken Road. This area shall specifically include the entire area 30 feet from the curb in front of the entire length of the buildings comprising the stores and shops of the North Hill Shopping Center. 
(2)  Rochester Hills Plaza. The marked entrance and exit lanes and the marked aisles in the parking lot of the shopping center which is commonly known as the Rochester Hills Plaza, which is located north of Walton Boulevard, west of the centerline of Livernois Road approximately 731 feet. This area shall specifically include the area adjoining the buildings in the Rochester Hills Plaza, extending from the curbs in front of the buildings to the area marked for parking spaces. 
(3)  Hampton Plaza Shopping Center. The marked entrance and exit lanes and the marked aisles in the parking lot of the shopping center which is commonly known as the Hampton Plaza, which is located in the southeast quadrant of the intersections of Rochester Road and Hamlin Road. This area shall specifically include the area adjoining the buildings in the Hampton Plaza Shopping Center, extending from the curbs in front of the buildings to the area marked for parking spaces. 
(4)  Campus Corners Shopping Center. The marked entrance and exit lanes and the marked aisles in the parking lot of the shopping center which is commonly known as Campus Corners, which is located in the southeast quadrant of the intersections of Walton Boulevard and Livernois Road. This area shall specifically include the area adjoining the buildings in the Campus Corners Shopping Center, extending from the curbs in front of the buildings to the area marked for parking spaces. 
(5)  Winchester Mall. The marked entrance and exit lanes and the marked aisles in the parking lot of the shopping center which is commonly known as Winchester Mall, which is located in the southwest quadrant of the intersection of Rochester Road and Avon Road. This area shall specifically, but not by way of limitation, include the area adjoining the buildings in the Winchester Mall, extending from the curbs in front of the buildings to the area marked for parking spaces, as well as the area extending from the western edge of the mall parking lot to the area marked for parking spaces, as follows: 
 
Winchester Mall 
(6)  University Square. The marked entrance and exit lanes and the marked aisles in the parking lot of the shopping center which is commonly known as University Square, which is located in the northwest quadrant of the intersection of Walton Boulevard and Adams Road. This area shall specifically, but not by way of limitation, include the area adjoining the building in University Square, extending from the curbs in front of the building to the area marked for parking spaces. 
(7)  Kmart Shopping Center. The marked entrance and exit lanes and the marked aisles in the parking lot of the shopping center which is commonly known as the Kmart Shopping Center, which is located in the southwest quadrant of the intersection of Rochester Road and Avon Road, as shown following this subsection. This area shall specifically include the area adjoining the buildings in the Kmart Shopping Center, extending from the curbs in front of the buildings to the area marked for parking spaces. 
 
K-Mart Center 
(b)  Designated fire lanes. The areas so described in subsection (a) of this section are declared to be fire lanes. 
(c)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this section shall be when necessary in order to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a peace officer. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-06.02, 7-06.0A, 7-06.0B)  
Sec. 98-171. - Traffic control. 
A person who violates the directions of any of the following traffic control devices is responsible for a violation of this article: 
(1)  Winchester Mall. Any and all stop signs, yield signs, or other traffic control devices erected at entrance and exit locations and intersections in the Winchester Mall parking area, as set forth in section 98-170. 
(2)  University Square. Any and all stop signs or other traffic control devices erected at entrance and exit locations in the University Square parking area. 
(3)  Kmart Shopping Center. Any and all stop signs or other traffic control devices erected at entrance and exit locations in the Kmart Shopping Center, as shown in section 98-170. 
(Code 1976, § 7-06.03)  
Secs. 98-172—98-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MOTORCYCLES AND CERTAIN RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of motorcycles, MCL 257.656 et seq., MSA 9.2356 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Michigan Vehicle Code. All definitions that appear in the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), shall be applicable to such terms when used in this article. 
Motorcycle means: 
(1)  Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground; and 
(2)  Every vehicle not entitled to be licensed for travel upon the public highways of the state that is designed primarily for recreational purposes, including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, go-carts, trail bikes or drag bikes. 
The term does not include tractors, motor-powered lawn mowers, special mobile equipment as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), or similar vehicles. 
(Code 1976, § 7-08.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Motorcycle, defined, MCL 257.31, MSA 9.1831.  
Sec. 98-202. - Purpose. 
By the adoption of this article, the city council finds and determines the uncontrolled operation of motorcycles, as defined in section 98-201, has become a public nuisance within the city due to loud and raucous noises, noxious odors and excessive dust. They are dangerous to the health and safety of persons within the city, and damage is being caused to property within the city because of the uncontrolled use of such vehicles on private property without the consent of the owners thereof and on public property without the consent of the public bodies having jurisdiction. The city council further finds that this article controlling the use of such vehicles is necessary to prevent nuisance conditions detrimental to the safety, health, and general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1976, § 7-08.01)  
Sec. 98-203. - Operating restrictions. 
(a)  Motor vehicle travel areas. No motorcycle shall be operated upon the city streets and highways or other areas open to public motor vehicle travel except in accordance with the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.). 
(b)  Parking facilities. No motorcycle shall be operated in any area open to the public for the parking of motor vehicles except for the sole purpose of normal ingress and egress into such parking facilities. 
(c)  Public or school property. No motorcycle shall be operated upon property owned by the city or by a public school district, other than areas designated for the parking of motor vehicles, except in accordance with the rules and regulations established for such property by the public body having jurisdiction. 
(d)  Private property. The following shall apply to the use of motorcycles on private property: 
(1)  Trespassing. No motorcycle shall be operated upon any private property in violation of division 2 of article II of chapter 70 pertaining to trespassing. 
(2)  Zoning. No motorcycle shall be operated upon any private property within the city unless such operation is in accordance with a principal use permitted on such property by chapter 138 or is an accessory use normally incidental to a permitted principal use then in existence upon the property. 
(e)  Subdivision streets. No person shall operate a motorcycle on the streets of any subdivision except for the purpose of gaining ingress to or egress from premises located within the subdivision or for through traffic through the subdivision. It is the intention of this subsection to regulate, restrict and minimize the use of subdivision streets for the recreational use of motorcycles. 
(Code 1976, § 7-08.03)  
Sec. 98-204. - Operator restrictions. 
No person shall operate a motorcycle on public or private property: 
(1)  While under the influence of alcoholic liquor or narcotic drugs, barbital or any derivative of barbital; 
(2)  When, due to consumption of alcoholic liquor, narcotic drugs, barbital or any derivative of barbital, he has visibly impaired his ability to operate the vehicle; 
(3)  In willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons, including himself, or property; 
(4)  In a careless or negligent manner likely to endanger any person or property; 
(5)  In a speed or acceleration contest or for the purpose of making a speed record, whether from a standing start or otherwise over a measured or unmeasured distance; or 
(6)  In a drag race as defined in section 626a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.626a, MSA 9.2326(1)). 
(Code 1976, § 7-08.04)  
Sec. 98-205. - Excessive, unusual or unnecessary noise. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall operate a motorcycle in the city in such a manner as to create excessive, unusual or unnecessary noise. 
(b)  Mandatory equipment. Every motorcycle so operated shall be equipped with an efficient muffler which will ensure noise levels comparable to that of a private passenger automobile. 
(c)  Causes. Causes of excessive, unusual or unnecessary noise shall be as follows: 
(1)  Racing engines. Racing motorcycle engines or repeated acceleration and deceleration of motorcycle engines, except in the course of maintenance of such engines, is deemed to be excessive, unusual and unnecessary noise. 
(2)  Abrupt or violent acceleration. Abrupt or violent acceleration of a motorcycle, including acceleration which causes the front wheel of the motorcycle to lose contact with the ground, shall be deemed to create excessive, unusual, or unnecessary noise. 
(Code 1976, § 7-08.05)  
Secs. 98-206—98-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Off-road recreation vehicles, MCL 324.81101 et seq., MSA 13A.81101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Off-road vehicle or ORV means a motor-driven off-road recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. The term includes but is not limited to a multitrack or multiwheel drive or low pressure tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel, three-wheel or four-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground-effect or air cushion vehicle, or any other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. The term does not include a registered snowmobile; a farm vehicle being used for farming; a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes; a vehicle owned and operated by a utility company or an oil or gas company when performing maintenance on its facilities or on property over which it has an easement; a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function; a registered aircraft or motorboat; or a self-propelled lawn mower, snow blower, garden or lawn tractor or golfcart while being used exclusively for their designed purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 7-15.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Off-road vehicle, defined, MCL 324.81101, MSA 13A.81101.  
Sec. 98-232. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines off-road vehicles (ORVs) have become a public nuisance within the city due to loud and raucous noises, reckless and careless operation, noxious odors, excessive dust and other adverse effects upon the natural terrain and environment. 
(b)  They are dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of persons within the city, and damage is being caused to property within the city due to the use of such vehicles on private property without the consent of the property owners and on public property without the consent of the public bodies having jurisdiction. 
(c)  The city council further determines this article restricting the use, operation, setting into motion, transportation, movement, maneuvering or standing of such vehicles is necessary to prevent and eliminate nuisance conditions that are detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1976, § 7-15.01)  
Sec. 98-233. - Prohibitions. 
Except as permitted in section 98-234, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, set in motion, transport, move, maneuver or leave standing an off-road vehicle within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-15.03)  
Sec. 98-234. - Exceptions. 
The prohibition expressed in section 98-233 shall not apply to the use, operation, setting in motion, transportation, movement, maneuvering or standing of an off-road vehicle: 
(1)  On the frozen surface of public waters or on land owned by or under the control of the state; 
(2)  Which is a vehicle registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), or part 811 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.81101 et seq., MSA 13A.81101 et seq.), unless the vehicle is operated as an off-road vehicle off highways, roadways or streets; 
(3)  Occurring exclusively during the course of a special event of limited duration which is conducted according to a prearranged schedule under a permit from the city council; 
(4)  Upon private property owned or leased by or under the control of the off-road vehicle owner, provided the activity is in accordance with a principal or accessory use permitted on the land by chapter 138 pertaining to zoning; 
(5)  Upon the private property of another, in the presence of or with the written consent of the owner, lessee or agent thereof; 
(6)  Left or kept at an off-road vehicle dealership or repair facility; 
(7)  Operated across a public highway, other than a limited access highway, at right angles to the highway for the purpose of getting to a permitted area when the operation can be done in safety and another vehicle is not crossing the highway at the same time in the same general area. An operator shall bring his off-road vehicle to a complete stop before proceeding across the public highway and shall yield the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic; or 
(8)  In the process of being transported in a trailer upon the city highways, roadways, or streets. 
(Code 1976, § 7-15.04)  
Sec. 98-235. - Impoundment for violation. 
(a)  Authority of sheriff's department. The county sheriff's department is authorized to remove, tow and impound any off-road vehicle used, operated, set in motion, transported, moved, maneuvered or left standing in violation of this article. 
(b)  Minimum duration. An impounded off-road vehicle shall be held for at least 24 hours. 
(c)  Release. The off-road vehicle shall be released in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Application by owner. After the time stated in subsection (b) of this section, an impounded off-road vehicle shall be released upon application of the off-road vehicle owner and payment of any removal, towing and storage charges. 
(2)  Owner under 18. If the owner is less than 18 years old, the owner must also be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1976, § 7-15.05)  
Secs. 98-236—98-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Motor carrier safety act of 1963, MCL 480.11 et seq., MSA 9.1666(1) et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business district means the territory contiguous to a highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business. 
Drive-away/tow-away operation means an operation in which one or more motor vehicles, new or used, constitute the commodity being transported when one or more sets of wheels of any such motor vehicle are on the roadway during the course of transportation, regardless of whether the motor vehicle being transported furnishes the motive power. 
Driver means a person who drives or operates a motor vehicle. 
Enforcement officer includes both sheriff's deputies and other persons designated by the mayor to enforce this article. 
Gross weight means the combined weight of a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles and any load thereon. 
Hazardous materials means all solids, liquids, and gases listed in the provisions of 49 CFR 171 et seq. 
Lightweight vehicle means either of the following: 
(1)  A motor vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less, if a single vehicle, or a gross combination weight of 10,000 pounds or less, if a combination of vehicles. 
(2)  A motor vehicle that has a gross weight, including its load and the gross weight of any vehicle being towed by the motor vehicle, of 10,000 pounds or less. 
The term "lightweight vehicle" shall not include a vehicle that is being used to transport hazardous materials of a type or quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to the provisions of 49 CFR 171 et seq. 
Motor carrier means a carrier of property by motor vehicle and includes a motor carrier and the agents, officers, representatives, and employees of a motor carrier who are responsible for the hiring, supervising, training, assigning, or dispatching of drivers. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled or a vehicle that is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Pole trailer means a vehicle without motive power, possibly of variable wheelbase, designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads, such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable generally of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Residential district means the territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a business district when the frontage on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings. 
Semitrailer means a vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Trailer means a vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying property or persons and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. A semitrailer equipped with an auxiliary front axle, known as a dolly, shall be deemed to be a trailer. 
Truck means a motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Truck tractor means a motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Vehicle means any conveyance of any type whatsoever operated upon the highways. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-16.02, 7-16.03.02(c)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 480.11a, MSA 9.1666(1a).  
Sec. 98-262. - Purpose. 
The city council finds and determines that it is necessary to regulate the operation of motor trucks, truck tractors, and trailers within the city to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.01)  
Sec. 98-263. - Enforcement officers. 
(a)  Designated. It shall be the duty of the sheriff's department and the deputy sheriffs of the department and other enforcement officers designated by the mayor to enforce this article. 
(b)  Authority to stop and inspect vehicles. The enforcement officers, upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this article, may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle. 
(c)  Issuance of appearance notice. If a violation is found, the enforcement officer may issue a notice to appear for that violation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.03.02)  
Sec. 98-264. - Responsibility for violation. 
Any driver or operator who violates this article or any motor carrier or any owner or user of any truck, truck tractor, or trailer or any officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court which is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or drive any truck, truck tractor, or trailer in violation of this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor for each violation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.03.01)  
Secs. 98-265—98-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRIVING OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 98-291. - Medical certificate. 
(a)  Required. A person who drives a motor vehicle as, for, or on behalf of a motor carrier shall have on his person the original or a copy of a certificate, issued from a physician licensed to practice medicine or osteopathy in the state, stating that the person is physically qualified to drive a motor vehicle, unless that person is otherwise lawfully exempted from having the certificate on his person. 
(b)  Form. The certificate shall be in accordance with the following form prescribed by the motor carrier safety act and rules as promulgated by the department of state police and authorized by MCL 480.14, MSA 9.1666(4): 
I certify that I have examined ___________ in accordance with Motor Carrier Safety Rules R 460.16215—R 460.16218, and with knowledge of his or her duties, I find him or her qualified under the regulations. 
_____ Qualified only when wearing corrective lenses. 
A completed examination form for this person is on file in my office at (address) _____
_____ . 
_____
(Date of exam) 	_____
(Examining Doctor) 
	_____
(Driver) 
	_____
(Driver's Address) 
 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.01) 
State Law reference— Medical examiner's certificate, MCL 480.12i, MSA 9.1666(2i); persons required to be medically examined and certified in accordance with 49 CFR 391.43, MCL 480.12j, MSA 9.1666(2j).  
Sec. 98-292. - Operation by impaired driver. 
(a)  Restriction. Under this article, a driver shall not operate a motor vehicle and a motor carrier shall not require or permit a driver to operate a motor vehicle while the driver's ability or alertness is so impaired or so likely to become impaired, through fatigue, illness, or any other cause, as to make it unsafe for him to begin or continue to operate the motor vehicle. 
(b)  Grave emergency exception. However, in case of grave emergency, where the hazard to occupants of the vehicle or other users of the highway would be increased by compliance with this section, the driver may continue to operate the motor vehicle to the nearest place at which that hazard is removed. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.02)  
Sec. 98-293. - Narcotics, amphetamines and like substances. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "possession" does not include possession of a substance which is manifested and transported as part of a shipment. 
(b)  Operation of motor vehicle. Under this article, a person shall not operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle if he possessed, is under the influence of, or is using any of the following substances: 
(1)  A narcotic drug or any derivative thereof. 
(2)  An amphetamine or any formulation thereof, including but not limited to pep pills and bennies. 
(3)  Any other substances, to a degree which renders him incapable of safely operating a motor vehicle. 
(c)  Motor carrier responsibility. A motor carrier shall not knowingly require or permit a driver to violate subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Permissive use. Subsection (b) of this section does not apply to the possession or use of a substance administered to a driver by or under the instructions of a physician who has advised the driver that the substance will not affect his ability to operate a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.03)  
Sec. 98-294. - Alcoholic liquor. 
(a)  Prohibitions. Under this article, a person shall not: 
(1)  Consume an alcoholic liquor, regardless of its alcoholic content, or be under the influence of an alcoholic liquor within four hours before going on duty or operating or having physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Consume an alcoholic liquor, regardless of its alcoholic content, or be under the influence of an alcoholic liquor while on duty or while operating or being in physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(3)  Be on duty or operate a motor vehicle while he possesses an alcoholic liquor, regardless of its alcoholic content. However, this subsection does not apply to possession of an alcoholic liquor which is manifested and transported as part of a shipment. 
(b)  Motor carrier responsibility. A motor carrier shall not require or permit a driver to: 
(1)  Violate subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Be on duty or operate a motor vehicle if, by his general appearance, conduct or other substantiating evidence, he appears to have consumed an alcoholic liquor within the preceding four hours. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.04)  
Sec. 98-295. - Schedules to conform with speed limits. 
A motor carrier shall not schedule a run or shall not permit or shall not require the operation of a motor vehicle between different locations in such a period of time as would necessitate the vehicle being operated at speeds greater than those prescribed. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.05)  
Sec. 98-296. - Parts and accessories. 
(a)  Proper operating condition. Under this article, a motor vehicle shall not be driven unless the driver thereof is satisfied that the vehicle is in proper operating condition. Parts and accessories that shall be checked by the driver include but are not limited to all of the following: 
(1)  Service brakes, including trailer brake connections. 
(2)  Parking brake or hand brake. 
(3)  Steering mechanism. 
(4)  Lighting devices and reflectors. 
(5)  Tires. 
(6)  Horn. 
(7)  Windshield wipers. 
(8)  Rear-vision mirrors. 
(9)  Coupling devices. 
(10)  Windshield washers. 
(11)  Windshield defrosters. 
(b)  Use of parts and accessories. A driver of a motor vehicle shall not fail to use or make use of the parts and accessories listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.06)  
Sec. 98-297. - Emergency equipment inspection and use. 
Under this article, a motor vehicle shall not be driven unless the driver thereof has been satisfied that the emergency equipment required by section 98-398 is in place and ready for use, and a driver shall not fail to use or make use of such equipment when and as needed. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.07)  
Sec. 98-298. - Safe loading. 
(a)  Requirements. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle and a motor carrier shall not require or permit a person to drive a motor vehicle pursuant to this article, unless there is compliance with all of the following: 
(1)  The vehicle's cargo is properly distributed and adequately secured as specified in sections 98-399 to 98-401. 
(2)  The vehicle's tailgate, doors, sideboards, tarpaulins, spare tire, other equipment used in its operation and the means of fastening the vehicle's cargo are secured. 
(3)  The vehicle's cargo or any other object shall not do any of the following: 
a.  Obscure the driver's view ahead or to the right or left sides. 
b.  Interfere with the free movement of the driver's arms or legs. 
c.  Prevent the driver from having free and ready access to any accessories required for emergencies. 
d.  Prevent the free and ready exit of any person from the vehicle's cab or driver's compartment. 
(b)  Examination of vehicle and load. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the driver of a truck or truck tractor shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Assure himself that all the provisions of subsection (a) of this section have been complied with before he drives the vehicle. 
(2)  Examine the vehicle's cargo and its load-securing devices within the first 25 miles after beginning a trip and cause any adjustments to be made to the cargo or load-securing devices, other than steel strapping, as may be necessary to maintain the security of the vehicle's load. 
(3)  Reexamine the vehicle's cargo and its load-securing devices periodically during the course of transportation and cause any adjustments to be made to the cargo or load-securing devices, other than steel strapping, as may be necessary to maintain the security of the vehicle's load. A periodic reexamination and any necessary adjustments shall be made when the driver makes a change of his duty status, after the vehicle has been driven for three hours, or after the vehicle has been driven for 150 miles, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to the driver of a sealed vehicle who is ordered not to open the vehicle to inspect its cargo or to the driver of a vehicle that is loaded in a manner that makes inspection of its cargo impracticable. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.08)  
Sec. 98-299. - Stopping required at railroad crossings. 
(a)  Stopping and continuation. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the driver of a motor vehicle specified in subsection (b) of this section shall not cross a railroad track at grade unless he first stops the vehicle within 50 feet of and not closer than 15 feet to the tracks, thereafter listens and looks in each direction along the tracks for an approaching train, and ascertains that no train is approaching. When it is safe to do so, the driver may drive the vehicle across the tracks in a gear that permits the vehicle to complete the crossing without a change of gears. The driver shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(b)  Types of motor vehicles. The following motor vehicles shall stop at railroad grade crossings as provided in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  A motor vehicle transporting any quantity of chlorine. 
(2)  A motor vehicle which, pursuant to the provisions of 49 CFR 171 et seq., is required to be marked or placarded with one of the following markings: 
a.  Explosives A. 
b.  Explosives B. 
c.  Poison. 
d.  Flammable. 
e.  Oxidizer. 
f.  Compressed gas. 
g.  Corrosive. 
h.  Flammable gas. 
i.  Radioactive. 
j.  Dangerous. 
k.  Poison gas. 
l.  Flammable solid. 
m.  Flammable solid waste. 
n.  Blasting agent. 
o.  Nonflammable gas. 
p.  Chlorine. 
q.  Oxygen. 
r.  Combustible. 
s.  Organic peroxide. 
(3)  A cargo tank vehicle, whether loaded or empty, which is used for the transportation of any hazardous material, as defined in 49 CFR 171 et seq., or for the transportation of any liquid having a flashpoint below 200 degrees Fahrenheit, as determined by The Standard Method of Test for Flashpoint of the American Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19103, as set forth in ASTM D-5661, ASTM D-92.57, or ASTM D-93-62, and referenced by the National Fire Protection Association, 470 Atlantic Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02210, in Pamphlet No. 385, 1964 edition. 
(4)  A cargo tank vehicle transporting a commodity which, at the time of loading, has a temperature above its flashpoint as determined by the same standard method of testing as prescribed in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(c)  Exceptions. A stop need not be made at the following locations: 
(1)  A streetcar crossing or railroad tracks used exclusively for industrial switching purposes within a business district. 
(2)  A railroad grade crossing when a police officer or crossing flagman directs traffic to proceed. 
(3)  A railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning highway traffic signal transmitting a green indication which permits the vehicle to proceed across the railroad tracks without slowing or stopping. 
(4)  An abandoned railroad grade crossing which is marked with a sign indicating that the rail line is abandoned. 
(5)  An industrial or spur line railroad grade crossing marked with a sign reading "exempt crossing." Such exempt crossing signs shall be erected only by or with the consent of the state transportation department or local road commission. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.09)  
Sec. 98-300. - Speed and caution at railroad crossings. 
Motor vehicles, other than those listed in section 98-299, shall, upon approaching a railroad grade crossing, be driven at a rate of speed which permits the motor vehicle to be stopped before reaching the nearest rail of the crossing and shall not be driven upon or over the crossing until due caution is taken to ascertain that the course is clear. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.10)  
Sec. 98-301. - Extreme caution in hazardous conditions. 
Extreme caution in the operation of a motor vehicle pursuant to this article shall be exercised when hazardous conditions, such as those caused by snow, ice, sleet, fog, mist, rain, dust, or smoke, adversely affect visibility or traction. Speed shall be reduced when such conditions exist. If conditions become sufficiently dangerous, the operation of the vehicle shall be discontinued and shall not be resumed until the vehicle can be safely operated. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.11)  
Sec. 98-302. - Turn signals required; prohibited use. 
(a)  Distance. Under this article, a motor vehicle turn shall be signaled for a distance of not less than 100 feet in advance of and during the turning movement by flashing the turn signals at the front and the rear of the vehicle on the side toward which the turning movement is made. 
(b)  Direction. Turn signals shall be flashed to indicate the direction of vehicle movement prior to and during entry of the vehicle into the traffic stream from a parked position. 
(c)  Lane change. Turn signals shall be flashed to indicate the direction of vehicle movement continuously for a distance of not less than 100 feet in advance of and during the movement of the vehicle from one traffic lane to another. 
(d)  Parked or disabled vehicle. Turn signals shall not be flashed on one side only on parked or disabled vehicles. 
(e)  Courtesy signal. Turn signals shall not be used as courtesy or "do pass" signals to operators of vehicles approaching from the rear. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.12)  
Sec. 98-303. - Seat belt use. 
Under this article, a motor vehicle that has a seat belt assembly installed at the driver's seat shall not be driven unless the driver properly restrains himself with the seat belt assembly. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.13)  
Sec. 98-304. - Precautions for unattended vehicle. 
Under this article, a motor vehicle shall not be left unattended until the parking brake is securely set and all reasonable precautions are taken to prevent the movement of the vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.14)  
Sec. 98-305. - Stopping, parking or leaving vehicle. 
(a)  Off traveled portion of highway. A vehicle shall not be stopped, parked, or left standing, whether attended or unattended, upon the traveled portion of a highway outside of a business or residential district when it is practicable to stop, park, or leave the vehicle off the traveled portion of the highway. 
(b)  Conditions. If conditions make it impracticable to move the vehicle from the traveled portion of the highway, the driver shall make every effort to leave all possible width of the highway opposite the standing vehicle for the free passage of other vehicles, and he shall take care to provide clear view of the standing vehicle as far as possible to the front and rear. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.15)  
Sec. 98-306. - Emergency signals on stopped vehicles. 
(a)  Flashing signals. Under this article, when a vehicle is stopped upon the traveled portion of a highway or the shoulder of a highway for any cause, other than necessary traffic stops, the driver of the stopped vehicle shall immediately flash the two front and two rear turn signals simultaneously as a vehicular traffic hazard warning and shall continue the flashing until he places the warning devices required by subsections (b) and (c) of this section in use on the highways. The flashing signals shall be used during the time the warning devices are picked up for storage before movement of the vehicle. The flashing lights may be used at other times while a vehicle is stopped in addition to, but not in place of, the warning devices required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Placement of warning devices. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, when a vehicle is stopped upon the traveled portion of a highway or the shoulder of a highway for any cause, other than necessary traffic stops, the driver shall, as soon as possible, but in any event within ten minutes, place the warning devices with which his vehicle is equipped pursuant to section 98-398, which shall be three emergency reflective triangles, three electric emergency lanterns, three liquid-burning emergency flares, or three red emergency reflectors. The warning devices shall be placed in the following manner: 
(1)  One at the traffic side of the stopped vehicle, within ten feet of the front or rear of the vehicle. 
(2)  One at a distance of approximately 100 feet from the rear of the stopped vehicle or load, in the center of the traffic lane or shoulder occupied by the vehicle, and facing traffic approaching the rear of the vehicle. 
(3)  One at a distance of approximately 100 feet from the front of the stopped vehicle, in the center of the traffic lane or shoulder occupied by the vehicle, and facing oncoming traffic in the opposite lane. 
(c)  Special rules. The following special rules apply to the placement of warning devices: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle equipped with liquid-burning flares or pot torches shall first place a fuse at the locations specified in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section relative to business and residential districts, during the period lighted lamps are not required, three emergency triangles shall be placed as specified in subsection (b) of this section or two red flags shall be placed as specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section and subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(3)  The placement of warning devices is not required within a business or residential district, except during the time lighted lamps are required and when street or highway lighting is insufficient to make a vehicle clearly discernable to persons on the highway at a distance of 500 feet. 
(4)  If a vehicle is stopped within 500 feet of a curve, crest of a hill or other obstruction to view, the driver shall place the warning signals required by subsection (b) of this section in the direction of the obstruction to view at a distance of 100 to 500 feet from the stopped vehicle so as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway. 
(5)  If a vehicle is stopped upon the traveled portion or the shoulder of a divided or one-way highway, the driver shall place the warning devices required by subsection (b) of this section so that one warning device is at a distance of 200 feet and one warning device is at a distance of 100 feet in the direction of approaching traffic. The devices shall be placed in the center of the lane or shoulder occupied by the vehicle. The driver shall place one warning device at the traffic side of the vehicle within ten feet of the rear of the vehicle. 
(6)  If gasoline or any other flammable liquid, combustible liquid, or gas seeps or leaks from a fuel container of a vehicle stopped upon a highway, an emergency warning signal producing a flame shall not be lighted or placed unless it is lighted or placed at a distance from the liquid or gas which ensures that a fire or explosion will not occur. 
(d)  Exceptions. Subsections (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to the operation of a lightweight vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.16)  
Sec. 98-307. - Flame-type warning device restricted. 
Under this article, a driver shall not use or permit the use of any flame-producing emergency signal for protecting a vehicle transporting class A or class B explosives; for protecting a cargo tank vehicle used for the transportation of a flammable liquid or flammable compressed gas, whether loaded or empty; or for protecting a motor vehicle using compressed gas as a motor fuel. In lieu thereof, emergency reflective triangles, red electric lanterns, or red emergency reflectors shall be used, the placement of which shall be in the same manner as prescribed in subsection 98-306(b). 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.17)  
Sec. 98-308. - Lighted lamps generally. 
A motor vehicle shall not be driven upon the highway unless the lamps required by this article are lighted during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernable persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.18)  
Sec. 98-309. - Lighted lamps on stopped or parked vehicle. 
If a motor vehicle subject to this article is parked or stopped upon the highway within a business or residential district, whether attended or unattended, during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, at least one white or amber light shall be displayed on the traffic side of the motor vehicle, visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the motor vehicle, and at least one red light, visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, shall be displayed. The headlamp beam, if in use, shall be dimmed or depressed. Lamps need not be lighted, however, if there is sufficient highway lighting to make clearly discernable persons and vehicles at a distance of 500 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.19)  
Sec. 98-310. - Upper and lower headlamp beams. 
During the times when lighted lamps are required under this article, every driver shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The driver shall use the upper distribution of light when there is no oncoming vehicle within 500 feet. However, a lower distribution of light may be used when fog, dust, or other atmospheric conditions make it desirable for reasons of safety and when there is sufficient light to render clearly discernable persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead. 
(2)  When within 500 feet of an oncoming vehicle, the driver shall use a distribution of light or composite beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver, and such distribution of light shall also be used when following another vehicle within 500 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.20)  
Sec. 98-311. - Obscured lamps or reflectors. 
A vehicle shall not be operated under this article when any of the required lamps or reflectors are obscured by the tailboard, by any part of the load, by dirt, or by other conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.21)  
Sec. 98-312. - Driver's duties during personal injury accident. 
Under this article, a driver of a motor vehicle involved in an accident from which there results injury to or death of any person or property damage of any kind, regardless of the amount, shall do the following: 
(1)  Stop immediately. 
(2)  Take all necessary precautions to prevent a further accident at the scene. 
(3)  Render all reasonable assistance to injured persons, although movement of injured persons by a driver should not be undertaken if likely to cause further injury. 
(4)  Give to any person, demanding such, his name and address, the name and address of the motor carrier for whom he is then driving, and the state tag registration number of the vehicle involved. If requested, the driver shall exhibit his chauffeur's or operator's license. 
(5)  Report all details of the accident, as soon as practicable after its occurrence, to the motor carrier then using his services. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.22)  
Sec. 98-313. - Striking unattended vehicle. 
Under this article, if a moving vehicle strikes a vehicle standing unattended upon a highway, the driver of the former shall immediately stop and endeavor to locate the custodian of the unattended vehicle. If his reasonable effort to do so is unsuccessful, the driver of the vehicle doing the striking shall place, securely and conspicuously in or on that unattended vehicle, his name and address and that of the motor carrier for whom he is then driving. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.23)  
Sec. 98-314. - Prohibitions on fueling motor vehicles. 
A driver or employee of a motor carrier shall not: 
(1)  Fuel a motor vehicle with the engine running, except when it is necessary to run the engine to fuel the vehicle. 
(2)  Smoke or expose any open flame in the vicinity of a motor vehicle being fueled. 
(3)  Fuel a motor vehicle unless the nozzle of the fuel hose is continuously in contact with the intake pipe of the fuel tank. 
(4)  Permit, insofar as practicable, any other person to engage in such activities as are likely to result in fire or explosion. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.24)  
Sec. 98-315. - Reserve fuel tank. 
Under this article, a supply of fuel for the propulsion of a vehicle or for the operation of accessories shall not be carried on a vehicle except in a properly mounted fuel tank. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.25)  
Sec. 98-316. - Transporting of unauthorized persons. 
(a)  Prohibition. Unless specifically authorized in writing to do so by the motor carrier under whose authority the motor vehicle is being operated, a driver shall not transport a person or permit a person to be transported on a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Written authorization requirements. When such authorization is issued, it shall state the name of the person to be transported, the points where the transportation is to begin and end, and the date upon which the authorization expires. 
(c)  Exclusions from written authorization. A written authorization shall not, however, be necessary for the transportation of: 
(1)  Employees or other persons assigned to a vehicle by a motor carrier. 
(2)  A person transported when aid is being rendered in an accident or other emergency. 
(3)  An attendant delegated to care for livestock. 
(d)  Exception. This section does not apply to the operation of a motor vehicle controlled and operated by a farmer and used in the transportation of agricultural commodities or products thereof from his farm or in the transportation of supplies to his farm. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.26)  
Sec. 98-317. - Operation by unauthorized person. 
Except in an emergency, a driver shall not permit a motor vehicle to which he is assigned to be driven by a person not authorized to drive the vehicle by the motor carrier in control thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.27)  
Sec. 98-318. - Riders within closed-body vehicles. 
Under this article, a person shall not ride within the closed body of a vehicle unless there are means, on the inside thereof, of obtaining exit. The means of exit shall be in such condition as to permit ready operation by the occupant. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.28)  
Sec. 98-319. - Transfer to or from sleeper berth. 
Under this article, a person shall not transfer to or from a sleeper berth while a motor vehicle is in motion unless by means of a direct access between the cab and the berth. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.29)  
Sec. 98-320. - Sleeper berth occupation. 
Under this article, a sleeper berth shall not be occupied by more than one person at any time when the vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.30)  
Sec. 98-321. - Carbon monoxide detection. 
Under this article, a person shall not dispatch or drive a motor vehicle or permit any passengers thereon, when the following conditions are known to exist, until such conditions are remedied or repaired: 
(1)  Where an occupant has been affected by carbon monoxide. 
(2)  Where carbon monoxide has been detected in the interior of the vehicle. 
(3)  When a mechanical condition of the vehicle is discovered that is likely to produce a hazard to the occupants because of carbon monoxide. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.31)  
Sec. 98-322. - Operation of open flame heaters. 
An open flame heater used in the loading or unloading of the commodity transported pursuant to this article shall not be in operation while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.32)  
Sec. 98-323. - Motive power disengagement. 
Under this article, a motor vehicle shall not be driven with the source of motive power disengaged from the driving wheels, except when such disengagement is necessary to stop or to shift gears. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.04.33)  
Secs. 98-324—98-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REQUIRED SAFE OPERATING EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 98-351. - Compliance with requirements and specifications. 
(a)  A motor carrier, its officers, agents, drivers, representatives, and its employees directly concerned with the installation and maintenance of equipment and accessories shall comply with and be conversant in the requirements and specifications of this division. 
(b)  A motor carrier or driver shall not operate a vehicle or cause or permit it to be operated unless it is equipped pursuant to the requirements and specifications of this division and unless all required equipment is in proper operating condition. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.01)  
Sec. 98-352. - Additional equipment and accessories. 
This division shall not be construed to prohibit the use of additional equipment and accessories if such additional equipment or accessories are in proper working condition, are not inconsistent with or prohibited by this division, and do not decrease the safety of operation of the vehicle on which they are used. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.02)  
Sec. 98-353. - Lamps and reflectors. 
(a)  Small truck requirements. A truck less than 80 inches in overall width shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  On the front, there shall be not less than two headlamps, an equal number on each side; and two turn signals, one on each side. 
(2)  On the rear, there shall be two tail lamps, one on each side; two stop lamps, one on each side; two turn signals, one on each side; and two reflectors, one on each side. 
(b)  Large truck requirements. A truck 80 inches or more in overall width shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  On the front, there shall be not less than two headlamps, an equal number on each side; two turn signals, one on each side; two clearance lamps, one on each side; three identification lamps, mounted on the vertical centerline of the vehicle or the vertical centerline of the cab where different from the centerline of the vehicle, except that where the cab is not more than 42 inches wide at the front roofline, a single lamp at the center of the cab shall be deemed to comply with the requirements for identification lamps. No part of the identification lamps or their mounts shall extend below the top of the vehicle windshield. 
(2)  On the rear, there shall be two tail lamps, one on each side; two stop lamps, one on each side; two turn signals, one on each side; two clearance lamps, one on each side; two reflectors, one on each side; and three identification lamps mounted on the vertical centerline of the vehicle. However, the identification lamps need not be lighted if obscured by a vehicle towed by the truck. 
(3)  On each side, there shall be one side-marker lamp at or near the front; one side-marker lamp at or near the rear; one reflector at or near the front; and one reflector at or near the rear. 
(c)  Truck tractor requirements. A truck tractor shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  On the front, there shall be not less than two headlamps, an equal number on each side; two turn signals, one on each side; two clearance lamps, one on each side; three identification lamps, mounted on the vertical centerline of the vehicle or the vertical centerline of the cab where different from the centerline of the vehicle, except that where the cab is not more than 42 inches wide at the front roofline, a single lamp at the center of the cab shall be deemed to comply with the requirement for identification lamps. No part of the identification lamps or their mountings shall extend below the top of the vehicle windshield. 
(2)  On the rear, there shall be one tail lamp; one stop lamp; two reflectors, one on each side; and, unless turn signals on the front are so constructed (e.g., double faced) and located as to be visible to passing drivers, two turn signals on the rear of the cab, one on each side. 
(d)  Large semitrailer and full trailer requirements. A semitrailer or full trailer 80 inches or more in overall width, except converter dollies, shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  On the front, there shall be two clearance lamps, one on each side. 
(2)  On the rear, there shall be two tail lamps, one on each side; two stop lamps, one on each side; two turn signals, one on each side; two clearance lamps, one on each side; two reflectors, one on each side; and three identification lamps mounted on the vertical centerline of the vehicle. However, the identification lamps need not be lighted if obscured by another vehicle in the same combination. 
(3)  On each side, there shall be one side-marker lamp on or near the front; one side-marker lamp on or near the rear; one reflector on or near the front; one reflector on or near the rear; and, for semitrailers and full trailers 30 feet or more in length, at least one additional side-marker lamp at optional height and at least one additional reflector, the additional side-marker lamp and reflector to be at or near the center or at approximately uniform spacing in the length of the vehicle. 
(e)  Converter dolly requirements. A converter dolly is a vehicle with a fifth wheel lower half or equivalent mechanism, the attachment of which vehicle converts a semitrailer to a full trailer. The dolly shall have lights as follows: 
(1)  Each dolly, when towed singly by another vehicle and not as part of a full trailer, shall be equipped with one stop lamp, one tail lamp, and two reflectors on the rear. 
(2)  Lighting devices or reflectors are not required on the front or sides of a dolly. 
(f)  Small semitrailer and full trailer requirements. A semitrailer or full trailer less than 80 inches in overall width shall be equipped so as to have, on the rear, two tail lamps, one on each side; two turn signals, one on each side; two reflectors, one on each side; and two stop lamps, one on each side. 
(g)  Pole trailer requirements. Every pole trailer shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  On the rear, there shall be two tail lamps, one on each side; two stop lamps, one on each side; two turn signals, one on each side; two reflectors, one on each side, placed to indicate the extreme width of the pole trailer; three identification lamps mounted on the vertical centerline of the pole trailer or, in lieu thereof, mounted on the vertical centerline of the rear of the cab of the truck tractor drawing the pole trailer and higher than the load being transported. 
(2)  On the rear of vehicles with projecting loads, lamps shall be placed pursuant to section 98-354. 
(3)  On each side, there shall be one amber side-marker lamp at or near the front of the load; one amber reflector at or near the front of the load; on the rearmost support for the load, one combination marker lamp, showing amber to the front and red to the rear and side, mounted to indicate maximum width of the pole trailer; and on the rearmost support for the load, one red reflector. 
(h)  Combination drive-away/tow-away requirements. Combinations of motor vehicles engaged in drive-away/tow-away operations shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  On the towing vehicle there shall be the following: 
a.  On the front, not less than two headlamps, an equal number on each side; two turn signals and two clearance lamps, one on each side. 
b.  On the rear, one tail lamp and one stop lamp. 
(2)  On the towed vehicle of a tow-bar combination, the towed vehicle of a single saddle-mount combination and on the rearmost towed vehicle of a double or triple saddle-mount combination, or on a vehicle full-mounted on a saddle-mount, there shall be the following: 
a.  On each side and near the rear, one side-marker lamp. 
b.  On the rear, one tail lamp; one stop lamp; two turn signals; two clearance lamps; two reflectors, one on each side; and, if any vehicle in the combination is 80 inches or more in overall width, three identification lamps. 
(3)  On the first saddle-mounted vehicle of a double saddle-mount combination, and on the first and second saddle-mounted vehicles of a triple saddle-mount combination, there shall be, on each side and near the rear, one side-marker lamp. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.03)  
Sec. 98-354. - Lamps on vehicles with projecting loads. 
(a)  Requirements. A vehicle transporting a load which extends beyond the width or having projections beyond the rear of the vehicle shall be equipped with the following lamps in addition to other required lamps: 
(1)  For loads projecting beyond the sides of the vehicles: 
a.  The foremost edge of the projecting load at its outermost extremity shall be marked with an amber lamp visible from the front and side. 
b.  The rearmost edge of the projecting load at its outermost extremity shall be marked with a red lamp visible from the rear and side. 
c.  If any portion of the projecting load extends beyond both the foremost and rearmost edge, it shall be marked with an amber lamp visible from the front, side, and rear. 
d.  If the projecting load does not measure over three feet from front to rear, it shall be marked with an amber lamp visible from the front, side, and rear; but if the projection is located at or near the rear, it shall be marked by a red lamp visible from the front side, and rear. 
(2)  Vehicles transporting loads which extend over four feet beyond the rear of the vehicle or that have tailboards or tailgates extending over four feet beyond the body shall have these projections marked as follows: 
a.  On each side of the projecting load, one red lamp visible from the side, located so as to indicate maximum overhang. 
b.  On the rear of the projecting load, two red lamps, visible from the rear, one on each side, and two red reflectors visible from the rear, one on each side, located so as to indicate maximum width. 
(b)  Flag placement. Requirements for the placement of flags on vehicles with projecting loads are provided by section 98-395. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.04)  
Sec. 98-355. - Turn signaling system requirements. 
Every vehicle shall be equipped with a signaling system that, in addition to signaling turning movements as required by section 98-302, shall have a switch or combination of switches that cause the two front turn signals and the two rear turn signals to flash simultaneously as a vehicular traffic hazard warning required by subsection 98-306(a). The system shall be capable of flashing simultaneously with the ignition of the vehicle turned on or off. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.05)  
Sec. 98-356. - Clearance lamps to indicate width and height. 
(a)  Under this article, clearance lamps shall be mounted so as to indicate the extreme width of the motor vehicle, not including mirrors, and as near the top thereof as practicable. However, when rear identification lamps are mounted at the extreme height of the vehicle, rear clearance lamps may be mounted at optional height. 
(b)  Also, when the mounting of front clearance lamps at the highest point of a trailer results in such lamps failing to make the extreme width of the trailer, the lamps may be mounted at optional height, but must indicate the extreme width of the trailer. 
(c)  Clearance lamps on truck tractors shall be so located as to indicate the extreme width of the truck tractor cab. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.06)  
Sec. 98-357. - Combined lighting devices and reflectors. 
(a)  Permissible combination. Except as provided in subsections (b) to (d) of this section, two or more lighting devices and reflectors, whether or not required by this article, may be combined optically if each required lighting device and reflector conforms to the applicable sections of this article, and neither the mounting nor the use of a nonrequired lighting device or reflector impairs the effectiveness of a required lighting device or reflector or causes that device or reflector to be inconsistent with the applicable sections of this article. 
(b)  Light intensity. A turn signal lamp shall not be combined optically with either a headlamp or other lighting device or combination of lighting devices that produces a greater intensity of light than the turn signal lamp. 
(c)  Stop lamp. A turn signal lamp shall not be combined optically with a stop lamp, unless the stop lamp function is always deactivated when the turn signal function is activated. 
(d)  Clearance lamp. A clearance lamp shall not be combined optically with a tail lamp or identification lamp. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.07)  
Sec. 98-358. - Electric powered lighting devices. 
Lighting devices required under this article shall be electric, except that red, liquid-burning lanterns may be used on the end of a load such as poles, pipes, and ladders projecting to the rear of the vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.08)  
Sec. 98-359. - Headlamp and auxiliary light requirements. 
(a)  Mounting. Headlamps and auxiliary road-lighting lamps required under this article shall be mounted so that the beams are readily adjustable, both vertically and horizontally, and the mounting shall be such that the aim is not readily disturbed by ordinary conditions of service. 
(b)  Number and distribution. A truck and truck tractor shall be equipped with a head-lighting system composed of not less than two headlamps, not including fog or other auxiliary lamps, with an equal number on each side of the vehicle. The head-lighting system shall provide an upper and lower distribution of light, selectable at the driver's will. 
(c)  Use of auxiliary lamps. For the purpose of this section, fog, adverse weather, and auxiliary road-lighting lamps, when installed, are considered to be a part of the head-lighting system. Such lamps may be used in lieu of headlamps, under conditions making their use advisable, if there is at least one such lamp conforming to the appropriate SAE standard for such lamps on each side of the vehicle. 
(d)  Installation. Headlamps shall be constructed and installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination, and shall conform to the appropriate specification set forth in the SAE standards for Electric Head Lamps For Motor Vehicles or Sealed Beam Head Lamp Units For Motor Vehicles. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.09)  
Sec. 98-360. - Requirements for lamps other than headlamps. 
(a)  Mounting. All lamps required pursuant to this article shall be permanently and securely mounted in a workmanlike manner on a permanent part of the vehicle, except that temporary lamps on motor vehicles being transported in drive-away/tow-away operations and temporary electric lamps on projecting loads need not be permanently mounted on a permanent part of the vehicle. The requirement for three identification lamps on the centerline of a vehicle is met as to location by one lamp on the centerline, with the other two at the right and left. All temporary lamps shall be firmly attached. 
(b)  Visibility. All required exterior lamps shall be so mounted as to be capable of being seen at all distances between 50 feet and 500 feet under clear atmospheric conditions during the time lamps are required to be lighted. The light from front clearance lamps and front identification lamps shall be visible to the front, and the light from side-marker lamps shall be visible to the side; the light from rear clearance, rear identification, and taillamps shall be visible to the rear, and the light from projecting load-marker lamps shall be visible from those directions required by section 98-354. This subsection shall not be construed to apply to lamps on one unit which are obscured by another unit of a combination of vehicles. 
(c)  Markings. All required lamps, except lamps already installed on vehicles tendered for transportation in drive-away/tow-away operations, shall be marked with the manufacturer's or supplier's name or trade name and shall be marked with the particular SAE designation that is proper for the use to which the lamp is being put on the vehicle. 
(d)  Color. The color of exterior lighting devices, not otherwise specified in this article, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front clearance and identification lamps and side-marker lamps, except those at or near the rear, shall, when lighted, display an amber color. 
(2)  A lighted red lamp of any character shall not be displayed at any place other than the rear or on the sides near the rear, except that this prohibition does not apply to lamps on projecting loads, as specified in subsection 98-353(h), or to rear-facing lenses of turn signals. 
(3)  Rear clearance and identification lamps, the side-marker lamps at or near the rear, and any other lamps mounted on the rear or on the sides near the rear shall, when lighted, display a red color, except as specified by subsection 98-353(g) and section 98-354 and as permitted by subsections (d)(4) to (d)(6) of this section. 
(4)  The stop lamps and the turn signals on or facing the rear of a vehicle shall be red, yellow, amber, or any shade of color between red and yellow. The turn signals facing the front of a motor vehicle shall be white, amber, or any shade of color between white and amber. 
(5)  The backup lamps, showing white to amber to the rear, may be mounted on the rear of any vehicle if such lamps can be lighted only when the vehicle is in reverse gear or when a pilot lamp readily visible to the driver is burning to indicate that such backup lamps are lighted. 
(6)  White lamps may be used for the purpose of illuminating license plates on a vehicle. 
(7)  This subsection shall not be so construed as to prohibit the use of vehicles in combination if such vehicles are separately lighted as required by section 98-353. 
(8)  Whenever reference is made in this article to the colors red, amber, or white, such colors shall be as prescribed in the SAE Standard Color Specification For Electric Lamps. 
(e)  Steady burning. Exterior lighting devices shall be of the steady-burning type, except turn signals and warning lights on emergency and service vehicles authorized by state or local authorities. However, lamps combined into the same shell or housing with a turn signal may be turned off by the same switch that turns the signal on for flashing and may be turned on again when the turn signal, as such, is turned off. This requirement shall not be construed to prohibit the use of turn signals to give vehicular traffic hazard warning signals as required by section 98-306. 
(f)  Stop lamps. Stop lamps on a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be actuated upon application of any of the service brakes. However, such actuation is not required upon activation of the emergency feature of trailer brakes by means of either manual or automatic control on the towing vehicle. Also, stop lamps on a towing vehicle need not be actuated when service brakes are applied to the towed vehicle only, and a stop lamp need not be actuated as such when it is used as a turn signal or when it is turned off by the turn signal switch as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.10)  
Sec. 98-361. - Reflector requirements. 
(a)  Mounting. Reflectors required under this article shall be mounted upon the vehicle at a height not less than 15 inches nor more than 60 inches above the ground on which the vehicle stands, except the reflectors shall be mounted as high as practicable on vehicles which are so constructed as to make compliance with the 15-inch requirement impractical. The reflectors shall be so installed as to perform their function adequately and reliably and, except for temporary reflectors required for vehicles in drive-away/tow-away operations or required on projecting loads, all reflectors shall be permanently and securely mounted in a workmanlike manner so as to provide the maximum of stability and the minimum likelihood of damage. Required reflectors, otherwise properly mounted, may be securely installed on flexible strapping or belting if, under conditions of normal operation, they reflect light in the required directions. Required temporary reflectors mounted on vehicles during the time they are in transit in any drive-away/tow-away operation shall be firmly attached. 
(b)  Conformance and markings. Required reflectors, except those already installed on vehicles tendered for transportation in drive-away/tow-away operations, shall conform to the requirements for class A reflectors in the SAE Recommended Practice or SAE Standard Reflex Reflectors and shall be marked with the particular SAE designation that is proper for class A reflectors. 
(c)  Color. Reflectors on the rear and those reflectors nearest the rear on the sides, except those referred to in subsection (d) of this section, shall reflect a red color. 
(1)  All other reflectors, except those referred to in subsection (d) of this section, shall reflect an amber color. 
(2)  However, this requirement shall not be construed to prohibit the use of vehicles in combination if such vehicles are separately equipped with reflectors as required by sections 98-353 and 98-354. 
(3)  Wherever reference is made to the colors red or amber for reflectors, such colors shall correspond to the requirement in the SAE Standard Color Specification for Electric Lamps. 
(d)  Optional surfaces. Retro-reflective surfaces other than required reflectors may be used: 
(1)  The designs do not resemble traffic control signs, lights, or devices, except that straight edge striping resembling a barricade pattern may be used. 
(2)  The designs do not tend to distort the length or width or both of a vehicle. 
(3)  Such surfaces shall be not less than three inches from any required lamp or reflector, unless the same color as the lamp or reflector. 
(4)  A red color shall not be used on the front of any vehicle, except for display of marking or placards required by 49 CFR 177.812. 
(5)  Retro-reflective license plates required by state or local authorities may be used. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.11)  
Sec. 98-362. - Wiring specifications. 
(a)  Under this article, wiring for both low tension and high tension circuits shall be constructed and installed so as to function reliably and adequately and shall conform to the appropriate requirements in the SAE Standard For Insulated Cable or shall be wiring which is mechanically and electrically at least equal to such cable. 
(b)  Required lamps shall be connected to the source of power with stranded wire. 
(c)  The source of power and the electrical wiring shall be of such size and characteristics that required lamps shall, when lighted, be capable of being seen not less than 500 feet under clear atmospheric conditions during the time lamps are required to be lighted. 
(d)  This section shall not be so construed as to prohibit the use of the frame or other metal parts of a vehicle as a return ground system, provided that, for truck tractor-semitrailer combinations, the truck tractor is electrically bonded to the semitrailer. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.12)  
Sec. 98-363. - Wiring grouping and protection. 
(a)  Under this article, wiring shall, when possible, be grouped together and protected by nonmetallic tape, braid, or other covering capable of withstanding severe abrasion or shall be protected by being enclosed in a metallic sheath or tube. 
(b)  Wiring shall be properly supported. 
(c)  Wiring shall not be so located as to be likely to be charred, overheated, or enmeshed in moving parts. 
(d)  Insofar as is practicable, wiring shall not be adjacent to any part of the fuel system. 
(e)  The edges of all holes in metal through which the wiring passes, unless the wiring is metal covered, shall be rolled or bushed with a grommet of rubber or other suitable material. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.13)  
Sec. 98-364. - Grounded connections. 
Under this article, the battery ground and trailer return ground connections on a grounded system shall be readily accessible. The contact surfaces of electrical connections shall be clean and free of oxide, paint, or other nonconductive coating. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.14)  
Sec. 98-365. - Battery installation. 
(a)  Every storage battery on every vehicle used pursuant to this article, unless located in the engine compartment, shall be covered by a fixed part of the vehicle or protected by a removable cover or enclosure. Removable covers or enclosures shall be substantial and shall be securely latched or fastened. 
(b)  The storage battery compartment and adjacent metal parts, which might corrode because of battery leakage, shall be painted or coated with an acid-resisting paint or coating and shall have openings to provide ample battery ventilation and drainage. 
(c)  Whenever the cable to the starting motor passes through a metal compartment, the cable shall be protected against grounding by an acidproof and waterproof insulating bushing. 
(d)  Whenever a battery and a fuel tank are both placed under the driver's seat, they shall be partitioned from each other, and each compartment shall be provided with an independent cover, ventilation and drainage. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.15)  
Sec. 98-366. - Overload protection devices. 
Under this article, the current to all low tension circuits shall not pass through overload protective devices, except that this requirement is not applicable to battery-to-starting motor or battery-to-generator circuits, ignition and engine control circuits, horn circuits, electrically operated fuel pump circuits, or electric brake circuits. 
(1)  Protective devices for electric circuits on every vehicle, the date of manufacture of which is subsequent to June 30, 1953, except motor vehicles being transported in drive-away/tow-away operations, shall be arranged so that either the headlamp circuit or circuits shall not be affected by a short circuit in any of the other lighting circuits on the motor vehicle; or 
(2)  If the headlamp circuit is protected in common with other electrical circuits, the protection device shall be an automatic reset overload circuit breaker. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.16)  
Sec. 98-367. - Detachable electrical connections. 
(a)  Electrical wiring between towing and towed vehicles used pursuant to this article shall be contained in a cable or entirely within another substantially constructed protective device. All such electrical wiring shall be mechanically and electrically adequate and shall be free of short or open circuits. Suitable provision shall be made in every such detachable connection to afford reasonable assurance against connection in an incorrect manner or accidental disconnection. 
(b)  Detachable connections made by twisting together wires from the towed and towing units are prohibited. 
(c)  Precaution shall be taken to provide sufficient slack in the connecting wire or cable to accommodate, without damage, all normal motions of the parts to which they are attached. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.17)  
Sec. 98-368. - Wiring installation. 
(a)  Electrical wiring required under this article shall be systematically arranged and installed in a workmanlike manner. 
(b)  All detachable wiring, except temporary wiring connections for drive-away/tow-away operations, shall be attached to posts or terminals by means of suitable cable terminals which conform to the SAE Standard For Cable Terminals or by cable terminals which are mechanically and electrically at least equal to such terminals. The number of wires attached to any post shall be limited to the number which such post was designed to accommodate. 
(c)  The presence of bare, loose, dangling, chafing, or poorly connected wires is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.18)  
Sec. 98-369. - Brake system requirements. 
(a)  Adequacy. A truck, truck tractor, or a combination of vehicles being operated pursuant to this article shall have brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
(b)  Conformance. A truck, truck tractor, or combination of vehicles shall have a parking brake system that conforms to the requirements of section 98-370. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.19)  
Sec. 98-370. - Parking brake system. 
(a)  Adequacy. Under this article, a singly driven motor vehicle, as well as a combination of vehicles, shall at all times be equipped with a parking brake system adequate to hold the vehicle or combination on any grade on which it is operated under any conditions of loading on a surface free from ice or snow. 
(b)  Application. The parking brake system shall at all times be capable of being applied in conformance with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section by either the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or by other energy. However, if such other energy is depended on for application of the parking brake, an accumulation of such energy shall be isolated from any common source and used exclusively for the operation of the parking brake. 
(c)  Prohibitions. The parking brake system shall be held in the applied position by energy other than fluid pressure, air pressure, or electric energy. The parking brake system shall be such that it cannot be released unless adequate energy is available upon release of the parking brake to make immediate further application with the required effectiveness. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.20)  
Sec. 98-371. - Wheels requiring brakes. 
(a)  All wheels. Under this article, a vehicle shall be equipped with brakes acting on all wheels. 
(b)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to the following: 
(1)  A full trailer, semitrailer, or pole trailer of a gross weight not exceeding 3,000 pounds if the gross weight of any such full trailer or pole trailer, no part of the load of which rests upon the towing vehicle, does not exceed 40 percent of the gross weight of the towing vehicle, and if the gross weight of the towing vehicle and the gross weight of any such semitrailer or pole trailer, part of the load of which rests upon the towing vehicle, does not exceed 40 percent of the gross weight of the towing vehicle when connected to such semitrailer or pole trailer. 
(2)  A vehicle being towed in a drive-away/tow-away operation. This subsection is not applicable to a motor vehicle towed by means of a tow-bar when any vehicle is full-mounted on such motor vehicle or any combination of motor vehicles utilizing three saddle-mounts. 
(3)  Trucks and truck tractors having three or more axles need not have brakes on the front wheels. When such vehicles are equipped with not less than two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped with brakes. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.21)  
Sec. 98-372. - Breakaway and emergency braking. 
(a)  Adequacy. Under this article, a motor vehicle, if used to tow a trailer equipped with brakes, shall be equipped with means for providing that, in case of breakaway of such trailer, the service brakes on the towing vehicle are sufficiently operative to stop the towing vehicle. 
(b)  Air brakes. A truck or truck tractor equipped with air brakes, when used for towing other vehicles equipped with air brakes, shall be equipped with two means of activating the emergency features of the trailer brakes as follows: 
(1)  One of these means shall operate automatically if there is a reduction of the towing vehicle air supply to a fixed pressure, which shall not be less than 20 pounds per square inch nor more than 45 pounds per square inch. 
(2)  The other means shall be a manually controlled device readily operable by a person seated in the driving seat. Its emergency position or method of operation shall be clearly indicated. 
(3)  In no instance may the manual means be so arranged as to permit its use to prevent operation of the automatic means. The automatic and manual means required by this subsection may be but are not required to be separate. 
(c)  Vacuum brakes. A truck tractor and truck, when used for towing other vehicles equipped with vacuum brakes, shall have, in addition to the single control required by section 98-377, a second manual control device which can be used to operate the brakes on the towed vehicles in emergencies. Such second control shall be independent of brake air, hydraulic, and other pressure and independent of other controls, unless the braking system is so arranged that failure of the pressure on which the second control depends causes the towed vehicle brakes to be applied automatically. The second control is not required by this subsection to provide modulated or graduated braking. 
(d)  Automatic application upon breakaway. A trailer required to be equipped with brakes shall be equipped with brakes of such character as to be applied automatically and promptly upon breakaway from the towing vehicle, and means shall be provided to maintain application of the brakes on the trailer, in such case, for not less than 15 minutes. 
(e)  Air brake reservoir. Air brake systems installed on towed vehicles shall be so designed, by the use of no-bleed-back relay emergency valves or equivalent devices, that the supply reservoir used to provide air for brakes shall be safeguarded against backflow of air to the towing vehicle upon reduction of the towing vehicle air pressure. 
(f)  Exception. The requirements of subsections (b) to (d) of this section are not applicable to motor vehicles in drive-away/tow-away operations. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.22)  
Sec. 98-373. - Brake tubing and hose. 
(a)  Requirements. Under this article, brake tubing and brake hose shall: 
(1)  Be designed and constructed in a manner that ensures proper, adequate, and continued functioning of the tubing or hose. 
(2)  Be installed in a manner that ensures proper and continued functioning of the tubing or hose. 
(3)  Be long and flexible enough to accommodate, without damage, all normal motions of the parts to which it is attached. 
(4)  Be suitably secured against chafing, kinking, or other mechanical damage. 
(5)  Be installed in a manner that prevents it from contacting the vehicle's exhaust system or any other source of high temperatures. 
(6)  Conform to the applicable requirements of subsections (b) to (d) of this section. 
(b)  Installation after October 1, 1973. Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, brake hose installed on a vehicle on or after October 1, 1973, shall conform to one of the following specifications: 
(1)  As to hydraulic brake hose, The Society of Automotive Engineers Standard J1401, 1981. 
(2)  As to air brake hose, The Society of Automotive Engineers Standard J1402b, 1980. 
(3)  As to vacuum brake hose, The Society of Automotive Engineers Standard J1403, June 1968. 
(c)  Installation prior to October 1, 1973. Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, brake hose installed on a vehicle before October 1, 1973, shall conform to either of the following: 
(1)  The applicable specification set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  The applicable specification in the SAE Standard For Automotive Brake Hoses published in the 1952 edition of the SAE Handbook. 
(d)  Nylon brake tubing. Coiled nylon brake tubing may be used for connections between towed and towing vehicles, if such tubing complies with each of the following: 
(1)  The tubing conforms to the requirements for type 3B nylon tubing set forth in Society of Automotive Engineers Standard J844c, Air Brake Tubing and Pipe, December 1970. 
(2)  The coiled tubing has a straight segment (pigtail) at each end that is not less than two inches in length and is encased in a spring guard or similar device which prevents the tubing from kinking at the fitting at which it is attached to the vehicle. 
(3)  The spring guard or similar device has not less than two inches of closed coils or similar surface at its interface with the fitting and extends not less than one to 1½ inches into the coiled segment of the tubing from its straight segment. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.23)  
Sec. 98-374. - Brake tubing and hose connect requirements. 
All connections for air, vacuum, or hydraulic braking systems required under this article shall: 
(1)  Be adequate in material and construction to ensure proper continued functioning. 
(2)  Be designed, constructed, and installed so as to ensure, when properly connected, an attachment free of leaks, constrictions, or other defects. 
(3)  Have suitable provision in every detachable connection to afford reasonable assurance against accidental disconnection. 
(4)  Have the vacuum brake engine manifold connection at least three-eighths inch in diameter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.24)  
Sec. 98-375. - Brake lining. 
The brake lining on every vehicle operated under this article shall be so constructed and installed as not to be subject to excessive fading and grabbing and shall be adequate in thickness, means of attachment, and physical characteristics to provide for safe and reliable stopping of the vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.25)  
Sec. 98-376. - Brake operational characteristics. 
(a)  Capability. Except as provided in subsections (b) to (e) of this section, all brakes with which a vehicle is equipped pursuant to this article shall at all times be capable of operating. 
(b)  Front braking reduction. A motor vehicle may be equipped with a device to reduce the braking effort upon its front wheels or, if a three-axle truck or truck tractor manufactured before March 1, 1975, may be equipped with a device to remove the braking effort upon its front wheels, if that device conforms to and is used in compliance with subsection (c) or (d) of this section. 
(c)  Manual prohibitions. A manually operated device to reduce or remove the front-wheel braking effort shall not be: 
(1)  Installed in a motor vehicle other than a truck or truck tractor. 
(2)  Installed and operable in a truck or truck tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 1975. 
(3)  Used, except when the vehicle is operating under adverse road conditions, such as wet, snowy or icy roads. 
(d)  Automatic prohibitions. An automatic device to reduce the front-wheel braking effort shall not: 
(1)  Be installed in a motor vehicle unless that vehicle is equipped with an air-mechanical brake system or a hydraulic brake system utilizing compressed air. 
(2)  Be operable by the driver, except upon application of the control that activates the braking system. 
(3)  Reduce the braking force when the air pressure that transmits brake control application forces exceeds the vehicle's air compressor cut-in pressure. 
(e)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to the following: 
(1)  A disabled vehicle being towed. 
(2)  A vehicle being towed in a drive-away/tow-away operation which is exempt from the general provisions of section 98-372. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.26)  
Sec. 98-377. - Power brakes operated by single valve. 
(a)  A motor vehicle, the date of manufacture of which is subsequent to June 30, 1953, which is equipped with power brakes, shall have the braking system so arranged that one application valve shall, when applied, operate all the service brakes on the motor vehicle or combination of vehicles operated under this article. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit motor vehicles from being equipped with an additional valve to be used to operate the brakes on a trailer. 
(c)  This section shall not be applicable to drive-away/tow-away operations, unless the brakes on such operations are designed to be operated by a single valve. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.27)  
Sec. 98-378. - Brake reservoir requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all property-carrying vehicles and combinations of property-carrying vehicles having three or more axles. 
(b)  Sufficiency. As provided in subsection (a) of this section, every truck and truck tractor made after June 30, 1953, and operated pursuant to this article and using air or vacuum for braking shall be equipped with reserve capacity or a reservoir sufficient to ensure a full service brake application with the engine stopped without depleting the air pressure or vacuum below 70 percent of that pressure or degree of vacuum indicated by the gauge immediately before the brake application is made. For purposes of this section, a full service brake application is considered to be made when the service brake pedal is pushed to the limit of its travel. 
(c)  Safeguard device. A truck and truck tractor, when equipped with air or vacuum reservoirs and regardless of date of manufacture, shall have such reservoirs so safeguarded by a checkvalve or equivalent device that, if failure or leakage in its connection to the source of compressed air or vacuum occurs, the air or vacuum supply in the reservoir shall not be depleted by the leak or failure. 
(d)  Checkvalve operation verification. Means shall be provided to verify that the checkvalve is in working order. Means, other than loosening or disconnecting of a connection between the source of compressed air or vacuum and the checkvalve, and necessary tools for the operation of such means shall be provided to prove that the checkvalve is in working order. The means shall be readily accessible either from the front, side, or rear of the vehicle or from the driver's compartment. The means for verifying the operation of the checkvalve shall be as follows: 
(1)  In air brake systems with one reservoir, the means shall be a cock, valve, plug, or equivalent device arranged to vent a cavity having free communication with the connection between the checkvalve and the source of compressed air or vacuum. 
(2)  Where air is delivered by a compressor into one tank or compartment (dry tank) only, with the required check between the tanks or compartments, a manually operated drain cock on the first (wet) tank or compartment shall serve as a means required in this section if it conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(3)  In vacuum systems, stopping the engine shall serve as the required means, with the system remaining evacuated as indicated by the vacuum gauge. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.28)  
Sec. 98-379. - Brake warning devices and gauges. 
(a)  Warning signal requirement performance. In the manner and to the extent specified in subsections (b) to (e) of this section, a truck or truck tractor operating under this article shall be equipped with a signal that provides a warning to the driver when a failure occurs in the vehicle's service brake system. 
(b)  Hydraulic brakes applied or assisted by air or vacuum. Relative to hydraulic brakes, a vehicle manufactured on or after July 1, 1973, and having service brakes activated by hydraulic fluid, shall be equipped with a warning signal that performs as follows: 
(1)  If Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 105, 49 CFR 571.105, was applicable to the vehicle at the time it was manufactured, the warning signal shall conform to the requirements of that standard. 
(2)  If Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 105 was not applicable to the vehicle at the time it was manufactured, the warning signal shall become operative, before or upon application of the brakes, in a hydraulic-type complete failure of a partial system. The signal shall be readily audible or visible to the driver. 
(c)  Air brakes. Relative to air brakes, except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, a vehicle, regardless of the date it was manufactured, having service brakes activated by compressed air (air-mechanical brakes), or a vehicle towing a vehicle having service brakes activated by compressed air (air-mechanical brakes), shall be equipped and shall perform as follows: 
(1)  The vehicle shall have a low air pressure warning device that conforms to the requirements of either of the following: 
a.  If Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 121, 49 CFR 571.121, was applicable to the vehicle at the time it was manufactured, the warning device shall conform to the requirements of that standard. 
b.  If Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 121 was not applicable to the vehicle at the time it was manufactured, the vehicle shall have a device that provides a readily audible or visible continuous warning to the driver whenever the pressure of the compressed air in the braking system is below a specified pressure, which shall be at least one-half of the compressor governor cutout pressure. 
(2)  The vehicle shall have a pressure gauge which indicates to the driver the pressure in pounds per square inch available for braking. 
(d)  Vacuum brakes. Relative to vacuum brakes, except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, a vehicle, regardless of the date it was manufactured, having service brakes activated by vacuum, or a vehicle towing a vehicle having service brakes activated by vacuum, shall be equipped with both of the following: 
(1)  A device that provides a readily audible or visible continuous warning to the driver whenever the vacuum in the vehicle's supply reservoir is less than eight inches of mercury. 
(2)  A vacuum gauge which indicates to the driver the vacuum in inches of mercury available for braking. 
(e)  Hydraulic brakes applied or assisted by air or vaccum. Relative to hydraulic brakes applied or assisted by air or vacuum, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a vehicle having a braking system in which hydraulically activated service brakes are applied or assisted by compressed air or vacuum shall be equipped with both a warning signal that conforms to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section and a warning device that conforms to the requirements of either subsection (c) or (d) of this section. 
(f)  Maintenance. The warning signals, devices, and gauges required by this section shall be maintained in operative condition. 
(g)  Applicability. Subsections (c) to (e) of this section do not apply to property-carrying vehicles and combinations of property-carrying vehicles which have less than three axles and either were manufactured before July 1, 1973, or have a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.29)  
Sec. 98-380. - Glass covered openings. 
(a)  Glazing standards. When glazing is used in the windshield, window, door, or any other opening into a truck or truck tractor operated pursuant to this article, except for a vehicle engaged in armored car service, such glazing shall conform to the requirements contained in the American Standard Safety Code For Safety Glazing Materials For Glazing Motor Vehicles Operating On Land Highways, Z26.1A1964, of the American National Standards Institute, Inc., 1430 Broadway, New York, New York, 10018. However, glazing conforming to ANSI Code Z26.1-1950 is acceptable for vehicles manufactured before January 1, 1966. 
(b)  Windshield discoloration. A motor vehicle windshield shall be free of discoloration or other damage, except that the following discoloration is permissible: 
(1)  Coloring or tinting which is applied during manufacturing for reduction of glare. 
(2)  A crack which is not more than one-fourth inch long, if the crack is not intersected by any other crack. 
(3)  A damaged area which can be covered by a disc the size of a United States five cent piece (nickel) in diameter, if the damaged area is not closer than three inches to any other such damaged area. 
(c)  Vision-reducing coverings. A motor vehicle shall not be operated with a label, sticker, decalcomania, or other vision-reducing matter covering any portion of its windshield or windows at either side of the driver's compartment. However, stickers required by law may be affixed at the bottom of the windshield if no portion of a label, sticker, decalcomania, or other vision-reducing matter extends upward more than 4½ inches from the bottom of the windshield. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.30)  
Sec. 98-381. - Window construction. 
(a)  Side windows area. Every truck and truck tractor operated pursuant to this article, except vehicles engaged in armored car service, shall have, in addition to the area provided by the windshield, at least one window on each side of the driver's compartment, which window shall have sufficient area to contain either an ellipse having a major axis of 18 inches and a minor axis of 13 inches or an opening containing 200 square inches formed by a rectangle 13 inches by 17¾ inches with corner arcs of six inches maximum radius. The major axis of the ellipse and the long axis of the rectangle shall not make an angle of more than 45 degrees with the surface on which the unladen vehicle stands. 
(b)  Windows excluded. However, if the cab is designed with a folding door or with clear openings where doors or windows are customarily located, windows shall not be required in such locations. 
(c)  Windows unobstructed. Windows, if otherwise capable of complying with this section, shall not be obstructed by bars or other such means located either inside or outside the windows, such as would hinder the escape of occupants, unless such bars or other such means are so constructed as to provide a clear opening at least equal to the opening provided by the window to which it is adjacent. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.31)  
Sec. 98-382. - Fuel systems generally. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to systems for containing and supplying fuel for the operation of vehicles or for the operation of auxiliary equipment installed on or used in connection with motor vehicles operated under this article. 
(b)  Location. A fuel system shall be located on the vehicle so that: 
(1)  No part of the system extends beyond the widest part of the vehicle. 
(2)  No part of the fuel tank is forward of the front axle of a power unit. 
(3)  Fuel spilled vertically from a fuel tank while it is being filled does not contact any part of the exhaust or electrical systems of the vehicle, except the fuel level indicator assembly. 
(4)  Fill pipe openings are located outside the vehicle's passenger compartment and its cargo compartment. 
(5)  A fuel line does not extend between a towed vehicle and the vehicle that is towing it while the combination of vehicles is in motion. 
(c)  Attachment. A fuel tank shall be securely attached to the vehicle in workmanlike manner. 
(d)  Supply. A fuel system shall not supply fuel by gravity or siphon feed directly to the carburetor or injector. 
(e)  Operation. If a fuel system includes a selection control valve which is operable by the driver to regulate the flow of fuel from two or more fuel tanks, the valve shall be installed so that either of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The driver may operate it while watching the roadway and without leaving his driving position. 
(2)  The driver shall stop the vehicle and leave his seat in order to operate the valve. 
(f)  Protection. A fuel line, which is not completely enclosed in a protective housing, shall not extend more than two inches below the fuel tank or its sump. Diesel fuel crossover, return and withdrawal lines which extend below the bottom of the tank or sump shall be protected against damage from impact. Every fuel line shall be: 
(1)  Long enough and flexible enough to accommodate normal movements of the parts to which it is attached without incurring damage. 
(2)  Secured against chafing, kinking, or other causes of mechanical damage. 
(g)  Pressurized fuel flow. When pressure devices are used to force fuel from a fuel tank, a device which prevents the flow of fuel from the fuel tank if the fuel feed line is broken shall be installed in the fuel system. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.32)  
Sec. 98-383. - Fuel systems for liquid fuel tanks. 
(a)  Applicability. Application of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  A liquid fuel tank manufactured on or after January 1, 1973, and a side-mounted gasoline tank shall conform to this section. 
(2)  A diesel fuel tank manufactured before January 1, 1973, and mounted on a vehicle other than a bus shall conform to subsection (c)(6) of this section relative to the fill pipe cap. 
(3)  A gasoline tank, other than a side-mounted gasoline tank, manufactured before January 1, 1973, and mounted on a vehicle other than a bus shall conform to subsections (c)(1) to (c)(9) of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Liquid fuel tank means a fuel tank designed to contain a fuel that is used to propel a vehicle. 
Side-mounted fuel tank means a liquid fuel tank which, if mounted on a truck tractor, extends outboard of the vehicle frame and outside of the plain view outline of the cab or, if mounted on a truck, extends outboard of a line parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the truck and tangent to the outboard side of a front tire in a straight ahead position. In determining whether a fuel tank on a truck or truck tractor is side mounted, the fill pipe is not considered to be a part of the tank. 
(c)  Construction requirements. Construction of liquid fuel tanks shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Joints of a fuel tank body shall be closed by arc, gas, seam, or spot welding; by brazing; by silver soldering; or by techniques which provide heat resistance and mechanical securements at least equal to those specifically named. Joints shall not be closed solely by crimping or by soldering with a lead-based or other soft solder. 
(2)  The fuel tank body shall have flanges or spuds suitable for the installation of all fittings. 
(3)  The threads of all fittings shall be Dryseal American Standard Taper Pipe Thread or Dryseal SAE Short Taper Pipe Thread, specified in Society of Automotive Engineers Standard J476, as contained in the 1971 edition of the SAE Handbook, except that straight nontapered threads may be used on fittings having integral flanges and using gaskets for sealing. Not less than four full threads shall be in engagement in each fitting. 
(4)  Drains or other bottom fittings shall not extend more than three-fourths of an inch below the lowest part of the fuel tank or sump. Drains or other bottom fittings shall be protected against damage from impact. If a fuel tank has drains, the drain fittings shall permit substantially complete drainage of the tank. Drains or other bottom fittings shall be installed in a flange or spud designed to accommodate it. 
(5)  Except for diesel fuel tanks, the fittings through which fuel is withdrawn from a fuel tank shall be located above the normal level of fuel in the tank when the tank is full. 
(6)  A fill pipe shall be designed and constructed to minimize the risk of fuel spillage during fueling operations and when the vehicle is involved in a crash. The fill pipe and vents of a fuel tank having a capacity of more than 25 gallons of fuel shall permit filling the tank with fuel at a rate of not less than 20 gallons per minute without fuel spillage. Each fill pipe shall be fitted with a cap that can be fastened securely over the opening in the fill pipe. Screw threads or a bayonet-type joint are methods of conforming to the requirements of this subsection. 
(7)  A liquid fuel tank with a capacity of more than 25 gallons of fuel shall have a venting system which, if the tank is subjected to fire, prevents internal tank pressure from rupturing the tank's body, seams, or bottom opening, if any. 
(8)  The body and fittings of a liquid fuel tank with a capacity of more than 25 gallons of fuel shall be capable of withstanding an internal-hydrostatic pressure equal to 150 percent of the maximum internal pressure reached in the tank during the safety venting systems test. 
(9)  A fuel tank shall be equipped with a nonspill air vent, such as a ball check. The air vent may be combined with the fill pipe cap or safety vent, or it may be a separate unit installed on the fuel tank. 
(10)  If the body of a fuel tank is readily visible when the tank is installed on the vehicle, the tank shall be plainly marked with its liquid capacity. The tank shall also be plainly marked with a warning against filling it to more than 95 percent of its liquid capacity. 
(11)  A liquid fuel tank manufactured on or after January 1, 1973, shall be designed and constructed so that the tank cannot be filled, in a normal filling operation, with a quantity of fuel that exceeds 95 percent of the tank's liquid capacity and so that, when the tank is filled, normal expansion of the fuel does not cause fuel spillage. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.33)  
Sec. 98-384. - Coupling devices and towing methods; drive-away/tow-away operations excepted. 
(a)  Construction. When two or more vehicles are operated in combination pursuant to this article, the coupling devices connecting the vehicles shall be designed, constructed, and installed and the vehicles shall be designed and constructed so that, when the combination is operated in a straight line on a level, smooth, paved surface, the path of the towed vehicle does not deviate more than three inches to either side of the path of the vehicle that tows it. 
(b)  Fifth wheel assemblies. Relative to fifth wheel assemblies: 
(1)  The lower half of a fifth wheel mounted on a truck tractor or converter dolly shall be secured to the frame of that vehicle with properly designed brackets, mounting plates or angles, and properly tightened bolts of adequate size and grade or devices that provide equivalent security. The installation shall not cause cracking, warping, or deformation of the frame. The installation shall include a device for positively preventing the lower half of the fifth wheel from shifting on the frame to which it is attached. The upper half of a fifth wheel shall be fastened to the vehicle with at least the same security required for the installation of the lower half on a truck tractor or converted dolly. 
(2)  A fifth wheel assembly shall have a locking mechanism. The locking mechanism, and any adapter used in conjunction with it, shall prevent separation of the upper and lower halves of the fifth wheel assembly unless a positive manual release is activated. The release may be located so that the driver can operate it from the cab. If a vehicle has a fifth wheel designed and constructed to be readily separable, the fifth wheel locking devices shall apply automatically on coupling. 
(3)  The lower half of a fifth wheel shall be located so that, regardless of the condition of loading, the relationship between the kingpin and the rear axle of the towing vehicle properly distributes the gross weight of both the towed and towing vehicles on the axles of those vehicles; does not unduly interfere with the steering, braking, and other maneuvering of the towing vehicle; and does not otherwise contribute to the unsafe operation of the vehicles comprising the combination. The upper half of a fifth wheel shall be located so that the weight of the vehicles is properly distributed on their axles and the combination of vehicles operates safely during normal operation. 
(c)  Full trailer. A full trailer shall be equipped with a tow-bar and a means of attaching the tow-bar to the towing and towed vehicles. The tow-bar and the means of attaching it shall: 
(1)  Be structurally adequate for the weight being drawn. 
(2)  Be properly and securely mounted. 
(3)  Provide for adequate articulation at the connection without excessive slack at that location. 
(4)  Be provided with a locking device that prevents accidental separation of the towed and towing vehicles. 
The mounting of the trailer hitch, pintle hook, or equivalent mechanism on the towing vehicle shall include reinforcement or bracing of the frame sufficient to produce strength and rigidity of the frame to prevent its undue distortion. 
(d)  Conversion. A full trailer and a converter dolly used to convert a semitrailer to a full trailer shall be coupled to the frame or an extension of the frame of the vehicle that tows it, with one or more safety devices to prevent the towed vehicle from breaking loose if the tow-bar fails or becomes disconnected. The safety device shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The safety device shall not be attached to the pintle hook or any other device on the towing vehicle to which the tow-bar is attached. However, if the pintle hook or other device was manufactured prior to July 1, 1973, the safety device may be attached to the towing vehicle at a place on a pintle hook forging or casting if that place is independent of the pintle hook. 
(2)  The safety device shall have no more slack than is necessary to permit the vehicles to be turned properly. 
(3)  The safety device and the means of attaching it to the vehicles shall have an ultimate strength of not less than the gross weight of the vehicle being towed. 
(4)  The safety device shall be connected to the towed and towing vehicles and to the tow-bar so as to prevent the tow-bar from dropping to the ground if it fails or becomes disconnected. 
(5)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(6) of this section, if the safety device consists of safety chains or cables, the towed vehicle shall be equipped with either two safety chains or cables or with a bridle arrangement of single chain or cable attached to its frame or axle at two points as far apart as the configuration of the frame or axle permits. The safety chains or cables shall be either two separate pieces, each equipped with a hook or other means for attachment to the towing vehicle, or a single piece leading along each side of the tow-bar from the two points of attachment on the towed vehicle and arranged into a bridle with a single means of attachment to be connected to the towing vehicle. When a single length of cable is used, a thimble and twin-base cable clamps shall be used to form the forward bridle eye. The hook or other means of attachment to the towing vehicle shall be secured to the chains or cables in a fixed position. 
(6)  If the towed vehicle is a converted dolly with a solid tongue and without a hinged tow-bar or other swivel between the fifth wheel mounting and the attachment point of the tongue eye or other hitch device, the following shall apply: 
a.  Safety chains or cables, when used as the safety device for that vehicle, may consist of either two chains or cables or a single chain or cable used alone. 
b.  A single safety device, including a single chain or cable used alone as the safety device, shall be in line with the centerline of the trailer tongue. 
c.  The device may be attached to the converter dolly at any point to the rear of the attachment point of the tongue eye or other hitch device. 
(7)  Safety devices, other than safety chains or cables, shall provide strength, security of attachment, and directional stability equal to or greater than safety chains or cables installed pursuant to subsections (d)(5) and (d)(6) of this section. 
(8)  When two safety devices, including two safety chains or cables, are used and are attached to the towing vehicles at separate points, the points of attachment on the towing vehicle shall be located equally distant from and on opposite sides of the centerline of the towing vehicle. Where two chains or cables are attached to the same point on the towing vehicle and where a bridle or a single chain or cable is used, the point of attachment shall be on the longitudinal centerline of the towing vehicle. A single safety device, other than a chain or cable, shall also be attached to the towing vehicle at a point on its longitudinal centerline. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.34)  
Sec. 98-385. - Coupling devices and towing for drive-away/tow-away operations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Kingpin means that device which is used to connect the upper half to the lower half in such manner as to permit relative movement in a horizontal plane between the towed and towing vehicle. 
Lower half of a saddle-mount means that part of the device which is securely attached to the towing vehicle and which maintains a fixed position relative thereto, but does not include the kingpin. 
Saddle-mount means a device, designed and constructed as to be readily demountable, used in drive-away/tow-away operations to perform the functions of a conventional fifth wheel. 
Upper half of a saddle-mount means that part of the device which is securely attached to the towed vehicle and maintains a fixed position relative thereto, but does not include the kingpin. 
(b)  Saddle-mounts. Under this article, not more than three saddle-mounts may be used in any combination and not more than one tow-bar may be used in any combination. When motor vehicles are towed by means of triple saddle-mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes acting on all wheels which are in contact with the roadway. 
(c)  Carrying on towing vehicle. Carrying vehicles on the towing vehicle shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  When adequately and securely attached by means equivalent in security to that provided in subsection (k)(2) of this section, a motor vehicle may be full mounted on the structure of a towing vehicle engaged in a drive-away/tow-away operation. 
(2)  A motor vehicle may not be full mounted on a towing vehicle unless the relationship of such full-mounted vehicle to the rear axle results in proper distribution of the total gross weight of the vehicles and does not unduly interfere with the steering, braking, or maneuvering of the towing vehicle or otherwise contribute to the unsafe operation of the vehicles comprising the combination. 
(d)  Carrying on towed vehicle. Carrying vehicles on towed vehicles shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  When adequately and securely attached by means equivalent in security to that provided in subsection (k)(2) of this section, a motor vehicle may be full mounted on the structure of towed vehicles engaged in a drive-away/tow-away operation. 
(2)  A motor vehicle shall not be full mounted on a motor vehicle towed by means of a tow-bar unless the towed vehicle is equipped with brakes and is provided with means for effective application of brakes acting on all wheels and is towed on its own wheels. 
(3)  A motor vehicle shall not be full mounted on a motor vehicle towed by means of a saddle-mount unless the centerline of the kingpin or equivalent means of attachment of such towed vehicle shall be so located on the towing vehicle that the relationship to the rear axle results in proper distribution of the total gross weight of the vehicle and does not unduly interfere with the steering, braking or maneuvering of the towing vehicle or otherwise contribute to the unsafe operation of vehicles comprising the combination, and unless a line perpendicular to the ground from the center of gravity of the full-mounted vehicle lies forward of the centerline of the rear axle of the saddle-mounted vehicle. 
(4)  If a motor vehicle towed by means of a double saddle-mount has any vehicle full mounted on it, the saddle-mounted vehicle shall at all times, while so loaded, have effective brakes acting on those wheels that are in contact with the roadway. 
(e)  Tow-bar. Tow-bars of the type which depend upon the bumpers as a means of transmitting forces between the vehicles shall not be used to tow a motor vehicle weighing more than 5,000 pounds. 
(f)  Saddle-mount. A motor vehicle towed by means of a saddle-mount shall have the motion of the front wheels restrained if, under any condition of turning such wheels, they will project beyond the widest part of either the towed or towing vehicle. 
(g)  Locked steering mechanism. Unless the steering mechanism is adequately locked in a straight-forward position, all motor vehicles towed by means of a saddle-mount shall be towed with the front end mounted on the towing vehicle. 
(h)  Operation. A motor vehicle shall not be towed in drive-away/tow-away operations by means other than tow-bar or saddle-mount connections which shall meet the requirements of this article. For the purposes of this subsection, coupling devices, such as those used for towing house trailers and employing ball and socket connections, shall be considered as tow-bars. Also, motor vehicles or parts of motor vehicles adequately, securely, and rigidly attached by devices meeting the requirements of subsection (n) of this section shall be considered as one vehicle in any position in any combination. 
(i)  Tow-bar requirements. Tow-bars shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The tow-bar shall be so constructed as to freely permit motion in both horizontal and vertical planes between the towed and towing vehicles. The means used to provide the motion shall be such as to prohibit the transmission of stresses under normal operation between the towed and towing vehicles, except along the longitudinal axis of the tongue. 
(2)  Adequate means shall be provided for securely fastening the tow-bar to the towed and towing vehicles. 
(3)  The tow-bar shall be provided with suitable means of attachment to and actuation of the steering mechanism, if any, of the towed vehicle. The attachment shall provide for sufficient angularity of movement of the front wheels of the towed vehicle so that it may follow substantially in the path of the towing vehicle without cramping the tow-bar. The tow-bar shall be provided with suitable joints to permit such movement. 
(4)  The tow-bar shall be so designed, constructed, maintained, and mounted as to cause the towed vehicle to follow substantially in the path of the towing vehicle. Tow-bars of such design or in such condition as to permit the towed vehicle to deviate more than three inches to either side of the path of a towing vehicle moving in a straight line are prohibited. 
(5)  Every tow-bar acquired and used in drive-away/tow-away operations by a motor carrier shall be plainly marked with the following certification of the manufacturer thereof or words of equivalent meaning: 
This tow-bar complies with the requirements of the Federal Highway Administration for (maximum gross weight for which tow-bar is manufactured) vehicles. 
Manufactured 	_____
(Month and Year) 
By: _____
(Name of 
Manufacturer) 	
 
(6)  Safety devices, in case of tow-bar failure or disconnection, shall be provided as follows: 
a.  The towed vehicle shall be connected to the towing vehicle by a safety device to prevent the towed vehicle from breaking loose if the tow-bar fails or becomes disconnected. When safety chains or cables are used as the safety device for that vehicle, not less than two safety chains or cables meeting the requirements of subsection (i)(2) of this section shall be used. The tensile strength of the safety device and the means of attachment to the vehicles shall be at least equivalent to the corresponding longitudinal strength of tow-bars required in the table set forth in subsection (i)(1) of this section. If safety chains or cables are used as the safety device, the required strength shall be the combined strength of the combination of chains and cables. 
b.  If chains or cables are used as the safety device, they shall be crossed and attached to the vehicles near the points of bumper attachments to the chassis of the vehicles. The length of chain used shall be no more than necessary to permit free turning of the vehicles. The chains shall be attached to the tow-bar at the point of crossing or as close to that point as is practicable. 
c.  A safety device, other than safety chains or cables, shall provide strength, security of attachment, and directional stability equal to or greater than that provided by safety chains or cables installed in accordance with subsection (i)(6)b of this section. A safety device, other than safety chains or cables, shall be designed, constructed, and installed so that, if the tow-bar fails or becomes disconnected, it does not drop to the ground. 
(j)  Upper half saddle-mount requirements. The upper half of a saddle-mount shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  The upper half shall be securely attached to the frame or axle of the towed vehicle by means of U-bolts or other means providing at least equivalent security. 
_____ 
(2)  U-bolts used to attach the upper half to the towed vehicle shall be made of steel rod, free of defects, and so shaped as to avoid at any point a radius of less than one inch. However, a lesser radius may be utilized if the U-bolt is so fabricated as not to cause more than five percent reduction in cross sectional area at points of curvature, in which latter event the minimum radius shall be 1/16 inch. U-bolts shall have a diameter not less than required by the following table: 
DIAMETER OF U-BOLTS IN INCHES 
	Double or Triple Saddle-Mount 	
Weight in Pounds 
  of Heaviest 
  Towed Vehicle 	Front Mount 	Middle or 
Front Mount 	Rear Mount 	Single 
Saddle-Mount* 
Up to 5,000 	0.6250 	0.5625 	0.5000 	0.5000 
5,000 and over 	0.6875 	0.6250 	0.5625 	0.5625 
 
*The total weight of all the vehicles being towed shall govern. If other devices are used to accomplish the same purposes as U-bolts, they shall have at least equivalent strength of U-bolts made of mild steel. Cast iron shall not be used for clamps or any other holding devices. 
_____ 
(3)  The distance between the most widely separated U-bolts shall not be less than nine inches. The distance between the most widely separated points where the upper half supports the towed vehicle shall not be less than nine inches, except that saddle-mounts employing ball and socket joints shall employ a device which clamps the axle of the towed vehicle throughout a length of not less than five inches. 
(4)  Upper halves of the cradle-type using vertical members to restrain the towed vehicle from relative movement in the direction of the motion of the vehicles shall be substantially constructed and adequate for the purpose. Such cradle-mounts shall be equipped with at least one bolt or equivalent means to provide against relative vertical movement between the upper half and the towed vehicle. Bolts, if used, shall be at least one-half inch in diameter. Devices using equivalent means shall have at least equivalent strength. The means used to provide against relative vertical motion between the upper half and towed vehicle shall be such as not to permit a relative motion of over one-half inch. The distance between the most widely separated points of support between the upper half and the towed vehicle shall be not less than nine inches. 
(5)  Lateral movements of the towed vehicle shall be controlled as follows: 
a.  Towed vehicles having a straight axle or an axle having a drop of less than three inches, unless the saddle-mount is constructed pursuant to subsection (m)(2) of this section, shall be securely fastened by means of chains or cables to the upper half. The chains or cables shall be at least 3/16 -inch diameter and shall be secured by bolts of at least equal diameter. 
b.  Towed vehicles with an axle with a drop of three inches or more or connected by a saddle-mount constructed pursuant to subsection (m)(2) of this section, need not be restrained by chains or cables if the upper half is so designed as to ensure against such relative motion. 
c.  Chains or cables shall not be required if the upper half is so designed as positively to provide against lateral movement of the axle. 
_____
(k)  Lower half saddle-mount requirements. The lower half of any saddle-mount shall comply with the following: 
(1)  U-bolts used to attach the lower half to the towing vehicle shall be made of steel rod, free of defects, so shaped as to avoid at any point a radius of less than one inch. However, a lesser radius may be utilized if the U-bolt is so fabricated as not to cause more than five percent reduction in cross sectional area at points of curvature, in which event the minimum radius shall be 1/16 inch. U-bolts shall have a total cross sectional area not less than as required by the following table: 
TOTAL CROSS SECTIONAL AREA OF U-BOLTS IN SQUARE INCHES 
	Double or Triple Saddle-Mount 	
Weight in Pounds 
  of Heaviest 
 Towed Vehicle 	Front Mount 	Middle or 
Front Mount 	Rear Mount 	Single 
Saddle-Mount* 
Up to 5,000 	1.2 	1.0 	0.8 	0.8 
5,000 and over 	1.4 	1.2 	1.0 	1.0 
 
*The total weight of all the vehicles being towed shall govern. If other devices are used to accomplish the same purposes as U-bolts, they shall have at least equivalent strength of U-bolts made of mild steel. Cast iron shall not be used for clamps or any other holding devices. 
_____ 
(2)  Adequate provision shall be made by design and installation to provide against relative movement between the lower half and the towing vehicle, especially during periods of rapid acceleration and deceleration. To ensure against shifting, designs of the tripod-type shall be equipped with adequate and securely fastened hold-back chains or similar devices. 
(3)  Swaying shall be controlled as follows: 
a.  Adequate provision shall be made, by design and installation, to provide against swaying or lateral movement of the towed vehicles relative to the towing vehicle. To ensure against swaying, lower halves designed with cross members shall have such cross members fastened to the vertical members by not less than two bolts on each side. Such bolts shall be of at least equivalent cross sectional area as those required for U-bolts for the corresponding saddle-mount as given in the table in subsection (k)(1) of this section. The minimum distance between the most widely separated points of support of the cross members by the vertical member shall be three inches as measured in a direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of the towing vehicle. 
b.  The lower half shall have a bearing surface on the frame of the towing vehicle of such dimensions that the pressure exerted by the lower half upon the frame of the towing vehicle shall not exceed 200 pounds per square inch under any conditions of static loading. Hardwood blocks or blocks of other suitable material, such as hard rubber, aluminum, or brake lining, if used between the lower half and the frame of the towing vehicle, shall be not less than one-half inch thick, three inches wide, and a combined length of six inches. 
c.  Under no condition shall the highest point of support of the towed vehicle by the upper half be more than 24 inches, measured vertically, above the top of the frame of the towing vehicle, measured at the point where the lower half rests on the towing vehicle. 
(4)  Hardwood blocks of good quality may be used to build up the height of the front end of the towed vehicle if the total height of such wood blocks does not exceed eight inches and if not more than two separate pieces are placed upon each other to obtain such height. However, hardwood blocks, not more than four in number, of a total height not to exceed 14 inches, may be used if the total cross sectional area of the U-bolts used to attach the lower half of the towing vehicle is at least 50 percent greater than that required by the table contained in subsection (k)(1) of this section or, if other devices are used in lieu of U-bolts, they shall provide for as great a resistance to bending as is provided by the larger U-bolts prescribed in this subsection. Hardwood blocks shall be not less than four inches in width, and the surfaces between blocks and the lower half of the block and upper half shall be planed and so installed and maintained as to minimize any tendency of the towed vehicle to sway or rock. 
(5)  The cross member, which is that part of the lower half used to distribute the weight of the towed vehicle equally to each member of the frame of the towing vehicle, if used, shall be structurally adequate and properly installed and maintained adequately to perform this function. 
(6)  Materials, other than suitable metals, shall not be used as the cross member, and wood may not be used structurally in any manner that results in its being subject to tensile stresses. Wood may be used in cross members if supported throughout its length by suitable metal cross members. 
_____ 
(7)  The lower half shall be capable of supporting the loads given in the following table. For the purpose of a test, the saddle-mount shall be mounted as normally operated and the load applied through the upper half: 
MINIMUM TEST LOAD IN POUNDS 
	Double or Triple Saddle-Mount 	
Weight in Pounds 
  of Heaviest 
 Towed Vehicle 	Front Mount 	Middle or 
Front Mount 	Rear Mount 	Single 
Saddle-Mount* 
Up to 5,000 	15,000 	10,000 	5,000 	5,000 
5,000 and over 	30,000 	20,000 	10,000 	10,000 
 
*The total weight of all the vehicles being towed shall govern. 
(l)  Kingpin requirements. The kingpin of a saddle-mount shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Kingpins shall be constructed of steel suitable for the purpose, free of defects, and shall have a diameter not less than required by the table which follows. If a ball and socket joint is used in place of a kingpin, the diameter of the neck of the ball shall be at least equal to the diameter of the corresponding solid kingpin given in the table which follows. If hollow kingpins are used, the metallic cross sectional area shall be at least equal to the cross sectional area of the corresponding solid kingpin. The diameter of the solid kingpin shall be in accordance with the following table: 
MINIMUM TEST LOAD IN POUNDS 
	Double or Triple Saddle-Mount 	
Weight in Pounds 
  of Heaviest 
 Towed Vehicle 	Front Mount 
Mild H.T.S. Steel 2 	Middle or 
Front Mount 
Mild H.T.S. Steel 2 	Rear Mount 
Mild H.T.S. Steel 2 	Single 
Saddle-Mount 1 
Mild H.T.S. Steel 2 
Up to 5,000 	1.125 	1.000 	0.875 	0.875 
	1.000 	0.750 	0.750 	0.750 
5,000 and over 	1.500 	1.250 	1.000 	1.000 
	1.125 	1.000 	0.875 	0.875 
 
1 The total weight of all the vehicles being towed shall govern. 
2 High tensile steel is steel having a minimum ultimate strength of 65,000 pounds per square inch. 
_____ 
(2)  If a kingpin bushing is not used, the kingpin shall fit snugly into the upper and lower halves, but shall not bind. Those portions of the upper or lower halves in moving contact with the kingpin shall be smoothly machined with no rough or sharp edges. The bearing surface thus provided shall not be less in depth than the radius of the kingpin. 
(3)  The kingpin of all new saddle-mounts acquired and used shall be snugly enclosed in a bushing at least along such length of the kingpin as may be in moving contact with either the upper or lower halves. The bearing surface thus provided shall not be less in depth than the radius of the kingpin. 
(4)  The kingpin shall be so designed and installed as to restrain the upper half from moving in a vertical direction relative to the lower half. 
(m)  Saddle-mount requirements. Saddle-mounts shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  The upper and lower halves shall be so constructed and connected that the bearing surface between the two halves shall not be less than 16 square inches under any conditions of angularity between the towing and towed vehicles. However, saddle-mounts using a ball and socket joint shall have a ball of such dimension that the static bearing load shall not exceed 800 pounds per square inch, based on the projected cross sectional area of the ball. In addition, saddle-mounts having the upper half supported by ball, taper, or roller bearings shall not have such bearings loaded beyond the limits prescribed for such bearings by the manufacturer thereof. The upper half shall rest evenly and smoothly upon the lower half, and the contact surfaces shall be lubricated and maintained so that there shall be a minimum of frictional resistance between the parts. 
(2)  All saddle-mounts acquired and used shall provide for angularity between the towing and towed vehicles due to vertical curvatures of the highways. Such means shall not depend upon either the looseness or deformation of the parts of either the saddle-mount or the vehicles to provide for such angularity. 
(3)  The saddle-mount shall be so designed, constructed, maintained, and installed that the towed vehicle follows substantially in the path of the towing vehicle without swerving. Towed vehicles shall not deviate more than three inches to either side of the path of the towing vehicle when moving in a straight line. 
(4)  Where necessary, provision shall be made to prevent the bending of the frame of the towing vehicle by insertion of suitable blocks inside the frame channel to prevent kinking. The saddle-mount shall not be so located as to cause deformation of the frame because of cantilever action. 
(5)  A saddle-mount shall not be located at a point to the rear of the frame of a towing vehicle. 
(6)  All nuts used on bolts, U-bolts, kingpins, or in any other part of the saddle-mount shall be secured against accidental disconnection by means of cotter keys, lock washers, double nuts, safety nuts, or equivalent means. Parts shall be so designed and installed that nuts shall be fully engaged. 
(7)  The saddle-mount shall be so designed that it may be disassembled and each separate part inspected for worn, bent, cracked, broken, or missing parts. 
(8)  Every new saddle-mount acquired and used in drive-away/tow-away operations by a motor carrier shall have the upper half and the lower half separately marked with the following certification of the manufacturer thereof or words of equivalent meaning: 
This saddle-mount complies with the requirements of the Federal Highway Administration for vehicles up to 5,000 pounds (or over 5,000 pounds): 
Manufactured 	_____
(Month and Year) 
By: _____
(Name of 
Manufacturer) 	
 
(n)  Connecting device requirements. Requirements for devices used to connect motor vehicles or parts of motor vehicles together to form one vehicle are as follows: 
(1)  The front axle of one motor vehicle intended to be coupled with another vehicle as described in subsection (h) of this section shall be attached with U-bolts meeting the requirements of subsection (j)(2) of this section. 
(2)  The rear axle of one vehicle shall be coupled to the frame of the other vehicle by means of a connecting device which, when in place, forms a rectangle. The device shall be composed of two pieces, top and bottom. The devices shall be made of four-inch by one-half-inch steel bar, bent to shape, and shall have the corners reinforced with a plate not less than three-inch by one-half-inch by eight inches long. The device shall be bolted together with three-quarter-inch bolts, and not less than three shall be used on each side. Wood may be used as spacers to keep the frames apart, and such wood shall be not less than four inches square. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.35)  
Sec. 98-386. - Tires. 
(a)  Prohibitions. A vehicle with any of the following tire or dual problems shall not be operated under this article: 
(1)  A tire that has fabric exposed through the tread or sidewall. 
(2)  A tire that has any visible bump, bulge, or knot apparently related to tread or sidewall separation. 
(3)  A tire that has any cut that enters the fabric plies on the sidewall or tread area. 
(4)  A tire that has any tread separation. 
(5)  A tire that is flat or has an audible leak. 
(6)  A tire that is marked "not for highway use." 
(7)  Any tire contacting its mate in duals. 
Dual tires shall be matched for overall diameter within three-fourths inch. 
(b)  Front tires. A tire on the front wheels of a truck or truck tractor shall have a tread groove pattern depth of not less than 4/32 of an inch when measured at any point on a major tread groove. The measurements shall not be made where tire bars, humps, or fillets are located. 
(c)  Tread groove depth. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, tires shall have a tread groove pattern depth of not less than 2/32 of an inch when measured in a major tread groove. The measurement shall not be made where tire bars, humps, or fillets are located. 
(d)  Regrooved tires. A truck or truck tractor shall not be operated with regrooved tires on the front wheels which have a load-carrying capacity equal to or greater than that of 8.25-20, eight-ply rating tires. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.36) 
_____ 
Sec. 98-387. - Sleeper berths. 
(a)  Size. Under this article, the size of a sleeper berth shall be not less than that prescribed by the following table: 
SLEEPER BERTH SIZE 
Date of Installation 
on Motor Vehicle 	Length Measured on 
Centerline of 
Longitudinal Axis 
(inches) 	Width Measured on 
Centerline of 
Longitudinal Axis 
(inches) 	Height Measured on 
Centerline of 
Longitudinal Axis 
(inches)* 
Before January 1, 1953 	72 	18 	18 
After December 31, 1962, and before October 1, 1975 	75 	21 	21 
After September 30, 1975 	75 	24 	24 
 
*For a sleeper berth that utilizes an adjustable mechanical suspension system, the required clearance can be measured when the suspension system is adjusted to the height to which it would settle when occupied by a driver. 
_____
(b)  Installation. A sleeper berth installed on a motor vehicle on or after January 1, 1953, shall be generally rectangular in shape, except that the horizontal corners and the roof corners may be rounded to radii not exceeding 10½ inches. 
(c)  Construction. A sleeper berth shall be constructed so that an occupant's ready entrance to and exit from the sleeper berth is not unduly hindered. 
(d)  Installation after January 1, 1953. A sleeper berth shall not be installed in or on a semitrailer or a full trailer, other than a house trailer. A sleeper berth located within the cargo space of a motor vehicle shall be securely compartmentalized from the remainder of the cargo space. A sleeper berth installed on or after January 1, 1953, shall be located in the cab, or immediately adjacent to the cab, and shall be securely fixed with relation to the cab. 
(e)  Means of exit. Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, there shall be a direct and ready means of exit from a sleeper berth into the driver's seat and compartment. If the sleeper berth was installed on or after January 12, 1963, the exit shall be a doorway or opening not less than 18 inches high and 36 inches wide. If the sleeper berth was installed before January 1, 1963, the exit shall have sufficient area to contain an ellipse having a major axis of 24 inches and a minor axis of 16 inches. 
(f)  Installation prior to January 1, 1953. A sleeper berth installed before January 1, 1953, shall either conform to the requirements of subsection (e) of this section or shall have not less than two exits, each of which is not less than 18 inches high and 21 inches wide, located at opposite ends of the vehicle and usable by the occupant without the assistance of any other person. 
(g)  Means of communication. A sleeper berth that is not located within the driver's compartment and that has no direct entrance into the driver's compartment shall be equipped with a means of communication between the occupant and the driver. The means of communication may consist of a telephone, speaker tube, buzzer, pull cord, or other mechanical or electrical device. 
(h)  Equipment. A sleeper berth shall be properly equipped for sleeping. Its equipment shall include the following: 
(1)  Adequate bed clothing and blankets. 
(2)  One of the following: 
a.  Springs and a mattress. 
b.  An innerspring mattress. 
c.  A cellular rubber or flexible foam mattress not less than four inches thick. 
d.  An air mattress of sufficient thickness when inflated to prevent bottoming-out by a driver when he is lying on the air mattress while the vehicle is in motion. 
(3)  A design and construction which will permit the mattress and bed clothing to be readily removed for cleaning. 
(i)  Ventilation. A sleeper berth shall have louvers or other means of providing adequate ventilation. A sleeper berth shall be reasonably tight against dust and rain. 
(j)  Exhaust and fuel leaks. A sleeper berth shall be located so that leaks in the vehicle's exhaust system or fuel system do not permit fuel, fuel system gases, or exhaust gases to enter the sleeper berth. A sleeper berth shall be located so that it is not overheated or damaged because of its proximity to the vehicle's exhaust system. 
(k)  Ejection. A motor vehicle manufactured on or after July 1, 1971, and equipped with a sleeper berth shall be equipped with a means of preventing ejection of the occupant of the sleeper berth during deceleration of the vehicle. The restraint system shall be designed, installed, and maintained to withstand a minimum total force of 6,000 pounds applied toward the front of the vehicle and parallel to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.37)  
Sec. 98-388. - Heaters. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "heater" means a device or assembly of devices or appliances used to heat the interior of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Prohibitions. Under this article, the installation or use of the following types of heaters is prohibited: 
(1)  Any type of exhaust heater in which the engine exhaust gases are conducted into or through a space occupied by persons, or a heater which conducts engine compartment air into any such space. 
(2)  Any type of heater employing a flame which is not fully enclosed; however, such heaters are not prohibited when used for heating the cargo of tank vehicles. 
(3)  Any type of heater from the burner of which there could be spillage or leakage of fuel upon the tilting or overturning of the vehicle in which it is mounted. 
(4)  A heater which takes air, heated or to be heated, from the engine compartment or from direct contact with any portion of the exhaust system, as well as a heater which takes air in ducts from the outside atmosphere to be conveyed through the engine compartment, unless the ducts are so constructed and installed as to prevent contamination of the air so conveyed by exhaust or engine compartment gases. 
(5)  A stove or other heater employing solid fuel, other than wood charcoal. 
(6)  Portable heaters used in a space occupied by persons, except the cargo space of a vehicle which is being loaded or unloaded. 
(c)  Specifications. Heaters shall comply with the following specifications: 
(1)  A heater shall be so located or protected as to prevent contact therewith by occupants, unless the surface temperature of the protecting grilles or of any exposed portions of the heaters, inclusive of exhaust stacks, pipes or conduits, is lower than would cause contact burns. Adequate protection shall be afforded against igniting parts of the vehicle or burning occupants by direct radiation. Wood charcoal heaters shall be enclosed within a metal barrel, drum, or similar protective enclosure, which enclosure shall be provided with a securely fastened cover. 
(2)  Effective guards shall be provided for the protection of passengers or occupants against injury by fans, belts, or other moving parts. 
(3)  A heater and heater enclosure shall be securely fastened to the vehicle in a substantial manner so as to provide against relative motion within the vehicle during normal usage or if the vehicle overturns. A heater shall be so designed, constructed, and mounted as to minimize the likelihood of disassembly of any of its parts, including exhaust stacks, pipes, or conduits, upon overturn of the vehicle in or on which it is mounted. Wood charcoal heaters shall be secured against relative motion within the enclosure required by subsection (c)(1) of this section, and the enclosure shall be securely fastened to the vehicle. 
(4)  When, either in normal operation or if an overturn occurs, there is or is likely to be relative motion between the fuel tank for a heater and the heater or between either of such units and the fuel lines between them, a suitable means shall be provided at the point of greatest relative motion so as to allow this motion without causing failure of the fuel lines. 
(5)  Hoses for all hot water and steam heater systems shall be specifically designed and constructed for that purpose. 
(6)  A heater employing an electrical apparatus shall be equipped with electrical conductors, switches, connectors, and other electrical parts of ample carrying capacity to provide against overheating. An electric motor employed in a heater shall be of adequate size and so located that it cannot be overheated. Electrical circuits shall be provided with fuses or circuit breakers, or both, to provide against electrical overloading. All electrical conductors employed in or leading to a heater shall be secured against dangling, chafing, and rubbing and shall have suitable protection against any other conditions likely to produce short or open circuits. Electrical parts certified as proper for use by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be deemed to comply with these requirements. 
(7)  If a separate storage battery is located within the personnel or cargo space, such battery shall be securely mounted and equipped with nonspill filler caps. 
(8)  A heater employing the combustion of oil, gas, liquified petroleum gas, or any other combustible material shall be provided with substantial means of conducting the products of combustion to the outside of the vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to heaters used solely to heat the cargo space of vehicles where such vehicles or heaters are equipped with means specifically designed and maintained so that the carbon monoxide concentration never exceeds two-tenths percent in the cargo space. The exhaust pipe, stack or conduit, if required, shall be sufficiently substantial and so secured as to provide reasonable assurance against leakage or discharge of products of combustion within the vehicle and, if necessary, shall be so insulated as to make unlikely the burning or charring of parts of the vehicle by radiation or by direct contact. The place of discharge of the products of combustion to the atmosphere and the means of discharge of such products shall be such as to minimize the likelihood of their reentry into the vehicle under all operating conditions. 
(9)  The design and construction of a combustion-type heater, except cargo space heaters permitted by the exception to subsection (c)(8) of this section and unenclosed flame heaters used for heating cargo of tank vehicles, shall be such as to provide against the leakage of products of combustion into air to be heated and circulated. The material employed in combustion chambers shall be such as to provide against leakage because of corrosion, oxidation, or other deterioration. Joints between combustion chambers and the air chambers with which they are in thermal and mechanical contact shall be so designed and constructed as to prevent leakage between the chambers, and the materials employed in such joints shall have melting points substantially higher than the maximum temperatures likely to be attained at the point of juncture. 
(10)  Gravity or siphon feed shall not be permitted for heaters using liquid fuels. Heaters using liquid fuels shall be equipped with automatic means for shutting off the fuel or for reducing such flow of fuel to the smallest practicable magnitude if the vehicle overturns. Heaters using liquified petroleum gas or fuel shall have the fuel line equipped with automatic means at the source of supply for shutting off the fuel if separation, breakage, or disconnection of any of the fuel lines occurs between the supply source and the heater. 
(11)  Heaters subject to subsection (a) of this section and not provided with automatic controls shall be provided with telltale means to indicate to the driver that the heater is properly functioning. This requirement shall not apply to heaters used solely for the cargo space in semitrailers or full trailers. 
(12)  Automatic means or manual means, if the control is readily accessible to the driver without moving from the driver's seat, shall be provided to shut off the fuel and electrical supply if the heater fails to function for any reason or if the heater should function improperly or overheat. This requirement shall not apply to wood charcoal heaters or to heaters used solely to heat the contents of cargo tank vehicles, but wood charcoal heaters shall be provided with a controlled method of regulating the flow of combustion air. 
(13)  A combustion type of heater, except wood charcoal heaters, the date of manufacture of which is subsequent to December 31, 1962, and every wood charcoal heater, the date of manufacture of which is subsequent to September 1, 1953, shall be marked plainly to indicate the type of service for which such heater is designed and with a certification by the manufacture that the heater meets the applicable requirements for such use; for example, "Meets I.C.C. Bus Heater Requirements" or "Meets I.C.C. Flue-Vented Cargo Space Heater Requirements." After December 31, 1967, such certification shall read "Meets FHWA Bus Heater Requirements" or "Meets FHWA Flue-Vented Cargo Space Heater Requirements." 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.38)  
Sec. 98-389. - Windshield wipers. 
(a)  Required. Under this article, every truck and truck tractor having a windshield shall be equipped with not less than two automatically operating windshield wiper blades, one on each side of the centerline of the windshield, for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The blades shall be in such condition as to provide clear vision for the driver, unless one such blade is so arranged as to clean an area of the windshield extending to within one inch of the limit of vision through the windshield at each side. However, in drive-away/tow-away operations, this section shall apply only to the driven vehicle. In addition, one windshield wiper blade suffices under this section when such driven vehicle in a drive-away/tow-away operation constitutes part or all of the property being transported and has no provision for two such blades. 
(b)  Vacuum operation. Every truck and truck tractor, the date of manufacture of which is subsequent to June 30, 1953, which depends upon vacuum to operate the windshield wipers, shall be so constructed that the operation of the wipers is not materially impaired by change in the intake manifold pressure. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.39)  
Sec. 98-390. - Defrosting device. 
Under this article, a truck and truck tractor having a windshield, when operating under conditions such that ice, snow, or frost is likely to collect on the outside of the windshield or condensation on the inside of the windshield, shall be equipped with a device or other means, not manually operated, for preventing or removing such obstructions to the driver's view. This section shall not apply in drive-away/tow-away operations when the driven vehicle is a part of the shipment being delivered. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.40)  
Sec. 98-391. - Rear-vision mirrors. 
Every truck and truck tractor operated pursuant to this article shall be equipped with two rear-vision mirrors, one at each side firmly attached to the outside of the motor vehicle and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear along both sides of the vehicle. Mirrors shall be free of discoloration or other damage. In drive-away/tow-away operations, the driven vehicle shall comply with this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.41)  
Sec. 98-392. - Horn. 
Under this article, a truck, truck tractor, and driven motor vehicle in a drive-away/tow-away operation shall be equipped with a horn and actuating elements which shall be in such condition as to be capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.42)  
Sec. 98-393. - Speedometer. 
Every truck and truck tractor operated pursuant to this article shall be equipped with a speedometer indicating vehicle speed in miles per hour, which shall be operative with reasonable accuracy. However, this section shall not apply to a driven vehicle which is part of a shipment being delivered in a drive-away/tow-away operation if such driven vehicle is equipped with an effective means of limiting its maximum speed to 45 miles per hour. Also, this section shall not apply to a towed vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.43)  
Sec. 98-394. - Exhaust system location. 
(a)  Damage. No part of the exhaust system of a motor vehicle operated pursuant to this article shall be so located as would be likely to result in burning, charring, or damaging the electrical wiring, the fuel supply, or any combustible part of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  Discharge. The exhaust system of a truck and truck tractor shall discharge to the atmosphere at a location to the rear of the cab or, if the exhaust projects above the cab, at a location near the rear of the cab. 
(c)  Floors. The flooring in all motor vehicles shall be substantially constructed, free of unnecessary holes and openings, and shall be maintained so as to minimize the entrance of fumes, exhaust gases, or fire. Floors shall not be permeated with oil or gasoline and shall have the interior surface in good condition. 
(d)  Bumpers. A vehicle, except truck tractors, pole trailers, and vehicles engaged in drive-away/tow-away operations, the date of manufacture of which is subsequent to December 31, 1952, which is so constructed that the body or the chassis assembly, if without a body, has a clearance at the rear end of more than 30 inches from the ground when empty, shall be provided with bumpers or devices serving similar purposes which shall be so constructed and located that: 
(1)  The clearance between the effective bottom of the bumpers or devices and the ground shall not exceed 30 inches with the vehicle empty; 
(2)  The maximum distance between the closest points between bumpers or devices, if more than one is used, shall not exceed 24 inches; 
(3)  The maximum transverse distance from the widest part of the vehicle at the rear to the bumper or device shall not exceed 18 inches; 
(4)  The bumpers or devices shall be located not more than 24 inches forward of the extreme rear of the vehicle; and 
(5)  The body, chassis, or other parts of the vehicle afford the rear end protection contemplated. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.44)  
Sec. 98-395. - Flags on projecting loads. 
Under this article, a vehicle having a load which extends beyond the sides or more than four feet beyond the rear shall have the extremities of the load marked with a red flag, not less than 12 inches square, at each point where a lamp is required by section 98-354. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.45)  
Sec. 98-396. - Television receivers. 
Under this article, a motor vehicle equipped with a television viewer, screen, or other means of visually receiving a television broadcast shall have the viewer or screen located in the motor vehicle at a point to the rear of the back of the driver's seat, if such viewer or screen is in the same compartment as the driver, and the viewer or screen shall be so located as not to be visible to the driver while he is driving the motor vehicle. The operating controls for the television receiver shall be so located that the driver cannot operate them without leaving the driver's seat. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.46)  
Sec. 98-397. - Seat belt assemblies and anchorages. 
(a)  Manufactured from January 1, 1965 through July 1, 1971. For the purposes of this article, a truck and truck tractor manufactured on or after January 1, 1965, and before July 1, 1971, shall be equipped with a type 1 or type 2 seat belt assembly, which conforms to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 209, 49 CFR 571.209, installed at the driver's seat and at the right front outboard seat, if the vehicle has one. The vehicle shall also have seat belt assembly anchorages that conform to the location and geometric requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 210, 49 CFR 571.210, for each seat belt assembly that is required by this subsection. 
(b)  Manufactured after July 1, 1971. A truck and truck tractor manufactured on or after July 1, 1971, except a truck or truck tractor being transported in a drive-away/tow-away operation and having an incomplete vehicle seating and cab configuration, shall conform to the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 208, 49 CFR 571.208, relating to installation of seat belt assemblies, and Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 201, 49 CFR 571.201, relating to installation of seat belt assembly anchorages. 
(c)  Manufactured after January 1, 1972. A truck and truck tractor manufactured on or after January 1, 1972, except a truck or truck tractor being transported in a drive-away/tow-away operation and having an incomplete vehicle seating and cab configuration, shall conform to the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 207, 49 CFR 571.207, relating to seating systems. 
(d)  Conformance standard. Whenever this section requires conformity to a Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard, the vehicle or equipment shall conform to the version of the standard that is in effect on the date the vehicle is manufactured or on the date the vehicle is modified to conform to the requirements of this section, whichever is later. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.47)  
Sec. 98-398. - Emergency equipment generally. 
(a)  Fire extinguisher. For the purposes of this article, a truck, truck tractor, and every driven vehicle in a drive-away/tow-away operation, except for a lightweight vehicle, shall be equipped pursuant to this section. A power unit shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher that is properly filled and located so that it is readily accessible for use. The fire extinguisher shall be securely mounted on the vehicle. The fire extinguisher shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to permit a determination of whether it is fully charged and in proper operating condition. The fire extinguisher shall have an extinguishing agent that does not need protection from freezing. The fire extinguisher shall not use a vaporizing liquid that gives off vapors more toxic than those produced by the substances shown as having a toxicity rating of 5 or 6 in the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., publication entitled "Classification of Comparative Life Hazard of Gases and Vapors." Fire extinguishers are to be inspected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 10, 1974 edition. 
(b)  Hazardous materials. A motor vehicle that is used to transport hazardous materials shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher having an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., rating of 10 B:C or more. This subsection applies to a vehicle that is required to be marked or placarded pursuant to 49 CFR 100—199. 
(c)  Fire extinguisher rating. A motor vehicle that is not used to transport hazardous material shall be equipped with either a fire extinguisher having an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., rating of 5 B:C or more, or two fire extinguishers, each of which has an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., rating of 4 B:C or more. 
(d)  Label. A fire extinguisher required by subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall be labeled or marked with its Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., rating and shall meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Spare overload protective device. At least one spare fuse or other overload protective device, if the devices used are not of a reset type, shall be provided for each kind and size used. In drive-away/tow-away operations, spares located on any one of the vehicles are deemed adequate. 
(f)  Warning devices. Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section, one of the following combinations of warning devices shall be provided: 
(1)  As to vehicles equipped with warning devices before January 1, 1974, one of the following warning device systems may be used until replacements are necessary: 
a.  Three liquid-burning emergency flares which satisfy the requirements of SAE standard J597, entitled "Liquid-Burning Emergency Flares," as well as three fusees and two red flags. 
b.  Three electric emergency lanterns which satisfy the requirements of SAE standard J596, entitled "Electric Emergency Lanterns," and two red flags. 
c.  Three red emergency reflectors which satisfy the requirements of subsection (i) of this section and two red flags. 
d.  Three red emergency reflective triangles which satisfy the requirements of subsection (h) of this section. 
e.  Three bidirectional emergency reflective triangles that conform to the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 125, 49 CFR 571.125. 
(2)  As to vehicles equipped with warning devices on and after January 1, 1974, three bidirectional emergency reflective triangles, pursuant 49 CFR 571.125, shall be used. Fusees, liquid-burning emergency flares, and red electric lanterns that conform to subsection (f)(1) of this section may be used to supplement the emergency reflective triangles. 
(g)  Flame signal. Liquid-burning emergency flares, fusees, oil lanterns, or any device which uses a flame to produce a signal shall not be carried on a vehicle transporting class A or class B explosives, on any cargo tank vehicle used for the transportation of flammable liquids or flammable compressed gas, whether loaded or empty, or on a motor vehicle using compressed gas as a motor fuel. 
(h)  Reflective triangles. The requirements for emergency reflective triangles manufactured before January 1, 1974, are as follows: 
(1)  A reflector shall be a collapsible equilateral triangle with legs not less than 17 inches long and not less than two inches wide. The front and back of the exposed leg surfaces shall be covered with red reflective material not less than one-half inch in width. The reflective surface, front and back, shall be approximately parallel. When placed in position, one point of the triangle shall be upward. The area within the sides of the triangle shall be open. 
(2)  The reflecting material covering the leg of the equilateral triangle shall comply with either of the following: 
a.  The requirements for reflex reflector elements made of red methylmethacrylate plastic material, meeting the color, sealing, minimum candlepower, wind test, vibration test, and corrosion resistance test of sections 3 and 4 of federal specification RR-R-11, 85 dated November 17, 1966. 
b.  The requirements for red reflective sheeting of federal specification L-S-300, dated September 7, 1965, except that the aggregate candlepower of the assembled triangle, in one direction, shall be not less than eight when measured at two-tenths divergence angle and minus four degrees incidence angle, and not less than 80 percent of the candlepower specified for one square foot of material at all other angles shown in table II, Reflective Intensity Values, of L-S-300. 
(3)  A reflective triangle shall be so constructed that when the triangle is properly placed, the reflective surfaces shall be in a plane perpendicular to the plane of the roadway surface with a permissible tolerance of plus or minus ten degrees. Reflective triangles which are collapsible shall be provided with means of holding the reflective surfaces within the required tolerance. Such holding means shall be readily capable of adjustment without the use of tools or special equipment. 
(4)  A reflective triangle shall be of such weight and dimensions as to remain stationary when subjected to a 40-mile-per-hour wind when properly placed on any clean, dry, paved road surface. The reflective triangle shall be so constructed as to withstand reasonable shocks without breakage. 
(5)  A set of reflective triangles shall be adequately protected by enclosure in a box or other adequate container which is specially designed and constructed so that the reflectors may be readily extracted for use. 
(6)  A red emergency reflective triangle designed and constructed to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be plainly marked with the certification of the manufacturer that it complies with these requirements. 
(i)  Emergency reflectors. A red emergency reflector shall conform in all respects to the following: 
(1)  A reflector shall be composed of not less than two reflecting elements or surfaces on each side, front and back. The reflecting elements, front and back, shall be approximately parallel. 
(2)  A reflecting element or surface shall meet the requirement for a red class A reflector contained in the SAE standard J594f entitled "Reflex Reflectors," 1977. The aggregate candlepower output of all the reflecting elements or surface in one direction shall not be less than 12 when tested in a perpendicular position with observation at one-third degree, as specified in the photometric test contained in the SAE standard J594f entitled "Reflex Reflectors," 1977. 
(3)  If the reflector or the reflecting elements would be adversely affected by dust, soot, or other foreign matter, or by contact with other parts of the reflector or its container, such reflecting surfaces shall be adequately sealed within the body of the reflector. 
(4)  A reflector shall be so constructed that, when the reflector is properly placed, every reflecting element or surface is in a plane perpendicular to the plane of the roadway surface. Reflectors which are collapsible shall be provided with means for locking the reflector elements or surfaces in the required position. Such locking means shall be readily capable of adjustment without the use of tools or special equipment. 
(5)  A reflector shall be of such weight and dimensions as to remain stationary when subjected to a 40-mile-per-hour wind when properly placed on any clean, dry, paved road surface. The reflector shall be so constructed as to withstand reasonable shocks without breakage. 
(6)  A set of reflectors and the reflecting elements or surfaces incorporated therein shall be adequately protected by enclosure in a box, rack, or other adequate container specially designed and constructed so that the reflectors may be readily extracted for use. 
(7)  A red emergency reflector designed and constructed to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be plainly marked with the certification of the manufacturer that it complies with these requirements. 
(j)  Fusees. A fusee shall be adequate, reliable, and capable of burning not less than 15 minutes and shall comply with the specifications of the Bureau of Explosives, 2 Pennsylvania Plaza, New York, New York, 10001, dated December 15, 1944, and shall be so marked. 
(k)  Red flags. Red flags shall be not less than 12 inches square, with standards adequate to maintain the flags in an upright position. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.48)  
Sec. 98-399. - Prevention of shifting or falling cargo. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to trucks, truck tractors, semitrailers, full trailers, and pole trailers operated pursuant to this article. Such vehicles shall, when transporting cargo, be loaded and equipped to prevent the shifting or falling of the cargo in the manner prescribed by subsection (b) of this section. In addition, each cargo-carrying vehicle shall conform to the applicable provisions in sections 98-400 through 98-402. 
(b)  Requirements. A cargo-carrying vehicle shall be equipped with devices that provide protection against shifting or falling cargo and that meet the requirements of one of the following options: 
(1)  Under option A, the vehicle shall have sides, sideboards, or stakes, and a rear end gate, rear end boards, or stakes. Such devices shall be strong enough and high enough to ensure that cargo does not shift upon or fall from the vehicle. The devices shall not have an aperture large enough to permit cargo in contact with one or more of the devices to pass through the devices. 
(2)  Under option B, the vehicle shall have at least one tiedown assembly that meets the requirements of section 98-400 for each ten linear feet of lading or fraction thereof. However, a pole trailer or an expandable trailer transporting metal articles under the special sections mentioned in subsections (c) and (d) of this section is required only to have two or more of such tiedown assemblies at each end of the trailer. In addition, the vehicle shall have as many additional tiedown assemblies meeting the requirements of section 98-400 as are necessary to secure all cargo being transported either by direct contact between the cargo and the tiedown assemblies or by dunnage which is in contact with the cargo and is secured by tiedown assemblies. This subsection shall apply to a vehicle which is designed and used exclusively to transport other vehicles. Each vehicle it transports shall be securely tied down by devices that conform to the requirements of section 98-400. 
(3)  Under option C, vehicles transporting metal articles only shall conform to subsection (b)(1), (2), or (4) of this section or to the special provisions for transportation of metal articles set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(4)  Under option D, the vehicle shall have other means of protecting against shifting or falling cargo which are similar to and at least as effective as those specified in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section. 
(c)  Metal cargo. This subsection and subsection (d) of this section apply to a motor vehicle transporting cargo consisting of metal articles if that vehicle does not conform to subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(4) of this section. A motor vehicle transporting property consisting of metal articles shall, regardless of whether the provisions in this subsection and in subsection (d) of this section apply to it, conform to the requirements in section 98-400 relating to securement systems, section 98-401 relating to blocking and bracing of cargo, and section 98-402 relating to front end structure requirements. Whenever a motor carrier transports four or more coils of metal which, individually or as a combination banded together, weigh 5,000 pounds or more, the coils shall be secured in the following manner: 
(1)  As to coils with eyes vertical, one or more coils which are grouped and loaded side by side in a transverse or longitudinal row shall be secured by the following: 
a.  A tiedown assembly against the front of the coil or row of coils, restraining against forward motion. 
b.  A tiedown assembly against the rear of the coil or row of coils, restraining against rearward motion. 
c.  A tiedown assembly over the top of each coil or transverse row of coils, restraining against vertical motion. The same tiedown assembly shall not be used to comply with more than one of the requirements of this subsection. 
(2)  As to coils with eyes crosswise, a coil or transverse row of coils loaded side by side and having approximately the same outside diameters shall be secured as follows: 
a.  A tiedown assembly through the eye of each coil, restricting against forward motion and making an angle of less than 45 degrees with the horizontal when viewed from the side of the vehicle. 
b.  A tiedown assembly through the eye of each coil, restricting against rearward motion and making an angle of less than 45 degrees with the horizontal when viewed from the side of the vehicle. 
c.  Timbers, having a nominal cross section of four by four inches or more and a length which is at least 75 percent of the width of the coil or row of coils, tightly placed against both the front and rear sides of the coil or row of coils and restrained to prevent movement of the coils in the forward and rearward directions. 
d.  If coils are loaded to contact each other in the longitudinal direction and relative motion between coils and between coils and the vehicle is prevented by tiedown assemblies and timbers, only the foremost and rearmost coils shall be secured with timbers, and a single tiedown assembly, restricting against forward motion, may be used to secure any coil, except the rearmost one, which shall be restrained against rearward motion. 
(3)  As to coils with eyes lengthwise, a coil or transverse row of coils having approximately equal outside diameters and loaded side by side or a longitudinal row of coils having approximately equal outside diameters and loaded end to end shall be secured as follows: 
a.  The coils shall be restrained against side-by-side movement and fore-and-aft movement by one or more tiedown assemblies over the top of each coil or transverse row or by two or more tiedown assemblies through the eye of each coil or longitudinal row or by one or more tiedown assemblies, crossing from one side of the vehicle to the other, through the eye of each coil or longitudinal row of coils in a transverse row. 
b.  Timbers having a nominal cross section of four by four inches or more shall be tightly placed against the sides of each coil or against the outboard sides of each transverse row of coils which are loaded side by side so that the timbers restrain against side-to-side movement. 
c.  If, pursuant to subsection (c)(3)a of this section, only one tiedown assembly over the top of each coil or transverse row of coils is used to restrain against side-to-side movement and fore-and-aft movement, timbers having a nominal cross section of two by four inches or more and which are firmly secured to longitudinal blocking shall be tightly placed against the front and back of each coil, each longitudinal row of coils, and each transverse row of coils in a manner which restricts forward and rearward movement. 
(4)  Timber which is used for blocking shall be sound lumber which is free of defects, such as knots or cracks, that materially reduce its strength. 
(5)  Timbers need not be used on vehicles which have depressions in the floor or are equipped with other restraining devices which perform the functions specified for timbers by this subsection. 
(6)  As used in this subsection, the word "nominal", when used to describe timer, means commercially dressed sizes generally designated by the dimensions indicated. 
(d)  Securing. Securing of miscellaneous metal articles shall be controlled by this subsection. Except as provided in subsection (d)(4) of this section, whenever a motor carrier transports metal articles consisting of cut-to-length bars, plates, rods, sheet and tin mill products, billets, blooms, ingots, slabs, structural shapes, or pipe and other tubular products and those articles, either individually or as a combination of articles banded or boxed together and handled as a single unit, weigh more than 2,000 pounds, the article shall be secured in the following manner: 
(1)  A single article, a group of articles, or a combination of articles loaded side by side across the width of the vehicle shall be secured by at least one tiedown assembly over its top for at least every eight feet of its length and not less than two tiedown assemblies securing each individual article or combination of articles banded or otherwise secured together and handled as a single unit. However, articles which individually have a length of eight feet or less and which are securely butted against each other in the fore-and-aft direction may be secured by metal angles secured by tiedown assemblies, or they may be secured by a timber having a nominal cross section of four by four inches or more placed longitudinally over the articles and secured by tiedown assemblies. Tiedown assemblies may not be located beyond the ends of the article which they secure. 
(2)  If articles are tiered and each tiered article rests securely on the one beneath it, the tier may be secured in the same manner as a single level of those articles is secured pursuant to this subsection. 
(3)  Pole trailers shall either comply with the requirements of subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section or they shall have not less than two tiedown assemblies securing the load to the forward bolster and not less than two tiedown assemblies securing the load to the rear bolster. 
(4)  This subsection does not apply to special loads consisting of machinery or fabricated structural items, such as beams, girders, and trusses, which are fastened by special methods. However, those loads shall be securely and adequately fastened to the vehicle. 
(e)  Exception. This section does not apply to a vehicle transporting one or more articles which, because of their size, shape, or weight, are carried on special-purpose vehicles or are fastened by special methods. However, an article carried on that vehicle shall be securely and adequately fastened to the vehicle. 
(f)  Intermodal cargo. Containers designed for the transportation of containerized, intermodal cargo and having integral securement devices shall be fastened to the chassis of the motor vehicle with securement devices that prevent them from being unintentionally unfastened. The securement devices shall restrain the container from moving more than one-half inch forward, more than one-half inch aft, more than one-half inch to the right, more than one-half inch to the left, or more than one inch vertically when the container is subjected to the following accelerations relative to the vehicle: 
Direction of 
Force Relative 
to Longitudinal 
Axis of Vehicle 	Acceleration 
in G's  
 
(1)  Downward ..... 1.70 
(2)  Upward ..... 0.50 
(3)  Lateral ..... 0.30 
(4)  Longitudinal ..... 1.80 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.49)  
Sec. 98-400. - Securement systems. 
(a)  Tiedown assemblies. This section applies to tiedown assemblies, including chains, cables, steel straps, and fiber webbing, other securement devices, and attachment or fastening devices used in conjunction therewith, which are used to secure cargo to motor vehicles in transit. All devices which are used to secure cargo to a motor vehicle in transit pursuant to sections 98-399 to 98-402 shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Breaking strength. Except for integral securement devices of containers designed for the transportation of containerized, intermodal cargo which conform to the requirements of subsection 98-399(f), the aggregate static breaking strength of the tiedown assemblies used to secure an article against movement in any direction shall be not less than 1½ times the weight of that article. Chains used as a component of a tiedown assembly shall conform to the requirements of the August 1961 edition of the National Association of Chain Manufacturers' Welded Chain Specifications applicable to all types of chain. Steel strapping used as a component of a tiedown assembly shall conform to the requirements of federal specification no. QQ-S-781 (1969). Steel strapping that is one inch wide or wider shall have not less than two pairs of crimps in each seal and, when end-over-end lap joints are formed, shall be sealed with not less than two seals. 
(c)  Load binders. The strength of load binders and hardware that are part of or used in conjunction with a tiedown assembly shall be equal to or greater than the minimum strength specified for that tiedown assembly in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Connectors. The hook, bolt, weld, or other connector by which a tiedown assembly is attached to a vehicle and the mounting place and means of mounting the connector shall be at least as strong as the tiedown assembly. 
(e)  Anchorages. The anchorages of a winch or other fastening device mounted on a vehicle and used in conjunction with a tiedown assembly shall have a combined tensile strength equal to or greater than the strength of the tiedown assembly. 
(f)  Tightening. A tiedown assembly and its associated connectors and attachment devices shall be designed, constructed, and maintained so that the driver of an in transit vehicle can tighten them. However, this subsection does not apply to a securement system in which the tiedown assembly consists of steel strapping or to a tiedown assembly which is not required by this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.50)  
Sec. 98-401. - Blocking and bracing of cargo. 
(a)  Secure cargo. Protection against longitudinal movement shall be provided pursuant to this subsection. When a motor vehicle carries cargo that is not fully braced against a front end structure that conforms to the requirements of section 98-402, the cargo shall be secured so that when the vehicle decelerates at a rate of 20 feet per second, the cargo remains on the vehicle and does not penetrate the vehicle's front end structure. 
(b)  Lateral movement. Protection against lateral movement shall be provided pursuant to this subsection. When a vehicle carries cargo that may shift sideways in transit, the cargo shall either be securely blocked and braced against the side, sideboards, or stakes of the vehicle, or shall be secured by devices that conform to the requirements of subsections 98-399(b)(2) to (b)(4). 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.51)  
Sec. 98-402. - Front end structure requirements. 
(a)  Load shifting. Except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, a cargo-carrying motor vehicle shall be equipped with a headerboard or similar device of sufficient strength to prevent load shifting and penetration or crushing of the driver's compartment. 
(b)  Location. The front end structure shall be located between the vehicle's cargo and the vehicle's driver. 
(c)  Height and width. The front end structure shall extend either to a height of four feet above the floor of the vehicle or to a height at which it blocks forward movement of any item of cargo being carried on the vehicle, whichever is lower. The front end structure shall have a width which is at least equal to the width of the vehicle or which blocks forward movement of any item of cargo being transported on the vehicle, whichever is narrower. 
(d)  Load. The front end structure shall be capable of withstanding the horizontal forward static load specified in either of the following: 
(1)  For a front end structure less than six feet in height, it shall be able to withstand a horizontal forward static load equal to one-half of the weight of the cargo being transported on the vehicle, uniformly distributed over the entire portion of the front end structure that is within four feet above the vehicle's floor, or that is at or below a height above the vehicle's floor at which it blocks forward movement of any item of the vehicle's cargo, whichever is less. 
(2)  For a front end structure six feet in height or higher, it shall be able to withstand a horizontal static load equal to four-tenths of the weight of the cargo being transported on the vehicle, uniformly distributed over the entire portion of the front end structure. 
(e)  Penetration. The front end structure shall be designed, constructed, and maintained so that it is capable of resisting penetration by any item of cargo that contacts it when the vehicle decelerates at a rate of 20 feet per second. The front end structure shall not have an aperture large enough to permit any item of cargo in contact with the structure to pass through it. 
(f)  Alternative devices. The requirements of this section may be met by the use of devices performing the same functions as a front end structure, if the devices are at least as strong as and provide protection against shifting cargo at least equal to a front end structure which conforms to this section. 
(g)  Exemptions. The following motor vehicles are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  A vehicle which is designed and used exclusively to transport other vehicles, if each vehicle it transports is securely tied down by devices that conform to the requirements of section 98-400. 
(2)  A pole trailer or semitrailer being towed by a truck tractor that is equipped with a front end structure that conforms to this section. 
(3)  A full trailer being towed by a vehicle that is equipped with a front end structure that conforms to this section for a front end structure. 
(4)  A full trailer being towed by a vehicle that is loaded in such a manner that the cargo on the towing vehicle conforms to this section for a front end structure. 
(5)  A motor vehicle manufactured before January 1, 1974, relative to the requirements of subsections (d) and (e) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.05.52)  
Secs. 98-403—98-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REPORTABLE ACCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 98-431. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Reportable accident means, except as provided in subsection (2) of this definition, as follows: 
(1)  Any occurrence involving a vehicle engaged in the interstate, foreign, or intrastate operations of a motor carrier which results in one of the following: 
a.  The death of a human being. 
b.  Bodily injury to a person who, as a result of the injury, receives medical treatment away from the scene of the accident. 
c.  Total damage to all property aggregating $3,500.00 or more, based on actual costs or reliable estimates. 
(2)  The term "reportable accident" does not include any of the following: 
a.  An occurrence involving only boarding and alighting from a stationary vehicle. 
b.  An occurrence involving only loading and unloading of cargo. 
c.  An occurrence in the course of the operation of a passenger car by a motor carrier which is not transporting passengers for hire or hazardous materials of a type and quantity that require the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to 49 CFR 171 et seq. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.06.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-432. - Reporting of accidents. 
(a)  Filing. Within 15 days after a reportable accident occurs, the motor carrier shall file a copy of the accident report with the department of state police, motor carrier division, on United States Department of Transportation form MCS 50-T. 
(b)  Form. The motor carrier shall fill in the report form completely and accurately with the most reliable information available to it at the time the report is filed. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.06.02)  
Sec. 98-433. - Notice of death after filing report. 
(a)  Notice. If, within 30 days after a reportable accident occurs, a person dies as a result of the accident after a motor carrier has filed its report, pursuant to section 98-432, the motor carrier shall, as soon as possible after the death and not later than the day specified in subsection (b) of this section, give written notice of death to the motor carrier division of the department of state police. 
(b)  Dispatch. The notice of death required by subsection (a) of this section shall be dispatched before the close of the first business day following the day on which the motor carrier learns of the death. 
(c)  Information. The notice of death required by subsection (a) of this section shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the accident. 
(2)  The name of the decedent. 
(3)  The name and address of the motor carrier. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.06.03)  
Sec. 98-434. - Assistance in investigations. 
Under this division, a motor carrier shall make all records and information pertaining to any accident available to an enforcement officer upon his request. A motor carrier shall give an enforcement officer all reasonable assistance in the investigation of an accident. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.06.04)  
Secs. 98-435—98-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - HOURS OF SERVICE 
 
Sec. 98-461. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drive or driving time means all time spent at the driving controls of a motor vehicle in operation. 
Driver-salesperson means any employee who is employed solely as such by a private carrier of property by motor vehicle; who is engaged both in selling goods, services, or the use of goods and in delivering, by motor vehicle, the goods sold or provided or upon which the services are performed; who does so entirely within a radius of 100 miles of the point at which he reports for duty; and who devotes not more than 50 percent of his hours on duty to driving time. The term "selling goods," for purposes of this division, includes, in all cases, the soliciting or obtaining of reorders or new accounts and may also include other selling or merchandising activities designed to retain the customer or to increase the sale of goods or services, in addition to the soliciting or obtaining of reorders or new accounts. 
Eight consecutive days means the period of eight consecutive days beginning on any day at the time designated by the motor carrier for a 24-hour period. 
Multiple stops means all stops made in any one village, town or city that may be computed as one. 
On-duty time means all time from the time a driver begins to work or is required to be in readiness to work until the time he is relieved from work and all responsibility for performing work. The term includes all of the following: 
(1)  All time at a carrier or shipper plant, terminal, facility, or other property or any public property waiting to be dispatched, unless the driver has been relieved from duty by the motor carrier; 
(2)  All time inspecting, servicing, or conditioning any motor vehicle; 
(3)  All driving time as defined in this section; 
(4)  All time, other than driving time, in or upon any motor vehicle, except time spent resting in a sleeper berth as defined in this section; 
(5)  All time loading or unloading a vehicle, supervising or assisting in the loading or unloading, attending a vehicle being loaded or unloaded, remaining in readiness to operate the vehicle, or in giving or receiving receipts for loaded or unloaded shipments; 
(6)  All time spent performing driver requirements relating to accidents; 
(7)  All time spent repairing, obtaining assistance for, or remaining in attendance with a disabled vehicle; and 
(8)  Performing any other work in the capacity of or in the employ or service of a common, contract, or private motor carrier. 
Principal place of business and main office address mean the geographic location designated by the motor carrier where the records required to be maintained by this division will be made available for inspection. 
Regularly employed driver means a driver who, in any period of seven consecutive days, is employed or used as a driver solely by a single motor carrier. 
Seven consecutive days means the period of seven consecutive days beginning on any day at the time designated by the motor carrier for a 24-hour period. 
Sleeper berth means a berth conforming to the requirements of section 98-387. 
Twenty-four-hour period means any 24-consecutive-hour period beginning at the time designated by the motor carrier for the terminal from which the driver is normally dispatched. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-462. - Exemptions from division. 
This division shall not apply to any carrier subject thereto when transporting passengers or property to or from any section of the country with the object of providing relief from any of the following: 
(1)  Earthquake. 
(2)  Flood. 
(3)  Fire. 
(4)  Famine. 
(5)  Drought. 
(6)  Epidemic. 
(7)  Pestilence. 
(8)  Other calamitous visitation disaster. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.08)  
Sec. 98-463. - Compliance with and knowledge of rules. 
(a)  Carriers and employees. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, every motor carrier and its officers, drivers, agents, employees, and representatives shall comply with the rules in this division, and every motor carrier shall require that its officers, drivers, agents, employees, and representatives be knowledgeable of the rules in this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. This division shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  The owner, driver, or operator of any motor vehicle which is being used as a wrecking, relief, or emergency road service vehicle. 
(2)  A public utility service vehicle when being used in an emergency. 
(3)  Specially trained drivers of motor vehicles which are especially designed or equipped for use and are used solely for performing services in the emergency maintenance of wells. 
(4)  The owner, driver, or operator of any motor vehicle eligible for and displaying a farm license plate. 
(5)  Vehicles owned or operated by the United States or a state or federal corporation, agency, or instrumentality. 
(6)  A motor vehicle that is used exclusively to transport mail under contract with the United States Postal Service. 
(7)  A vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.02)  
Sec. 98-464. - Maximum driving and on-duty time. 
(a)  Driving. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section and in section 98-467, a motor carrier shall not permit or require any driver to drive and such driver shall not drive more than ten hours, following eight consecutive hours off duty, or for any period after having been on duty 15 hours following eight consecutive hours off duty. However, drivers using sleeper berth equipment, as defined in section 98-461, or who are off duty at a natural gas or oil well location may accumulate the required eight consecutive hours off duty resting in a sleeper berth in two separate periods totaling eight hours, neither period to be less than two hours, or resting while off duty in other sleeping accommodations at a natural gas or oil well location 
(b)  Work week. A motor carrier shall not permit or require any driver to be on duty and such driver shall not be on duty more than 60 hours in any seven consecutive days, as defined in section 98-461, regardless of the number of motor carriers using the driver's services. However, carriers operating vehicles every day in the week may permit drivers to remain on duty for a total of not more than 70 hours in any period of eight consecutive days. The limitation of this section shall not apply to any driver of a vehicle of 40,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less whose total driving time does not exceed 60 hours in any seven consecutive days. 
(c)  Exception. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to drivers used wholly in driving motor vehicles having not more than two axles and whose gross vehicle weight does not exceed 10,000 pounds, unless such vehicle is used to transport explosives or other dangerous articles of such type and in such quantity as to require the vehicle to be specifically marked or placarded under 49 CFR 171 et seq., or when operated without cargo under conditions which require the vehicle to be so marked or placarded under such regulations. 
(d)  Transportation of oil field equipment. Where drivers of motor vehicles are used exclusively in the transportation of oil field equipment, including the stringing and picking up of pipe used in pipelines and servicing of the field operations of the natural gas and oil industry, any period of eight consecutive days may end with the beginning of any off-duty period of 24 or more successive hours. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.03)  
Sec. 98-465. - Travel time. 
For the purposes of this division, when a driver, at the direction of a motor carrier, is traveling but not driving or assuming any other responsibility to the carrier, such time shall be counted as on duty, unless the driver is afforded not less than eight consecutive hours off duty when arriving at his destination, in which case he shall be considered off duty for the entire period. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.04)  
Sec. 98-466. - Driver's record of duty status. 
(a)  Daily record. Every motor carrier shall require each driver used by the motor carrier to record his duty status, in duplicate, for each 24-hour period. The duty status time shall be recorded on a specified grid, as described in subsection (h) of this section. The grid and the requirements of subsection (d) of this section may be combined with any company forms. The previously approved format of the Daily Log Form MCS-59, or the Multi-Day Log, MCS-139 and MCS-139A, which meets the requirements of this section may continue to be used. 
(b)  Form of recording. The duty status shall be recorded as follows: 
(1)  "Off duty" or "off." 
(2)  "Sleeper berth" or "SB" (only if a sleeper berth is used). 
(3)  "Driving" or "D." 
(4)  "On duty not driving" or "on." 
(c)  Change of status. For each change of duty status (e.g., the place of reporting for work, starting to drive, on duty not driving, and where released from work), the name of the city, town, or village and the state abbreviation shall be recorded. If a change of duty status occurs at a location other than a city, town, or village, one of the following shall be shown: 
(1)  The highway number and nearest milepost followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and state abbreviation. 
(2)  The highway number and the name of the service plaza followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and state abbreviation. 
(d)  Additional information. The following information shall be included in the previously approved format of the Daily Log Form MCS-59, MCS-139, or MCS-139A in addition to the grid: 
(1)  Date. 
(2)  Total miles driving today. 
(3)  Truck or tractor number. 
(4)  Name of carrier. 
(5)  Driver's signature/certification. 
(6)  Twenty-four-hour period starting time, e.g., 12:00 midnight, 9:00 a.m., 12:00 noon and 3:00 p.m. 
(7)  Main office address. 
(8)  Remarks. 
(e)  Failure to comply. Failure to complete the record of duty activities, failure to preserve a record of such duty activities, or making false reports in connection with such duty activities as prescribed in this section shall make the driver or the carrier or both liable to prosecution. 
(f)  Display. When required to maintain a record of duty status, the operator or driver of the vehicle shall display the record upon demand of any duly appointed peace officer. 
(g)  Requirements. The driver's activities shall be recorded in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A driver shall keep his record of duty status current to the time shown for the last change of duty status. 
(2)  All entries relating to a driver's duty status shall be legible and in the driver's own handwriting. 
(3)  The hour, day, month, and year for the beginning of each 24-hour period shall be shown on the form containing the driver's duty status record. 
(4)  The total mileage driven during the 24-hour period shall be recorded on the form containing the driver's duty status record. 
(5)  The carrier's vehicle number or state and license plate number of each truck or tractor unit operated during the 24-hour period shall be shown on the form containing the driver's duty status record. 
(6)  The name of the motor carrier for which work is performed shall be shown on the form containing the driver's duty status record. When work is performed for more than one motor carrier during the same 24-hour period, the beginning and finishing time, showing a.m. or p.m., worked for each carrier shall be shown after each carrier name. A driver of a leased vehicle shall show the name of the motor carrier performing the transportation. 
(7)  The driver shall certify to the correctness of all entries by signing the form containing the driver's duty status record with his legal name or name of record. The driver's signature certifies that all entries required by this section made by the driver are true and correct. 
(8)  The driver's duty status record shall be prepared, maintained, and submitted using the time standard in effect at the driver's home terminal. The term "seven or eight consecutive days" means the seven or eight consecutive 24-hour periods as designated by the carrier for the driver's home terminal. The 24-hour period starting time shall be identified on the driver's duty status record. One-hour increments shall appear on the graph, shall be identified, and shall be preprinted. The words "midnight" and "noon" shall appear above or beside the appropriate one-hour increment. 
(9)  The motor carrier's main office address shall be shown on the form containing the driver's duty status record. 
(10)  Two or more consecutive 24-hour periods off duty may be recorded on one duty status record. 
(h)  Graph grid. A graph grid shall be incorporated into a motor carrier recordkeeping system, which shall also contain the information required in subsection (d) of this section. 
(i)  Legibility. The graph grid, when incorporated as part of any form used by a motor carrier, shall be of sufficient size to be legible. The graph grid may be used horizontally or vertically and shall be completed as follows: 
(1)  Except for time spent resting in a sleeper berth, a continuous line shall be drawn between the appropriate time markers to record the periods of time when the driver is not on duty, is not required to be in readiness to work, or is not under any responsibility for performing work. 
(2)  A continuous line shall be drawn between the appropriate time markers to record the periods of time off duty resting in a sleeper berth, as defined in section 98-461. If the operation is a nonsleeper berth operation, the term "sleeper berth" need not be shown on the grid. 
(3)  A continuous line shall be drawn between the appropriate time markers to record the periods of time on duty driving a motor vehicle, as defined in the definition of the term "drive or driving time" in section 98-461. 
(4)  A continuous line shall be drawn between the appropriate time markers to record the periods of time on duty not driving specified in the definition of the term "on-duty time" in section 98-461. 
(5)  The name of the city, town, or village and the state abbreviation where each change of duty status occurs shall be recorded. If a change of duty status occurs at a location other than a city, town, or village, one of the following shall be shown: 
a.  The highway number and nearest milepost followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and state abbreviation. 
b.  The highway number and the name of the service plaza followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and state abbreviation. 
c.  The highway numbers of the nearest two intersecting roadways followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and state abbreviation. 
(j)  Forwarding of form. The driver shall submit or forward by mail the original driver's record of duty status to the regular employing motor carrier within 13 days following the completion of the form. 
(k)  Multiple employers. When the services of a driver are used by more than one motor carrier during a 24-hour period in effect at the driver's home terminal, the driver shall submit a copy of the record of duty status to each motor carrier. The record shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  All duty time for the entire 24-hour period. 
(2)  The name of each motor carrier served by the driver during the 24-hour period. 
(3)  The beginning and finishing time, including a.m. or p.m., worked for each carrier. 
(l)  Initial and intermittent employment. A motor carrier, when using a driver for the first time or intermittently, shall obtain from the driver a signed statement giving the total time on duty during the immediately preceding seven days and the time at which the driver was last relieved from duty before beginning work for the motor carrier. 
(m)  Retention of records. The driver's records of duty status for each calendar month may be retained at the driver's home terminal until the 20th day of the succeeding calendar month. Such records shall then be forwarded to the carrier's principal place of business where they shall be retained with all supporting documents for a period of six months from the date of receipt. The driver shall retain a copy of each record of duty status for the previous seven consecutive days, which shall be in his possession and available for inspection while on duty. 
(n)  Exemption. A driver is exempt from the requirements of this section if there is compliance with all of the following: 
(1)  The driver operates within a 100-air-mile radius of the normal work reporting locations. 
(2)  The driver, except for a driver-salesperson, returns to the work reporting location and is released from work within 15 consecutive hours. 
(3)  The driver had eight consecutive hours off duty before reporting for duty. 
(4)  The driver does not exceed ten hours maximum driving time following eight consecutive hours off duty. 
(5)  The motor carrier that employs the driver maintains and retains for a period of six months accurate and true time records showing all of the following information: 
a.  The time the driver reports for duty each day. 
b.  The total number of hours the driver is on duty each day. 
c.  The time the driver is released from duty each day. 
d.  The total time for the preceding seven days, in accordance with subsection (l) of this section, for drivers used for the first time intermittently. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.05)  
Sec. 98-467. - Adverse driving conditions. 
(a)  Maximum driving time. A driver who encounters adverse driving conditions, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, and cannot, because of those conditions, safely complete the run within the ten-hour maximum driving time permitted by subsection 98-464(a) may drive and be permitted or required to drive a motor vehicle for not more than two additional hours in order to complete that run or to reach a place offering safety for vehicle occupants and security for the vehicle and its cargo. However, such driver shall not drive for more than 12 hours in the aggregate following eight consecutive hours off duty or after he has been on duty 15 hours following eight consecutive hours off duty. 
(b)  Definition. The term "adverse driving conditions" means snow, sleet, fog, other adverse weather conditions, a highway covered with snow or ice, or unusual road and traffic conditions, none of which were apparent on the basis of information known to the person dispatching the run at the time it was begun. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.06)  
Sec. 98-468. - Emergency conditions. 
In case of any emergency, a driver may complete his run without being in violation of this division if such run could reasonably have been completed without such violation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.07.07)  
Secs. 98-469—98-495. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 98-496. - Compliance and familiarity with division. 
A motor carrier or its officers, drivers, agents, representatives, and employees directly concerned with the inspection or maintenance of vehicles shall comply and be conversant with the rules in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.08.01)  
Sec. 98-497. - Responsibility of carrier. 
A motor carrier shall systematically inspect and maintain or shall cause to be systematically maintained all vehicles subject to its control, in addition to the accessories required by division 3 of this article and any additional parts and accessories which may affect the safety or operation, including but not limited to all of the following: 
(1)  Frame and frame assemblies. 
(2)  Suspension systems. 
(3)  Axles and attaching parts. 
(4)  Wheels and rims. 
(5)  Steering systems. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.08.02)  
Sec. 98-498. - Lubrication. 
A motor carrier shall institute such procedures as may be necessary to ensure that vehicles are properly lubricated, that proper action is taken to correct oil and grease leaks, and that undue accumulations of grease and oil are investigated and removed and the cause thereof corrected. This section shall apply to all equipment on the vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.08.03)  
Sec. 98-499. - Unsafe operations prohibited. 
A motor carrier shall not permit or require a driver to drive a vehicle revealed by inspection or operation to be in such condition that its operation would be hazardous or likely to result in breakdown of the vehicle. A driver shall not drive a vehicle which, by any reason of its mechanical condition, is so imminently hazardous to operate as to be likely to cause an accident or a breakdown of the vehicle. If, while a vehicle is being operated on a highway, it is discovered to be in such unsafe condition, it shall be continued in operation only to the nearest place where repairs can safely be effected, and even that operation shall be conducted only if it is less hazardous to the public than permitting the vehicle to remain on the highway. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.08.04)  
Sec. 98-500. - Vehicles in operation. 
(a)  Inspection. Every motor carrier enforcement officer shall perform inspections of a motor carrier's vehicle in operation. 
(b)  Equipment check. A driver and equipment compliance check shall be used to record the results of vehicle inspections conducted by authorized personnel. 
(c)  Out of service vehicle. Authorized personnel shall declare and mark as "out of service" any vehicle which, because of its mechanical condition or loading, would likely cause an accident or a breakdown. An out of service vehicle sticker shall be used to mark vehicles as out of service. A motor carrier shall not require or permit a person to operate a motor vehicle and a person shall not operate any vehicle declared out of service until all the repairs required by the out of service notice are satisfactorily completed. The term "operate" as used in this subsection includes towing the vehicle; however, vehicles declared to be out of service may be towed away by means of a vehicle using a crane or hoist if the vehicle combination, consisting of the emergency towing vehicle and the out of service vehicle, meets the brake performance requirements of the state motor carrier safety rules. A person shall not remove the out of service vehicle sticker from a vehicle before completion of all repairs required by the out of service notice. The person completing the repairs required by the out of service notice shall sign the repairer's certification. If the driver completes the repairs, the driver shall sign and complete the repairer's certification. 
(d)  Delivery of report. The driver of any vehicle receiving an inspection report shall deliver it to the motor carrier operating the vehicle upon his arrival at the next terminal or facility. If the driver is not scheduled to arrive at a terminal or facility of the motor carrier operating the vehicle within 24 hours, the driver shall immediately mail the report to the motor carrier. A motor carrier shall examine the report. Violations or defects noted therein shall be corrected. Within 15 days following the date of inspection, the motor carrier shall do both of the following: 
(1)  Complete the motor carrier certification of action taken in accordance with the terms prescribed therein. 
(2)  Return the completed form to the department of state police, motor carrier division office, at the address indicated on the report. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.08.05)  
Sec. 98-501. - Damaged vehicles. 
A motor carrier shall not permit or require a driver to drive and a driver shall not drive a vehicle which is damaged in an accident or by other cause until inspection is made by a person qualified to ascertain the nature and extent of the damage to the safe operation of the vehicle, and the vehicle shall not be operated until such person determines it to be in safe operating condition. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.08.06)  
Sec. 98-502. - Drive-away/tow-away operations. 
A motor carrier, with respect to motor vehicles engaged in drive-away/tow-away operations, shall comply with this section in addition to sections 98-496 and 98-498 through 98-501. Before the beginning of a drive-away/tow-away operation of motor vehicles in combination, the motor carrier shall make a careful inspection and test to ascertain that the tow-bar or saddle-mount connections are properly secured to the towed and towing vehicles, that they function adequately without cramping or binding of any of the parts, and that the towed motor vehicle follows substantially in the path of the towing vehicle without whipping or swerving. Every motor carrier shall maintain practices to ensure that, following completion of a trip in a drive-away/tow-away operation of motor vehicles in combination and before they are used again, the tow-bars and saddle-mounts are disassembled and inspected for worn, bent, cracked, broken or missing parts. Before reuse, suitable repair or replacement shall be made of any defective parts, and the devices shall be properly reassembled. 
(Code 1976, § 7-16.08.07)  
Chapter 102 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Utilities, ch. XI. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; electrical work, § 18-106 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; cable communications, ch. 26; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; franchises, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; specific zoning standards for utilities, § 138-1339. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 102-1—102-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or otherwise defined for the particular purpose of an article of this chapter: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l) as measured by standard methods. 
Capacity charge means a charge to each user of the water and sewer systems for having the systems in place and available to serve. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. 
Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. 
Commodity charge means the charge related to the number of gallons of water used, in the case of the water supply system, or water and sewage received for treatment by the sewer system, including the cost of purchase by the city of water, sewage treatment, electricity and labor related thereto. 
Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment at the Detroit Metro Wastewater Treatment Plant such as BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the Detroit Metro Wastewater Treatment Plant which is designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does remove such pollutants to an acceptable degree. 
Critical material means the organic or inorganic substances, elements or compounds listed in the register compiled by the state department of natural resources. 
Customer charge means a charge rendered to each customer of the water and sewer systems to cover the cost of servicing customers with such items as meters, connections, bills, meter reading, postage, etc. 
Daily average shall be based upon a minimum of eight grab samples taken at one hour intervals. 
Debt service and debt service charge means the charge assessed users of the system which is used to pay principal, interest, and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for the construction of the local portion of the system. 
Detroit capital charge means a charge for the City of Detroit capital expense as this city is required to pay pursuant to contract and law to pass on to the users of the system. 
DNR means the state department of natural resources. 
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as defined in this section. 
Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable but excludes single-family and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
Measurements, tests and analyses means measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article which shall be determined in accordance with the current edition of Standard Methods For Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and in accordance with 40 CFR 136 entitled "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures For Analysis of Pollutants," or as otherwise specified in this article. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, lake, or other body of water, either surface water or groundwater. 
Nonresidential means a use of premises which is nonresidential, being institutional, commercial, industrial, etc., but does not include schools, churches, or government buildings. 
Operation, maintenance and replacement means the expenditures required for operating, maintaining and replacement of the treatment works. 
Owner means the owner of record of the freehold of the premises or the lesser estate therein, a mortgagor or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of a building. 
pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter. 
Premises making a direct line connection means, for the purposes of section 102-188, a building, structure, or unit making a direct private service line connection to any public water and/or sanitary sewer line which has not been either privately constructed and paid for on behalf of the premises or publicly financed at least in part by means of special assessments levied against the property on which the premises are located. It shall not include a building, structure, or unit in a project or development which has an internal system of laterals, except a building, structure, or unit for which there is a direct private service line connection into the public water and/or sanitary sewer line as defined in section 102-188. 
Property abutting a water or sewer line means for purposes of computing the lateral benefit charge for both water and sanitary sewer for acreage parcels not involving a freestanding single-family residence, that part of the property abutting which is part of the area to be or reasonably expected to be occupied and/or used by the occupants of the premises in more than an incidental way, taking into consideration the area for parking, the area to be landscaped and/or maintained, the area sectioned off or delineated in order to obtain a building permit and such other relevant factors as may appear. (Examples would be the dividing of a development into phases and the lateral charge being assessed only against the first phase, or an industrial factory only actually utilizing four of 50 acres.) 
Public sewer means a sewer of any type which is controlled by a governmental entity. 
Replacement costs means the expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances during the useful life of the treatment works necessary to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works are designed and constructed. 
Residential unit or unit means a freestanding single-family residence, each residence in a townhouse or cluster house, each apartment in an apartment building, each half of a duplex house, each trailer or mobile home in a mobile home park, and includes schools, churches, or government buildings. 
Revenues or net revenues means as defined in section 3 of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.103). 
Sanitary sewage means any liquid wastes discharged from residences, business buildings and institutions, as distinct from industrial wastes, and not exceeding the parameters specified in subdivision IV of division 2 of this article. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters and surface waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage treatment charge means the charge for treatment of sewage accepted by the system, including charges for operation, maintenance and replacement of the system, debt service and the Detroit capital charge, and any surcharges. 
Slug means discharge of water or wastewater, which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flow during normal operation. 
Storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Surcharge means the additional charge that a user discharging wastewater having strength in excess of the limits set by the city for transmission and treatment within the sanitary sewer system will be required to pay to meet the cost of treating such excessively strong wastewater. 
Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of or are suspended in the water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering or as measured by standard methods. 
User means any water or sewer service customer and the owner of the premises served by water or sewer service, and includes any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits the discharge of wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works, as defined in this section. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.02; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-9-2009; Ord. No. 607 , § 1, 11-12-2018) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-27. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the operation and maintenance of the city's water supply system and the sewage disposal system on a public utility rate basis under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.01)  
Sec. 102-28. - Consolidation authorized. 
It is determined to be desirable and necessary for the public health, safety and welfare of the city to operate all water and sewer facilities of the city as one combined water supply and sewage disposal system and to operate and maintain the system on a public utility rate basis, in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.03.01)  
Sec. 102-29. - Inclusions. 
The city water supply and sewage disposal system shall include all water mains and laterals, pumping stations, sewers, sewage disposal facilities and all attendant facilities and equipment which are used or useful in the operation and maintenance of the water supply or sewage disposal system. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.03.02)  
Sec. 102-30. - Operation and maintenance combined rate basis. 
The water supply and sewage disposal system of the city shall be operated and maintained as one system on a combined rate basis. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.03.03)  
Sec. 102-31. - Management and operation. 
(a)  City council authority. For the purposes of this article, the city council shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Supervision and control. The operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the system shall be under the supervision and control of the city council. 
(2)  Hiring. The city council may employ such persons in such capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the system. 
(3)  Legislation. The city council may make such rules, orders and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to ensure the efficient management and operation of the system. 
(b)  Administration as department. The city water supply and sewage disposal system shall be administered as a regular department of the city government by the department of public service. 
(c)  Inspectors. The mayor and other duly authorized city officials or employees and agents of the state water resources commission bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with this article at any time during reasonable or usual business hours. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.03.04)  
Sec. 102-32. - Compliance with county standards. 
No person shall connect with any sanitary or combined sewer in the city until such person has complied with all standards and regulations of the county department of public works and the county drain commissioner's office. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.11)  
Sec. 102-33. - Violations. 
(a)  Written notice to correct. Any person found to be violating any section of this article shall be served with written notice stating the nature of such violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof in compliance with this article. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, take corrective action to comply with this article. Failure to take such action shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(b)  Civil liability. Any person violating any of the sections of this article shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned to the city because of such violation, and recovery therefor may be had in an appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Abatement. Any continued violation, after due notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city upon complaint in any court of competent jurisdiction. This remedy shall be in addition to those provided in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.12)  
Secs. 102-34—102-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE  
Subdivision I. - In General[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 507, § 1, adopted June 21, 2006, amended subdivision I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former subdivision 1, §§ 102-61—102-64, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1976, § 6-09.09.01—6-09.09.03, and 6-09.10; and Ord. No. 498, § 1, adopted June 15, 2005. 
 
Sec. 102-61. - Free service. 
No free service shall be furnished by the water and sewage disposal system to any person or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 1, 6-21-2006)  
Sec. 102-62. - Rate revisions authorized. 
The rates fixed in this division shall be reviewed annually and are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation, such expenses for maintenance of the water and sewage disposal system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as this article may require. Such rates may be revised by the city council when such action becomes necessary to provide sufficient funds. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 1, 6-21-2006)  
Sec. 102-63. - Operating year. 
The water and sewage disposal system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31 next following. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 1, 6-21-2006)  
Sec. 102-64. - Funds. 
(a)  Operation and maintenance fund. The revenues of the water and sewer disposal system shall be collected and deposited in a fund to be designated as the "operation and maintenance fund." Out of the revenues in the operation and maintenance fund there shall be first set aside a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of principal and interest on any bonds that may have been issued for the system, as set forth in subsection (c), below. Next, there shall be set aside a sum sufficient to provide for the administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order. 
(b)  Water and sewer capital fund. There shall next be established and maintained a fund designated "water and sewer capital fund," which shall be used for the purpose of reserving for replacement of equipment and items of unusual expense and making contingent repairs and replacements to the system if needed. There shall be set aside into the fund, after provision has been made for operation and maintenance funds, such sums as the city council shall deem necessary for this purpose, and for the purpose of making improvements, extensions and enlargements to the system, there shall be deposited into this fund, after providing for the funds in subsection (a) of this section, such sums as the city council shall determine. 
(c)  Bond interest and redemption funds. In the operation and maintenance fund, there shall be next set aside quarterly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of principal and interest on any bonds that may have been issued for the system and which bonds are payable out of revenues. 
(d)  Surplus funds. Moneys remaining in the operation and maintenance fund after the end of any operating year, after full satisfaction of the requirements of the funds in this section, may, at the option of the city council, be kept in the operation and maintenance fund, transferred to the water and sewer capital fund or used for any other purpose of the water and sewer system, consistent with federal regulations. 
(e)  Single account allocation to funds. All moneys belonging to any of the funds or accounts in this section may be kept in one bank account, in which event the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the city within this single bank account in the manner set forth in this section. 
(f)  Investment of moneys. Moneys in any fund or account established by this article may be invested in obligations of the United States of America in the manner and subject to the limitations provided in Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.). If such investments are made, the securities representing the investments shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund from which such purchase was made. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the fund from which the investments were made. 
(g)  Insufficient funds. If the moneys in the operation and maintenance fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of operation and maintenance, any moneys and/or securities in other funds of the system shall be transferred to the operation and maintenance fund, to the extent of any deficit therein. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 1, 6-21-2006)  
Secs. 102-65—102-90. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Billing and Collection Procedure 
 
Sec. 102-91. - Due date; late payment charge. 
(a)  All charges billed monthly to customers of the water and sewage disposal system shall be paid and received by 5:00 p.m. on the due date of payment, which due date shall be stated on the bill. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse payment. 
(b)  A late payment charge equal to five percent of any balance remaining unpaid on the second city working day following the due date for the preceding monthly bill shall be added to the unpaid balance and charged to the customer. 
(c)  The chief financial officer is authorized to waive the late payment charge under conditions which reasonably assure the city that the customer's future payments will be made on time. However, no such waiver shall be given after city council has assigned the delinquent charge to the property tax roll. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.08.01; Ord. No. 575 , § 1, 6-10-2013; Ord. No. 603 , § 1, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 102-92. - Lien on premises. 
(a)  Generally. The charges for water and/or sewer services and debt service charges which are, under section 21 of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121), made a lien on all premises served thereby, unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, are recognized to constitute such lien. 
(b)  Annual certification. Whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the city official in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, in September of each year, to the city tax assessing officer, the fact of such delinquency. An additional late payment charge of six percent of the amount delinquent shall be added and certified to the tax assessing officer for collection. 
(c)  Action by tax assessor. After certification of the delinquency as provided in subsection (b) of this section, such charge shall be, by the tax assessing officer, entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.08.02; Ord. No. 575, § 1, 6-10-2013 )  
Sec. 102-93. - Cash security deposit. 
Where notice is given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by section 21 of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121), no further service shall be rendered such premises until a cash deposit in an amount equivalent to one year's average consumption shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. This section shall not apply to release the owner from liability for payment of any charges or costs incurred by the city to repair damage to the water and/or sewer system caused by the tenant. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.08.03; Ord. No. 540, § 2, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-94. - Shut off and turn on charges. 
(a)  In addition to sections 102-91 through 102-93, the city shall have the right to shut off water and/or sewer service to any premises for which charges for water and/or sewer service are more than 30 days delinquent. 
(b)  Water shutoff shall be preceded by a termination of service notice, which shall be sent by first class mail and shall inform the user that failure to pay the past due amount, including any penalties, within 14 days will result in termination of service. This notice will also inform the user that the user may request an administrative hearing seven days prior to any termination of service. At the hearing the user will be given an opportunity to show why service should not be terminated. 
(c)  If the payment is not received or satisfactory arrangements have not been made or a hearing has been requested within 14 days after the termination of service notice is mailed to the user, the supply of water shall be discontinued. 
(d)  Such service shall not be reestablished until all delinquent charges and penalties and a turn on charge of $11.00 have been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.08.04)  
Sec. 102-95. - Other remedies. 
(a)  Court action. The charges and penalties in this subdivision shall constitute a debt which may be recovered by the city through court action. 
(b)  Service shutoff. In addition to any other lawful enforcement method for the assessment or collection of water or sewer system rates and charges as provide by law, the payment of the of the charges for water service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing the water service to the premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service or storm sewer service to the premises may be enforced by discontinuing the water service, the sewage disposal service or the stormwater disposal service to the premises, or any combination of the services. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.08.05; Ord. No. 540, § 3, 11-9-2009)  
Secs. 102-96—102-120. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Water Consumption Charges 
 
Sec. 102-121. - Measured by meter. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, water furnished by the water and sewage disposal system to each premises shall be measured by a meter installed and controlled by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.04.01; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-122. - Monthly charges. 
Charges for water service to every premises connected to the water supply system for each monthly (one month) period, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge. There shall be a customer charge to each water customer of the system as prescribed in section 54-741. 
(2)  Capacity charge. There shall be a capacity charge for each premises connected to the water supply system as prescribed in section 54-741. 
(3)  Commodity charge. There shall be a commodity charge for each 100 cubic feet of water as prescribed in section 54-741. 
(4)  Fire line availability charge. There shall be a monthly charge for each unmetered fire line connection for fire sprinklers and hydrant service as prescribed in section 54-741. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.04.02; Ord. No. 417, § 2, 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-123. - Separate metered connections. 
(a)  Individual owners. The owner of any premises using metered water may, upon application and compliance with the requirements of article III of this chapter, install a special area maintenance meter for use of water for area maintenance. Notwithstanding any other section in this article, the sewage treatment rate shall not be charged for the water used exclusively through an area maintenance meter, except if the use is in violation of this article or article III of this chapter. 
(b)  Corporations or associations. The privilege of having a special meter for exclusive use for area maintenance shall be extended to corporations or associations who, in their bylaws, are charged with the care and upkeep of open spaces or grounds surrounding residential dwellings. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.04.03; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-124. - Service to city. 
(a)  Normal use rate. The city shall pay for all water used by it at the rates established in section 54-741. 
(b)  City park drinking fountains. The city shall not be required to pay charges for water consumption attributable to freestanding drinking fountains located at city-operated parks. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.04.04; Ord. No. 436, § 3, 12-11-1998; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 4-26-2000; Ord. No. 540, § 4, 11-9-2009; Ord. No. 607 , § 2, 11-12-2018)  
Sec. 102-125. - Temporary meter permit. 
Any person may apply to the department of public service for a temporary permit for a water meter for temporary use for such things as filling of swimming pools, new lawns, construction, etc. The sewer rate shall not apply to water used under the temporary permit. The meters shall be made available according to the procedures adopted by the department of public service, and billing shall be on subsequent statements. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.04.05; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-126. - Temporary use of public hydrants. 
(a)  Generally. For premises not connected to the public water system, there may be use of public hydrants on a temporary basis, as set forth in section 102-125. Permits may be obtained from the department of public service. 
(b)  Minimum hydrant charge. The charge shall be for the water used, according to the rates as set forth in section 54-742. 
(c)  Hydrant adapter charge. In addition to the minimum charge for the use of a hydrant, there shall also be a hydrant adapter charge as set forth in section 54-742. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.04.06; Ord. No. 417, § 2, 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 4-26-2000)  
Secs. 102-127—102-155. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Sewage Treatment Charges 
 
Sec. 102-156. - Service rates. 
(a)  Customer charge. There shall be a customer charge to each customer of the water supply and sewage disposal system for sewage treatment service as prescribed in section 54-743. 
(b)  Capacity charge. There shall be charged for every premises connected to the city sewer system a capacity charge per residential unit or unit factor as prescribed in section 54-743. 
(c)  Commodity charge. There shall be a monthly commodity charge for sewage treatment, as follows: 
(1)  Metered water supply or sewage flow. For premises with a metered water supply or with a meter to measure sewage flowing to the sewer, there shall be a commodity charge for each 100 cubic feet of water or sewage metered, depending upon the type of meter utilized, as prescribed in section 54-743. 
(2)  Nonmetered water supply or sewage flow. For premises without a meter to measure water or sewage flowing to the sewer, there shall be a commodity charge per residential unit or unit factor as prescribed in section 54-743. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.05.01; Ord. No. 417, § 3(6-09.05.01), 6-18-1997)  
Sec. 102-157. - Nonresidential surcharge. 
There shall be an additional surcharge for all commercial and industrial premises that are connected to the city sanitary sewer system as follows: 
(1)  Metered water supply or sewage flow. For premises with a water meter or with a meter to measure sewage flowing to the sewer, an additional surcharge shall be charged as prescribed in section 54-744. 
(2)  Nonmetered water supply or sewage flow. For premises without metered water or a meter to measure sewage flowing to the sewer, the charge shall be as set forth in section 54-744 by using the equivalent to a meter size as provided in the following schedule. The reference to the units assigned is to a unit assignment factor schedule adopted by the county department of public works, effective September 1, 1981, or as it may be amended from time to time, which schedule is adopted by the city and is incorporated in this section by reference. 
Units Assigned in 
Accordance With Current 
County Department of 
Public Works Schedule 
of Unit Assignment 
Factors 	Assigned 
Water Meter 
Size 
(inches) 
  1—4   	5/8
  5—10  	1 
 11—20  	1½ 
 21—32  	2 
 33—64  	3 
 65—100 	4 
101—200 	6 
 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.05.02; Ord. No. 417, § 3(6-09.05.02), 6-18-1997)  
Sec. 102-158. - Area maintenance water excluded. 
The sewage rate for the sewage disposal system shall not apply where water is separately metered and used for area maintenance. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.05.03)  
Sec. 102-159. - Additional surcharge. 
(a)  Criteria for establishing. Notwithstanding the rates and charges set forth in chapter 54, if the character of the sewage of any user shall impose an unreasonable additional burden upon the sewage disposal and transmission system of the city, an additional charge shall be made over and above the rates established in chapter 54. 
(b)  Excess effluent. Effluent in excess of the maximum limitations imposed by this article shall be deemed prima facie subject to surcharge. 
(c)  Denial of use. If necessary to protect the system or any part thereof, the city shall deny the right of any user to empty such sewage into the system. 
(d)  Computation. Surcharges required by this section shall be computed as the prorated share of the annual cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, attributable to treating the substance multiplied by the ratio of weight of surchargeable excess of the discharged substance to the total weight of such substance that is treated in that year. 
(e)  Collection. This amount shall be collected on the basis of estimated surchargeable amounts with each periodic billing and shall be adjusted annually to reflect actual operation, maintenance and replacement costs. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.05.04)  
Sec. 102-160. - High strength surcharge. 
(a)  Levels of pollutants. There shall be an additional charge, as a high strength surcharge, for all industrial and commercial customers contributing sewage to the sewage disposal system with concentration of pollutants exceeding any of the following levels: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), 275 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(2)  Total suspended solids (TSS), 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(3)  Phosphorous (P), 12 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(4)  Fats, oils, and grease (FOG), 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(b)  Charges. The charges shall be as set forth in section 54-745. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.05.05; Ord. No. 417, § 3(6-09.05.05), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 540, § 5, 11-9-2009)  
Secs. 102-161—102-185. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Debt Service Charges 
 
Sec. 102-186. - Capital charge. 
For the purposes of this division, there shall be a capital charge as follows: 
(1)  Residential premises. Residential premises shall be charged per unit for water service and for sewer service as set forth in section 54-746. 
(2)  Nonresidential uses and occupancies. For all other uses and occupancies, there shall be a minimum charge for water service and for sewer service, and the charges shall be as set forth in section 54-746. 
(3)  Obligation regardless of changes. Once premises have been connected for water and sewer, subsequent changes in the character of the use or type of occupancy of the premises, including destruction, removal or abandonment of any or all improvements thereon, shall not abate the obligation to continue the payment of the capital charge to the premises in the amount and for the period provided in section 54-746. Likewise, no refund shall be made for any capital charges paid regardless of any changes or discontinuation in the use of the premises. 
(4)  Charge increases. The charge may be increased as follows: 
a.  Circumstances necessitating changes. If subsequent to connection to the sanitary sewer or water system there is a change in the use or type of occupancy of the premises which would cause an increase in the capital charge from what was paid, according to the capital charge schedule in effect at the time of connection, the owner of the premises shall pay the increase in the capital charge occasioned by the change in the use or type of occupancy. Credit shall be given for the equivalent charge for which payment was made previously, according to the rate in effect at the time of the change of use or type of occupancy. 
b.  Cash payment. Thereupon any additional capital charge occasioned by any change of use or type of occupancy of any premises shall be payable in cash before a building permit is issued by the city for such changes in use or at the time such changes of use or type of occupancy occurs if no permit is issued or required. 
(5)  Premises excluded. The capital charge shall not apply to premises which had structures connected to municipally owned and operated water and/or sanitary sewer systems, on February 26, 1969. 
a.  Changes in use or type of occupancy. Notwithstanding that, the owner of any such premises shall pay whatever charges may be owing as the result of any change in the use or type of occupancy which may occur, as required by subsection (4) of this section. 
b.  Determination of charges. To determine any such charges, credit shall be given for the capital charge in effect when the city water and/or sanitary sewer systems are actually connected to the premises, except for premises connected to a municipal system on February 26, 1969. The credit shall be in the amount of the capital charges in effect on that date. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.01; Ord. No. 417, § 4(6-09.06.01), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-187. - Lateral benefit charge. 
(a)  Use privilege established. For the purposes of this section, refer to the definition of the term "premises making a direct line connection" in section 102-26. There shall be paid on behalf of any premises making a direct private connection to any public water and/or sanitary sewer line which has not been either privately constructed and paid for on behalf of the premises or publicly financed at least in part by means of special assessments levied against the property on which the premises are located, for the privilege of making use of the public water or sewer line as a water or sanitary sewer lateral, at the time of application for a tap permit, a lateral benefit charge as provided in this section. 
(b)  Freestanding single-family residence. For each freestanding single-family residence, the charge shall be as prescribed in section 54-747. 
(c)  Nonsingle-family residence. For any premises other than a freestanding single-family residence, the charge shall be as prescribed in section 54-747. 
(d)  Acreage parcels. For the purposes of this subsection, refer to the definition of the term "property abutting a water or sewer line" in section 102-26. Determination of the property abutting the line for which a lateral benefit charge shall be paid shall be made by the department of public service, which determination may be reviewed by the city council at the request of the property owner. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.02; Ord. No. 417, § 4(6-09.06.02), 6-18-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-188. - Capital charge credits. 
(a)  Determination. For those premises in projects and/or developments for which a lateral benefit charge has been paid prior to October 17, 1975, for a connection to a public water and/or sanitary sewer line where there was an internal system of laterals, $150.00 shall be allowed as a credit against each capital charge to be paid for the same project or development, up to the amount of the lateral benefit charges previously paid if other than where there were direct private service line connections to public water and/or sewer lines. 
(b)  Project and/or development for which lateral benefit charge has been paid. The term "project and/or development for which a lateral benefit charge has been paid," for purposes of the credit, shall be defined as property under common ownership at the time of payment of the lateral benefit charge, but only so much of the property that abutted the public water and/or sanitary sewer line for which the charge was paid. 
(c)  Premises excluded. Premises in another phase of development of the property shall not be entitled to the credit if the area under development abuts, directly or by way of common ownership, any additional water and/or sanitary sewer line for which the lateral benefit charge has not been paid. 
(d)  Final determination by council. Any dispute by a property owner of an interpretation by the department of public service as to whether a credit shall be allowed shall be submitted to the city council for final determination according to the intention and standard set forth in this section. 
(e)  Payees. Payees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Original owner. A credit shall only be allowed if the person paying the capital charge is the same person who paid the lateral benefit charge, for which there may be a credit allowed. 
(2)  New owner. If it is a different person paying the capital charge, a written release by the person who paid the lateral charge shall be presented to the city allowing the credit to be given to the party paying the capital charge. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.03; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-189. - Method of payment. 
(a)  Existing residential units. For residential units existing and being used for residential purposes on the date of the notice of availability of the sewer to the premises, in the case of a sewer connection, and the date of payment of a permit to connect to the water system in the case of water service, published pursuant to subsection 102-448(b), there shall be an option of paying the debt service charges in cash or over a period of 20 years in equal monthly installments computed as follows as part of the water and sewer bill: 
(1)  Time-payment interest charge. If the time-payment method of payment is elected, interest shall be charged at the rate of eight percent per annum on the unpaid balance. 
(2)  Monthly time payments. Monthly payments shall be in equal amounts spread over the 20-year period based upon standard amortization tables, with payments first applied to interest and then principal. 
(b)  Existing nonresidential unit. For nonresidential units existing and occupied on the date of the notice of availability of the sewer to the premises, in the case of a sewer connection, and the date of payment of a permit to connect to the water system in the case of water service, published pursuant to subsection 102-448(b), there shall be an option of paying the debt service charge in cash or over a period of three years by paying 25 percent of the charges at the time of obtaining a permit to connect to the sewer, and paying three equal annual installments computed as follows as part of the water and sewer bill: 
(1)  Time-payment differential. If the time-payment method of payment is elected, at least 25 percent of the charges shall be paid at the time of obtaining a permit to connect to the sewer. The remaining amount owed shall be increased by a factor of 25 percent and divided by three, which shall equal the amount of the three annual installments. 
(2)  Time-payment allowance. When there is an election to pay the debt service charges over a period of years, there may be a prepayment of the unpaid balance at any time, with a ten-percent discount on the then remaining balance. 
(c)  Lien agreement. When there is an election to pay the debt service charges over a period of years, all owners of the premises involved shall execute and deliver, on a form acceptable for recording, a lien agreement in a form acceptable to the city attorney, giving security as a lien on the premises for the payment of the debt service charges owed. 
(d)  New construction and others. For all new construction and for other than existing units as described in this section, the debt service charges shall be paid in cash. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.04; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-190. - Time of payment. 
(a)  Residential. Debt service charges for residential structures shall be as follows: 
(1)  Existing structures or units. As to all existing residential structures and/or units, the debt service charge may be paid only if the public water and/or sewer is available for service to the property and shall be paid before connection to the water and/or sewer facilities. 
(2)  New construction. As to new residential construction, the debt service charge may be paid at any time if public water or sewer, as the case may be, is available to the property and shall be paid before connection with water and/or sewer service. 
(b)  Nonresidential. For all premises, except residential, the debt service charge may be paid at any time if public water or sewer, as the case may be, is available to the property, but shall be paid before the issuance of a building permit, if there is to be a connection to the water or sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.05; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-191. - Applicable rates and charges. 
For the purposes of this subdivision, the rates and charges in effect at the time of payment shall apply, except for existing structures for which there is an election to pay the charges over a period of years as provided in this subdivision. In that case the rates and charges shall be those in effect at the time of election to pay over a period of years. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.06; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-192. - Water service connections excluded. 
Debt service charges shall not apply for water service connections for areas maintained by corporations or associations maintaining open areas of grounds surrounding residential dwelling units already paying the debt service charges defined in this subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.07; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-193. - Sewer availability fee. 
The debt service charges included in this subdivision shall constitute a sewer availability fee for the purpose of paying a proportionate share of financing the construction of the city's existing available public sanitary sewer system, as provided in Public Act No. 421 of 1980 (MCL 333.12751 et seq., MSA 14.15(12751) et seq.). An owner installing an acceptable innovative or alternative waste treatment system and not connecting to the available public sanitary sewer system pursuant to Public Act No. 421 of 1980 shall pay a sewer availability fee, as defined and provided for in this section, according to the terms of this subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.08; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-194. - Connection to other municipalities. 
(a)  Agreement authorized. When the city's water or sewer system is not available but another municipality's system is available to a particular property in the city, the city council, in its discretion, may allow the connection by entering into a written agreement with the property owner and the other municipality. 
(b)  Charge payments. In all cases described in subsection (a) of this section, the sewer and water customer shall be a customer of this city and shall pay all charges as are prescribed in this subdivision as debt service charges and shall pay all expense and charges as may be required by the other municipality. However, sewer or water customers who are located in areas of the city identified by the department of public services as areas where the city is unlikely to extend its sewer or water system in the foreseeable future shall not be required to pay debt service charges to the city until such time as the city's sewer or water system becomes available and connection is made thereto. Customers and former customers in those areas who have already paid debt service charges shall have those charges refunded by the city. Such refunds shall not bear interest, and the city shall not be obligated to issue a refund to any customer or former customer for whom the city has no available forwarding address. 
(c)  Agreement provisions. The agreement shall provide and require the property owner to pay for sewer and water service whatever is charged by the other municipality for sewer and water service. 
(d)  Connection on availability of service. Upon the city system becoming available to serve the property connected to another municipality, the property owner shall, within 60 days of notice, weather permitting, disconnect from the other municipality's system and connect to the city system and pay any additional debt service charges that may be due the city at that time pursuant to the sections of this Code in effect at that time. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.09; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 1-28-1998; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-195. - Customers outside city. 
(a)  Agreement authorized. When a request of a property owner to connect property outside of the city limits to the city's water or sewer system, the city council, in its discretion, may allow the connection by entering into a written agreement with the property owner and the municipality in which the property is located. 
(b)  Charge payments. The property owner shall pay all city charges as provided in this article, including the charge of 150 percent of the applicable capital charge, in cash, before connection. 
(c)  Agreement provisions. The agreement shall provide and require the payment of 150 percent of the normal service or usage rates for sewer and water service. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.10; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Sec. 102-196. - Cancellation of permit. 
An administrative fee of 15 percent of the applicable debt service charges shall be charged for sewer service connection permits and water service connection permits obtained pursuant to division 2 of article III of this chapter and section 102-478, respectively, and subsequently cancelled at the permit holder's request. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.06.11; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 4-26-2000)  
Secs. 102-197—102-225. - Reserved.  
Subdivision VI. - Tap Charges 
 
Sec. 102-226. - City connections. 
Water or sewer connections, where provided by the city, shall be 120 percent of actual cost. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.07.01; Ord. No. 417, § 5(6-09.07.01), 6-18-1997)  
Sec. 102-227. - Other connections. 
Water tap charges shall be as prescribed in section 54-748. 
(Code 1976, § 6-09.07.02; Ord. No. 417, § 5(6-09.07.02), 6-18-1997)  
Secs. 102-228—102-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-256. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Backflow means water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. 
Construction water means the water consumed between the time water service has been initiated from the city water system to any building, structure or unit and the time the water meter is installed, at which time metered water or metered water and sewage billings shall begin. 
Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow could occur. 
Secondary water supply means a water supply system maintained in addition to a public water supply, including but not limited to water systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.4101 et seq., MSA 13A.4101 et seq.) or water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other than an approved storage facility. 
Submerged inlet means a water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-257. - Purpose. 
The administration and conduct of the department of public service and the use of public water shall be regulated as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.01)  
Sec. 102-258. - Enforcement by department of public service. 
The department of public services is responsible for enforcing this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.03)  
Sec. 102-259. - Administration. 
(a)  Department of public service director's responsibilities. For the purposes of this article, the department of public service director, who shall be appointed by the city council and at all times responsible to the council, shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Maintenance of system. The department of public service director shall have charge of the maintenance and operation appurtenances of the water system. 
(2)  Supervision of extensions and alterations. The department of public service director shall supervise all extensions and alterations of the system as the council may direct. 
(3)  Meter reading. The department of public service director shall be responsible for reading the meters. 
(4)  Report to council. The department of public service director shall report to the city council as requested. 
(b)  Treasurer's responsibility. The responsibilities of the city treasurer under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Collection of water bills. The city treasurer shall be responsible for the collection of water bills as provided in section 102-328. 
(2)  Deposit of water revenues. The city treasurer shall deposit water revenues in a manner approved by the city but shall keep such revenues in a separate and distinct account. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.04)  
Sec. 102-260. - Water mains. 
(a)  Control by department of public service director. The city water mains shall be under the control of the director of the department of public service. 
(b)  Extensions and alterations. Extensions and alterations shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Authorization and supervision. Extensions and alterations to the system of water mains shall be made under the supervision of the department of public service director, but only upon authorization by the city council. 
(2)  Petitions for extension. Petitions for extensions of water mains shall be addressed to the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.05)  
Sec. 102-261. - Inspections. 
(a)  Right of entry. The water superintendent shall have free access at all reasonable hours to inspect any premises supplied with water. No person shall refuse to admit authorized agents of the water department to any premises for such purpose. 
(b)  Basis for termination of service. If any authorized agent of the department of public service shall be refused admittance or is in any way hindered in making the necessary inspection or examination, the water may be turned off from such premises after giving 24 hours notice to the owner or occupant thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.11)  
Sec. 102-262. - Repairs or extensions. 
If it becomes necessary to shut off the water from any section of the city because of any accident or for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, the department of public service will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby and will, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes. However, the failure to give such notice shall not render the department of public service responsible or liable in damage for any inconvenience, injury, or loss which may result therefrom. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.12.01)  
Sec. 102-263. - Water supply emergency. 
(a)  Determination of emergency. Whenever the mayor is advised by the department of public service director or receives notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department in conjunction with the division of drinking water and radiological protection of the state department of environmental quality that, due to drought conditions, depletion of water supply, reduction in water pressure or other reasons, there is a threat of loss or significant reduction of pressure or water supply to the city or areas of the city, the mayor shall determine that a water emergency exists. 
(b)  Broadcast of emergency declaration. On finding such an emergency to exist, the mayor and/or the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department shall cause a declaration of such water supply emergency to be publicly announced by broadcast by radio stations or broadcast or telecast or television stations with a normal operating range covering the city and may cause such declaration to be posted at the city's municipal offices and further announced in newspapers of general circulation, when feasible. 
(c)  Record of public announcements. The mayor shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and date when any declaration is announced to the public in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Declaration valid irrespective of notice. A water supply emergency shall be deemed to exist irrespective of whether broadcast notification is provided under subsection (b) of this section as to persons otherwise provided with direct notice of such a water supply emergency. 
(e)  Emergency declaration prohibition. During a water supply emergency, no person shall use water from the city water supply system for any type of outdoor use, other than responding to a fire emergency, in the areas of the city to which the emergency declaration applies. The prohibition shall remain in effect 24 hours a day, seven days a week, until the water supply emergency is declared terminated by the mayor. 
(f)  Less restrictive prohibition authorized. The mayor may provide for a less restrictive prohibition when the mayor and the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department determine that a less restrictive prohibition will be sufficient to protect the capacity and pressure of the water supply system. The terms of such a limited prohibition shall be made a part of the emergency declaration. 
(g)  Written exceptions to prohibitions. The mayor may provide written exceptions to the prohibitions of this section where necessary to prevent imminent excessive financial loss to a water user. Such written exceptions may include the imposition of less restrictive prohibitions on such user than those generally imposed under this section. 
(h)  Termination of emergency regulations. Upon notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Board that emergency regulations are no longer necessary, the mayor shall cause a public announcement terminating the water usage restrictions. 
(i)  Violations. Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.12.03; Ord. No. 420, § 1, 8-27-1997)  
Sec. 102-264. - Contractor's license. 
(a)  Requisite for permits. Persons, other than individual property owners, may be issued permits under this article upon being licensed by the city as contractors. 
(b)  Prerequisites. As a prerequisite to a contractor's license, an applicant must: 
(1)  Complete and file an application as provided by the city; and 
(2)  Pay a license fee as provided in section 54-776. 
(c)  Fee and duration. A contractor's license shall be renewable yearly for a fee as provided in section 54-776. Failure to renew a license annually will cause the license to be considered inactive. A fee shall be required to reinstate an inactive license. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. A contractor's license may be suspended and/or revoked upon noncompliance with this Code, standards, specifications, rules and regulations, and/or a finding by the mayor that work is being done in less than a workmanlike manner and/or that there are claims for faulty work or materials for which the contractor has failed to promptly respond by making reparations or demonstrating the claims are unfounded. 
(1)  Written notice. Any notice of suspension or revocation shall be in writing to the contractor. 
(2)  Appeal for final determination. The contractor may, at any time, appeal the suspension or revocation to the city council for final determination. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.13; Ord. No. 419, § 2(6-07.13), 8-6-1997)  
Secs. 102-265—102-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 102-291. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Required. No connection shall be made to any water main without obtaining a water service connection permit from the city. The application for the permit must be made by the owner of the premises to be served or if made by the tenant, the application must include the owner's approval for the connection that the tenant is applying for. 
(b)  Capital, lateral, tap-in charges paid. A water service connection permit shall only be issued upon presentation of a paid receipt from the city treasurer certifying all applicable capital, lateral and tap-in charges as required by article II of this chapter and the cost of the meter have been paid or a contract has been entered into for deferred payments for such part of the charges that might be deferred, as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Preinspection. Before a water service connection permit is issued, if the water service is to replace a private water system, there shall be a preinspection at a cost as provided in section 54-806. The preinspection shall be by the building department, which shall determine the private water system is in good working order for the health of the occupants and that all rules and regulations regarding cross connections and provisions for cross connections as authorized and/or stated in this article and the state plumbing code have been met. 
(d)  Plumbing permit. If there are to be any alterations of the water distribution lines in the building to allow the installation of the water meter, a plumbing permit shall be obtained. An inspection shall be requested and made after the meter template is installed. 
(e)  City park drinking fountains. No water service connection permit or capital or lateral charges shall be required for freestanding drinking fountains located at city-operated parks. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.06.01; Ord. No. 436, § 1(6-07.06.01), 12-11-1998; Ord. No. 540, § 6, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-292. - Permit and initial inspection fees. 
(a)  Required. No connection shall be made to any water main without paying the permit and inspection fee as provided in section 54-776. 
(b)  Reinspection fee. If a reinspection is required, an additional fee as provided in section 54-776 shall be charged. 
(c)  Cancellation fee. If a permit is obtained and subsequently canceled at the permit holder's request, an administrative fee shall be charged as provided in section 54-776. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.06.02; Ord. No. 419, § 2, 8-6-1997)  
Sec. 102-293. - Installation. 
(a)  Specifications. All pipes, equipment and meters used to provide water service to any premises shall be laid and installed as provided in the specifications for Avon Township Water District No. I, as prepared by Johnson and Anderson, Registered Engineers, which specifications are incorporated and made a part of this article by reference, copies of which shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Prohibitions. The following shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Between buildings. No connection through which water may pass from one house or business building to another shall be constructed, though the ownership of both properties may be the same. 
(2)  Boilers or water heaters. No boiler or water heater shall be directly connected to the service pipe. For boiler or hot water heaters there shall be a check valve and shutoff valve between the boiler and service pipe. There shall be no connection between the protective check valve and shutoff valve and the boiler or hot water heater. The owner shall make such provisions as may be required by the department of public service before the water may be supplied to such an installation. 
(c)  Owner responsibilities. Responsibilities of the owner shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pipe installation. The owner or his contractor shall install the necessary pipe from the property line into the building and the meter. 
(2)  Protection of stop box. If freezing weather occurs, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to cover the stop box with straw or other suitable material to protect pipes from freezing and to assume the cost of repairing any damage that may be done from frost or other causes. There shall be no backfilling or covering of any pipe before the proper inspections are made. 
(d)  Discontinuing prohibited connections. If the city discovers an existing connection that would be prohibited under subsection (b) above, the city may require the owner of the premise to disconnect the prohibited connection. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.06.03; Ord. No. 540, § 7, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-294. - Inspection of connections. 
When the water pipe is laid, the department of public service shall be requested to make an inspection. The pipe and all connections shall be left uncovered until they are inspected and approved. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.06.04)  
Sec. 102-295. - Initiation of service. 
When new water service pipes are put into any premises, the service cock shall be left closed and will thereafter be opened only by an authorized employee of the department of public service and only upon the request of the owner or his agent. However, a plumber may open and close a service cock to test his work. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.06.05)  
Sec. 102-296. - Permit issuance to property owners. 
A permit for connection to a water main may be issued to an owner of property only if the owner signs an affidavit to the effect he is the owner and occupant of the building or the eventual occupant of the residence where the work is to be performed and the applicant will, in fact, be doing the work. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.06.06)  
Secs. 102-297—102-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - METERS 
 
Sec. 102-321. - Required; charges. 
(a)  Generally. All premises using water shall be metered and payment shall be made for water at rates as set forth in article XII of chapter 54. All water furnished by the city and used on any premises must pass through the meter. No bypass or connection around the meter will be permitted, unless approved by the department of public services director. 
(b)  Meter charges. The meter charges set forth in section 54-776 shall apply and are due and payable at the time other water connection charges are paid. 
(c)  Meter testing cost. Meters, at the request of customers, will be tested Mondays through Fridays, only, and the charges set forth in section 54-776 shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.08.01; Ord. No. 419, § 2(6-07.08.01), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 583 , § 1, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 102-322. - Rate restrictions. 
(a)  Fixed rates. Water shall not be supplied at fixed or flat rates, except for temporary supplies as provided in article III of chapter or when specified by ordinance. 
(b)  Construction water. For a new water connection, a minimum fee as provided in section 54-776 will be charged for each month of construction water. Any period beyond the first month but less than a full month shall have the construction water fee prorated based on the number of days divided by a 30-day month. 
(c)  Water main flushing. For the flushing and testing of water mains, usage will be charged at three times the volume of the pipe with a minimum charge as provided in section 54-776. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.08.02; Ord. No. 419, § 2(6-07.08.02), 8-6-1997)  
Sec. 102-323. - Location. 
Water meters shall be set in an accessible location and in a manner satisfactory to the director. Where the premises contain no basement or cellar, the meter shall be installed in a location which shall be approved by the director. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit, such pit shall be built at the expense of the owner as directed by the department of public service director and to his entire satisfaction. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.08.03)  
Sec. 102-324. - Owner responsibilities. 
(a)  Due care. The owner or occupant of the premises where a water meter is installed will be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing and from injury or interference by any person. 
(b)  Notice of deficiency. If injury to the meter occurs or in case of its stoppage or imperfect operation, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give immediate notice to the water department. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.08.04)  
Sec. 102-325. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Maintenance. All water meters shall be owned and maintained by the city. 
(b)  Seals. Meters will be sealed by the department of public service, and no one except an authorized employee of the department of public service may break or injure such seals. 
(c)  Changes. No person other than an authorized employee of the department of public service may change the location of, alter, or interfere in any way with the meter. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.08.05)  
Sec. 102-326. - Area maintenance. 
(a)  Owner's authority. The owner of any premises using metered water may, upon application, preinspection, signing of an agreement as provided for in this section and obtaining a permit and paying such fees as required in section 54-776, install a separate water meter for metering the use of water for area maintenance. 
(b)  Fees. The required fees are set forth in section 54-776. 
(c)  Cost. The cost of the area maintenance meter and its installation shall be paid by the property owner. 
(d)  Connections. The area maintenance meter shall be connected on the water line coming into the building from the public water supply immediately after the regular meter for the premises. Only lines approved by the city department of public service shall be connected to the area maintenance meter. There shall be no connections or use of water directly from the area maintenance meter for other than approved outdoor area maintenance. 
(e)  Right of entry. The department of public service and/or the building department shall, at any reasonable hour, have the right to enter any building wherein there is an area maintenance meter to inspect the meter and piping system to see that there are no violations respecting the area maintenance meter. The refusal of entry, upon request, shall be deemed evidence of a violation. 
(f)  Agreement. An owner shall enter into an agreement with the city before receiving a permit for an area maintenance meter, which agreement shall include a statement that the owner shall not make nor shall the owner allow anyone else to make any illegal use of the area maintenance meter. 
(g)  Violation options. Upon there appearing to be a violation of the provisions for the area maintenance meter, the city shall, at its option: 
(1)  Disconnect/suspend water service. Disconnect or cause the disconnection of the area maintenance meter. The city may suspend water service to the premises until the disconnection has occurred. 
(2)  Sewer charges. Charge the owner for whatever sewer charges should have been charged. 
(3)  District court citation. Issue a citation for a violation of this article to be answerable in the district court. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.08.06; Ord. No. 419, § 2(6-07.08.06), 8-6-1997)  
Sec. 102-327. - City park drinking fountains excluded. 
No water meter shall be required for freestanding drinking fountains located at city-operated parks 
(Ord. No. 436, § 2(6-07.08.07), 12-11-1998)  
Sec. 102-328. - Charges. 
(a)  Rates. The rates for consumption of water shall be and are set forth in divisions 2 and 3 of article XII of chapter 54. 
(b)  Collection. The city treasurer shall make the collection for water used in the system, and the city shall bill each user on a monthly basis. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.09; Ord. No. 402, § 1, 12-18-1996; Ord. No. 419, § 2(6-07.09), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 461, § 2, 4-26-2000)  
Secs. 102-329—102-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - USE OF SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 102-356. - Specific prohibitions. 
No person shall take or use city water from premises other than his own, and no person shall sell or give away water from his own premises for any purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.10.01)  
Sec. 102-357. - Temporary permit. 
If a permit is issued as provided in this article and a water meter has been installed for the temporary use of water, the owner shall notify the department of public service upon the completion of his work so that the water meter may be read and the connection shut off. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.10.02)  
Sec. 102-358. - Temporary vacancy. 
(a)  Written notice. If temporary vacancy of any premises occurs, water will be turned off at the service cock and the meter removed at the discretion of the director, upon written notice to the department of public service, and will be turned on again and the meter reinstalled when requested, upon payment of a turnoff fee and turn-on fee or a combined charge as provided in section 54-776. 
(b)  Notification. Where premises are left unoccupied and the owner or occupant does not request the water turned off by the department of public service, no rebate will be allowed. No allowance will be made for any water registered by the meter that may leak or waste through the plumbing or fixtures. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.12.02; Ord. No. 419, § 2(6-07.12.02), 8-6-1997)  
Sec. 102-359. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Authorization required. Fire hydrants may be opened and used only by the city department of public service and the fire department or by such persons as may be specifically authorized by the department of public service. 
(b)  Free access. No person shall in any manner obstruct or prevent free access to any fire hydrant by placing or storing, temporarily or otherwise, any object or materials of any kind within 20 feet of the hydrant. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.10.03)  
Secs. 102-360—102-385. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 102-386. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Generally. A cross connection shall not be made: 
(1)  Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply. 
(2)  By submerged inlet. 
(3)  Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary waste or chemical contaminant. 
(b)  Discontinuing prohibited connections. If the city discovers an existing cross connection that would be prohibited under subsection (a) above, the city may require the owner of the premise to disconnect the prohibited cross connection. 
(c)  Taps. No person shall, without first procuring a permit from the department of public service, tap any water main or distribution pipe of the city water system or insert a fixture or appliance or alter or disturb any service pipe, corporation stop, curb stop, gate valve, hydrant, water meter or any other attachment being part of the city water system. 
(d)  Water service pipe. No person shall, without first procuring a permit from the department of public service, install any water service pipe or connect or disconnect any such service pipe with or from the mains or distribution pipes of the city water system or with or from any other service pipe connected with the system or make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any such service pipe, tap, stop cock or any other fixture or attachment connected with any such service pipe. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.01; Ord. No. 540, § 8, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-387. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Water supply cross connection rules. The water supply cross connection rules of the state department of public health, R 325.431 to R 325.440 of the Michigan Administrative Code, are adopted in their entirety by reference and are to be considered to be a part of this article. 
(b)  Resolution by city council. Rules and regulations regarding cross connections and prevention of cross connections may be adopted by a resolution by the city council, and the rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as though they are set forth in this division in full. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.02)  
Sec. 102-388. - Inspections. 
(a)  Required. It shall be the duty of the department of public service to cause inspections to be made of all property served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. 
(b)  Frequency. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based upon potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the department of public service. 
(c)  Right of entry. The department of public service shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system for the purpose of inspecting the piping system thereof for cross connections. 
(d)  Furnishing of information. On request the owner, lessee or occupant of any property shall furnish to the inspector any pertinent information regarding the piping system of such property. 
(e)  Discontinuance of service. Service may be discontinued as follows: 
(1)  Refusal of information. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(2)  Violations. The director of the department of public service is authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.03)  
Sec. 102-389. - Supplementary to plumbing code. 
The sections pertaining to cross connections in this division do not supersede the plumbing code in effect in the city but are supplementary thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.04)  
Sec. 102-390. - Backflow device repair and test. 
(a)  Certified persons. Only persons certified or licensed by the state health department shall repair and test any backflow device. 
(b)  Tags. All such devices shall be tagged, which tag shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number of the person installing, repairing or testing the device; 
(2)  The date of inspection; and 
(3)  The inspector's name. 
(c)  Test results. A copy of each test result shall be delivered to the city department of public service. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.05)  
Sec. 102-391. - Potable water supply; warning. 
The potable water supply made available on properties served by public water shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the plumbing code. Any water outlet that could be used for potable or domestic purposes and that is not supplied by the potable system shall be labeled in a conspicuous manner as "water unsafe for drinking." 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.06)  
Sec. 102-392. - Fire sprinkler systems. 
Fire sprinkler systems installed in the city and connected to the public water supply system shall be protected from backflow or backsiphonage by the use of a backflow prevention device. The following rules shall be followed: 
(1)  Fire systems not chemically treated. An approved double checkvalve assembly shall be installed in a fire sprinkler system at the point where it is connected to the public water supply inside the building. This includes only the fire systems that utilize the public water supply that is not chemically treated. 
(2)  Fire systems subject to contamination. An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in a fire sprinkler system at the point where it is connected to the public water supply inside the building. This includes the fire systems that utilize the public water supply that is subject to contamination from foamite, antifreeze solutions, biological or chemical additives for prevention of scale formation, corrosion, algae, slime growth, etc. 
(3)  Restrictions. Compound meters and detector checks with approved checkvalves in the bypass shall not be used as a component part of an approved double checkvalve assembly. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.07)  
Sec. 102-393. - Lawn sprinkler systems. 
Lawn sprinkler systems installed in the city and connected to the public water supply systems must be protected from backflow or backsiphonage by the use of a backflow prevention device. The following rules shall be followed: 
(1)  Single zone systems. For systems with one zone, an atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed on the downstream side of the control valve. 
(2)  Multiple zone systems. For systems with multiple zones, an atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed on each zone, on the downstream side of the control valve, or a pressure-type vacuum breaker shall be installed on the upstream side of control valves, providing that: 
a.  Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be full size of piping and shall be located a minimum of six inches above the highest head and a minimum of 12 inches above the ground level. 
b.  Pressure-type vacuum breakers shall be full size of piping, a minimum of 12 inches above the highest head and a minimum of 14 inches above the ground. 
(3)  Other special systems. For systems using fertilizer injection or systems using a secondary optional water supply and in those systems where it is impractical to locate a backflow protection device above the highest head, there shall be installed in such systems a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer, full size of piping located where it is readily accessible for testing and servicing, and protected from flooding. 
(4)  Restrictions. There shall be no subsoil drains in the water supply piping on the upstream side of the backflow prevention device. 
(Code 1976, § 6-07.07.08)  
DIVISION 6. - OUTDOOR WATERING 
 
Sec. 102-394. - Restriction. 
To conserve water and reduce water consumption during peak hours, the outdoor watering of lawns, gardens, plants, trees, shrubs and other landscape shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all customers of the city's water supply system engaged in outdoor watering. However, this section shall not apply to outdoor watering from a well, pond or other water source that is not connected to or supplied by the city's water supply system, nor shall it apply to outdoor watering associated with commercial agriculture, farming, tree and plant nursery and golf course operations. 
(2)  Automatic system hours. Except as permitted in subsection (c), below, outdoor watering by means of an automatic or programmable landscape irrigation system may be done only between the hours of midnight to 5:00 a.m., [State of] Michigan time. 
(3)  Manual irrigation. A water user may, at any time, manually irrigate landscaping by means other than an automatic or programmable landscape irrigation system. Also, an automatic or programmable landscape irrigation system may occasionally be used in unprogrammed manual mode for brief periods and as necessary for testing, repair and winterizing purposes. 
(4)  Request for relief. If the foregoing outdoor watering restrictions create a hardship, the water user may request relief from the director of the department of public service or the director's designee. The requester shall specify the nature and duration of the requested relief and shall explain the hardship caused by the restriction. The director or designee may grant, modify or deny the requested relief, taking into consideration the contractual obligations of the city regarding the city's water supply system, prevailing weather conditions, any unusual or extenuating circumstances, water supply and water supply system conditions, and the particular circumstances of the requester. The decision of the director or designee shall be final. 
(5)  Violation. The water customer and the owner or occupant of premises where outdoor watering in violation of this section occurs shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with Chapter 66 of the Code of Ordinances. 
a.  First offense. For a first offense within a calendar year, the violator shall receive a warning, with no fine. 
b.  Subsequent offense. For any subsequent or repeat offense within a calendar year, the violator shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.00 and/or such other sanctions for municipal civil infractions prescribed in section 1-16 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-11-2008)  
Secs. 102-395—102-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 102-421—102-445. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 102-446. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Available public sanitary sewer means a public sanitary sewer system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins, or abuts upon the property and passing not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
Public sanitary sewer system means a sanitary sewer or a combined sanitary and storm sewer used or intended for use by the public for collection and transportation of sanitary sewage for treatment or disposal. 
Sewage disposal system means the city sewage disposal system. 
Structure in which sanitary sewage originates or structure means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities that generate water-carried sanitary sewage are used or are available for use for household, commercial, industrial, or other purposes. 
System means the sewage disposal system. 
(Code 1976, § 6-06.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-447. - Purpose. 
Public sanitary sewer systems are essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the state and the city. Septic tank disposal systems are subject to failure due to soil conditions or other reasons. Failure or potential failure to septic tank disposal systems poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare; presents a potential for ill health, transmission of disease, mortality and potential economic blight; and constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of the state and the city. The connection to available public sanitary sewer systems at the earliest, reasonable date is a matter for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare and necessary in the public interest, which is declared as a matter of legislative determination. 
(Code 1976, § 6-06.01)  
Sec. 102-448. - Connection mandatory. 
(a)  Requirement established. Structures in which sanitary sewage originates located in the city in the area served by the sewer system for which there is an available public sanitary sewer of the system shall not be used or occupied, after September 29, 1973, unless the structures are connected to the sewage disposal system. 
(b)  Time limit. Structures within the city in which sanitary sewage is originating on September 29, 1973 or in which sanitary sewage originates before availability of the system or any part thereof to serve the structures shall be connected to the system within 12 months after publication of a notice by the council in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of the availability of the system. 
(Code 1976, § 6-06.03)  
Sec. 102-449. - Failure to connect. 
(a)  Notice. When the structure in which sanitary sewage originates has not been connected to an available public sanitary sewer system before use and occupancy or within the 12-month period provided in this subdivision, the council shall require the connection to be made forthwith after notice, which may be by first class or certified mail or posting on the property to the owner of the property on which the structure is located. The notice shall: 
(1)  Give the approximate location of the public sanitary sewer of the system which is available for connection of the structure involved; and 
(2)  Advise the owner of the requirements and of the enforcement sections of this division. 
(b)  Enforcement remedies. Where any structure in which sanitary sewage originates is not connected to an available public sanitary sewer system within 90 days after the date of mailing or posting of the written notice, as required by subsection (a) of this section, this division shall be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus, or otherwise in any court having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Nuisance. Any violation of this division is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(Code 1976, § 6-06.04)  
Secs. 102-450—102-475. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permits and Installations 
 
Sec. 102-476. - Purpose. 
Connections to municipal sanitary sewers shall be regulated as provided in this subdivision to protect the health and welfare of the people. 
(Code 1976, § 6-05.01)  
Sec. 102-477. - Scope. 
This subdivision shall apply to all sanitary sewers within the city which are so constructed or connected as to flow directly or indirectly into the intercepting sewers of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-05.02)  
Sec. 102-478. - Sewer service connection permits. 
(a)  Required. No building shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer without the following: 
(1)  Sewer service connection permit. A sewer service connection permit having been obtained from the city; and 
(2)  Permit and initial inspection fee. The payment of the permit and initial inspection fee in the amount as provided in section 54-806; 
(3)  Reinspection fee. If a reinspection is required, an additional fee shall be charged as provided in section 54-806; 
(4)  Cancellation fee. If a permit is obtained and subsequently cancelled at the permit holder's request, an administrative fee shall be charged as provided in section 54-806. 
(b)  Capital and lateral benefit charges. A sewer service connection permit shall only be issued upon presentation of a paid receipt from the city treasurer certifying all applicable capital and lateral benefit charges, as required by division 2 of article XII of chapter 54 and article II of this chapter have been paid or a contract has been entered into for deferred payments, as is provided for in article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Fee. The sewer service connection permit fee shall include inspections for the installation of the connection. 
(d)  Duration. Permits shall terminate upon the expiration of one year from the date of their issuance. 
(e)  Issuance. A sewer service connection permit shall only be issued to a contractor duly licensed under this subdivision or a private property owner signing an affidavit pursuant to subsection (g) of this section. 
(f)  Maximum per contractor. The total number of permits which may be issued and outstanding to any contractor, at any one time, shall not exceed ten. 
(g)  Private property owners. A permit shall be issued to an owner of property only if the owner signs an affidavit to the effect the applicant is the owner and occupant or eventual occupant of the residence where the work is to be performed, and the applicant will in fact be doing the work. 
(h)  Preinspection. Before a permit shall be issued for an existing building, there shall be a preinspection by the building department in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Cost. The preinspection shall be at the cost as provided in section 54-806. 
(2)  Purposes. The preinspection shall be for the purposes of ascertaining that: 
a.  Storm drainage. No surface water, roof water, footing water, drain water, or groundwater will empty into the sanitary sewer by any method or device. 
b.  Cross connections. There is no cross connection between the sewer and water supply. 
c.  Trapping and venting. There is proper trapping and venting provided in the building. 
(Code 1976, § 6-05.03; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.29), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 102-479. - Contractor's license. 
(a)  Requisite for permits. A person, other than an individual property owner signing and agreeing to the terms of a homeowners affidavit under section 102-478, may be issued a permit only upon being licensed by the city as a contractor. 
(b)  Prerequisites. As a prerequisite to a contractor's license, an applicant must: 
(1)  Pay a license fee in the amount as provided in section 54-806, except for state registered master plumbers who shall pay the amount as provided in section 54-806. 
(2)  File and maintain a one-time cash bond of $1,000.00 while any permits are outstanding and for a period of ten months from the last sewer connection. The bond shall ensure compliance with this Code and city standards and regulations and shall cover any damages resulting from the contractor's work to utility systems and public property, not damage to private property. 
(c)  Fee and duration. A contractor's license shall be issued and renewable for a fee in the amount as provided in section 54-806. Failure to renew a license annually will cause the license to be considered inactive. A fee as provided in section 54-806 shall be required to reinstate an inactive license. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. A contractor's license may be suspended and/or revoked upon noncompliance with this Code and standards, specifications, rules and regulations and/or a finding by the mayor that work is being done in less than a workmanlike manner and/or that there are claims for faulty work or materials for which the contractor has failed to promptly respond by making reparations or demonstrating the claims are unfounded. 
(1)  Notice in writing. Any notice of suspension or revocation shall be in writing to the contractor. 
(2)  Appeal for final determination. The contractor may, at any time, appeal the suspension or revocation to the city council for final determination. 
(Code 1976, § 6-05.04; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.29), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 511, § 1, 9-6-2006)  
Sec. 102-480. - County connection permit. 
Before either a direct or indirect connection is made into any interceptor sewer of the county, a connection permit shall be obtained by the owner or contractor from the county department of public works. This permit shall be obtained prior to work being done on the connection. Such permit shall be obtained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the county department of public works. 
(Code 1976, § 6-05.05)  
Sec. 102-481. - Specifications. 
(a)  Plugging and capping of pipe inside building. When construction of a building occurs, the pipe connected to the sewer which is inside the building shall be plugged or capped and shall remain plugged and capped so as to remain watertight until such time as the plumbing is carried to the first floor. Water shall not be allowed to enter the public sanitary sewer from an excavated uncompleted building or building site, a storm drain, or any other source except as specifically approved by this Code. 
(b)  Storm drainage prohibited. No surface water, roof water, footing drain water or groundwater from any source shall be allowed to enter the sanitary system by any method or device whatsoever, and no connection shall be permitted which permits other than sanitary sewage to flow thereunto. 
(c)  Inspection. There shall be an opportunity provided for the inspection after all pipe is in place and before the backfilling of any trench or the covering of any pipe. 
(d)  Septic tanks. When the public sewer is to be connected to a building, the septic tank shall be disconnected from the building and shall be pumped and its contents removed by a licensed tank cleaner in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Collapse and fill. If the tank is to be abandoned, it shall then be collapsed and filled with earth, preferably sand, and the earth and/or sand shall be compacted. 
(2)  Fill. If the collapsing of the tank is impractical, it shall be filled with sand to at least the tank outlet level, and the inlet to the tank shall be filled with concrete. 
(e)  Between buildings. No connection through which sewage may pass from one building or structure to another shall be made, under any circumstances. 
(Code 1976, § 6-05.06)  
Sec. 102-482. - Costs and expenses. 
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property. 
(Code 1976, § 6-05.07)  
Secs. 102-483—102-510. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 537, § 1, adopted Jul. 1, 2009 repealed Art. V, Divs. 1—6, §§ 102-511—102-520, 102-546—102-555, 102-581—102-593, 102-621—102-638, 102-661, 102-662, 102-691—102-694, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
Sec. 102-511. - Delegation of authority. 
The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state approved Control Authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article on behalf of the City of Rochester Hills. The City of Rochester Hills has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this article, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-512. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is the protection of the environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the City of Rochester Hills and enabling the City of Rochester Hills to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq, and the General Pretreatment Regulations, being 40 CFR part 403. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and the City of Rochester Hills; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and 
(4)  To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit and City of Rochester Hills wastewater collection and treatment system through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-513. - Authority. 
By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the City of Rochester Hills; by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1251 et seq; the 1963 Constitution of the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being MCL 323.1 et seq; the Detroit City Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No.77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the board of water commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this article shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-514. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article and unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a corporation, who is either (a) the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or (b) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. 
Available cyanide means the quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion (CÑ) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a Standard Method or approved under 40 CFR 136. 
Best Management Practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but are not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control and may include technical and economic considerations. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of dissolved oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods. 
Board means the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of a waste stream from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. [See 40 CFR 403.17.] 
Centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility means any facility that treats any hazardous or non-hazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker truck, trailer roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment including: (i) a facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off-site, and (ii) a facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site. 
City means the City of Rochester Hills. 
Compatible industrial wastewater means wastewater that is produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater. 
Compatible pollutant means pollutants which can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream. 
Composite sample means a collection of individual samples which are obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. [See 40 CFR 403, Appendix E.] 
Confidential information means the information which would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
Control authority means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has been officially designated as such by the State of Michigan under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12. 
Cooling water means the noncontact water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the exchange of heat. 
Days means consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this division. 
Department means the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and authorized employees of the department. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Michigan. 
Director means the Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, or the director's designee. 
Discharger means a person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW. 
Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works. 
Environmental Protection Agency or administrator or EPA administrator means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA. 
Facility means a location, which contributes causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable. 
Fats, oils or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods. 
Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the waste stream. 
Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling. 
Gray water means all liquid contained in a grease interceptor that lies below the floating grease layer and above the solids layer. 
Grease means a liquid or solid material containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit, composed primarily of fats, oils or grease from animal and vegetable sources. 
Grease interceptor means a device located underground and outside of a food service facility designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste ("gray water") to discharge to the wastewater collection system. 
Grease trap means a device located inside a food service facility designed to collect contain or remove food wastes and grease from the stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under 33 USC 1317(b), (c) or (d). 
Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable but excludes single-family and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: (i) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (ii) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1345; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
May means permissive. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 USC 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial users. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 USC 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: (a) the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located; or (b) the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered; or 
(2)  Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)(b) or (1)(c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or 
(3)  Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or operator has: (a) begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: (1) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or (2) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b) entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section. 
Owner means the owner of record of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagor or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person in control of a building. 
Pass-through means discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns. 
pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into water. 
Pollution means the introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, State or local law, rules and regulations. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. [See 40 CFR 403.3(r)]. 
Pretreatment standards means all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 CFR 403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 CFR 403.5(b), and the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c), including the discharge prohibitions specified in this article. 
Public sewer means a sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 33 USC 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33 USC 1362, including: 
(1)  Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature; 
(2)  Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or 
(3)  The municipality, as defined in 33 USC 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater. 
Quantification level means the measurement of the concentration of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant. 
Representative sample means any sample of wastewater, which accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or more pollutants in the waste stream being sampled. Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. 
Sanitary wastewater means the portion of wastewater that is not attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site non-commercial consumption. 
Shall means mandatory. 
Significant noncompliance means any violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, Fats, Oil and Grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the department determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority; 
(5)  Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date; 
(6)  Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due date; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the department determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Significant industrial users means any user of the POTW who: 
(1)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling water; or 
(2)  Has discharges subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or 
(3)  Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations of this division; or 
(4)  Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 USC 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this division as determined by the department; or 
(5)  Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or 
(6)  Is found by the City of Detroit or City of Rochester Hills to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW. 
Slug means any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
Standard methods means methods set forth in 40 CFR Part 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR Part 136 shall be followed. 
State means the State of Michigan. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Suspended solids (total) means the total suspended matter which floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods. 
Total PCB means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being treated as zero. 
Total Phenolic Compounds means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2, 4-dichlorophenol, 2, 4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other federal or State laws, rules or regulations. 
Trade secret means the whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this division or with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
User means any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein. 
Wastewater or waste stream means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, stormwater, and cooling water. 
Wastewater discharge permits means permits issued by the department in accordance with this article. 
Waters of the State means groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 540, § 9, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-515. - Abbreviations. 
For purposes of this article, the following acronyms shall have the meanings designated by this section: 
BMR 	Baseline monitoring report 
BOD 	Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
C.F.R. 	Code of Federal Regulations 
EPA 	Environmental Protection Agency 
FOG 	Fats, Oil or Grease 
l 	Liter 
MDEQ 	MI. Department of Environment Quality 
mg 	Milligrams 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 USC 6901 et seq 
SIC 	Standard Industrial Classification 
SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
TSS 	Total Suspended Solids 
U.S.C. 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-516. - General pollutant prohibitions. 
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed to the publicly owned treatment works, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge prohibitions apply to such users of the publicly owned treatment works, whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, industrial users shall not contribute the following substances to the publicly owned treatment works: 
(1)  Any liquid, solid, or gas which, because of its nature or quantity, is sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to persons, the publicly owned treatment works, or the operation of the publicly owned treatment works. Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140°F or 60°C Using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any solid or viscous substance, in concentrations or quantities which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other encumbrance to the operation of the publicly owned treatment works, such as but not limited to grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling stones. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than 11.5 units. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference or pass through or constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(5)  Any liquid, gas, or solid or form of energy which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is sufficient to create a toxic gas, vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, a public nuisance or hazard to life or is sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which is sufficient to cause the publicly owned treatment works' effluent or any other product of the publicly owned treatment works, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the publicly owned treatment works is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the publicly owned treatment works cause the publicly owned treatment works to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, with criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the publicly owned treatment works to violate the consent judgment in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency v. City of Detroit, et al., C.A. No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. 
(8)  Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater being discharged. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the publicly owned treatment works treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 140° Fahrenheit (60° Celsius) or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104° Fahrenheit (40° Celsius). 
(10)  Any pollutant which constitutes a slug. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any floating fats, oil, or grease which are sufficient to cause interference with or pass through the publicly owned treatment works. 
(13)  Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half-inch or greater which are sufficient to cause interference with the publicly owned treatment works. 
(14)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 540, § 13, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-517. - Specific pollutant prohibitions. 
(a)  Compatible pollutants. See Appendix C [of this article]. 
(b)  Noncompatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
mg/1 
(1)  Arsenic (As), 1.0 mg/l. 
(2)  Cadmium (Cd), See Appendix C [of this article]. 
(3)  Chromium (Cr), 25.0. 
(4)  Copper (Cu), 2.5mg/l. 
(5)  Cyanide (CN) (Available), 1.0 mg/l. 
(6)  Iron (Fe), 1000.0 mg/l. 
(7)  Lead (Pb), 1.0 mg/l. 
(8)  Nickel (Ni), 5.0 mg/l. 
(9)  Silver (Ag), 1.0 mg/l. 
(10)  Zinc (Zn) 7.3 mg/l. 
(11)  Total Phenolic Compounds: 1.0 mg/l. 
or See Appendix B [of this article] 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR part 136. 
a.  The limitation for total PCB is Non-detect. Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of Total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the Total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with this article. 
b.  The limitation of Mercury (Hg) is Non-detect. Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/1, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of Mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For the purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with this article. 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance 40 CFR Part 136. 
(c)  Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this article, the department shall notify all industrial user's operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective date of this article. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's compliance or noncompliance with these limitations, and, in the event of noncompliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18-month from the effective date of this article. An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the department for a second extension as part of an administrative consent order. The department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this provision. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-518. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Generally. All users shall comply with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 CFR Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements, provided, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this division, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR part 403 and as established by the department. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are delineated in Appendix A [of this article]. 
(1)  Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's permit. 
(2)  Modification of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40 CFR 403.7. 
a.  Such authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of such pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. 
b.  Where such authorization is given to the department, any industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the department, consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7 and of this article. 
c.  Any credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 CFR 403.7, or as determined by the department. 
d.  A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. 
e.  Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section. 
(3)  New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(4)  Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 CFR 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 USC 1317(d) and of this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(5)  Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the department a report containing the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1—7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to the director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 CFR 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the department a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1—5). In such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12(b,)(4) and (5). 
(b)  Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the City of Rochester Hills, the City of Detroit or by the State of Michigan. 
(c)  Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the requirements of this division including, but not limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the department for unloading such waste in accordance with the board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in this article. The department may establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this division. 
(d)  Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued, by the department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the department to require further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the department before discharging such wastewater. An industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof: 
(1)  The general nature, source and process(es) generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as delineated in Appendix A [of this article], shall be so designated; 
(2)  The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the wastewater; 
(3)  At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application is made in paragraph (d)(1) of this subsection; 
(4)  A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or collected by the facility's treatment process(es); 
(5)  The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the department; and 
(6)  Other information requested by the department including, but not limited to, information required by Code, or by rules adopted by the board. 
The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures contained in this article, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions contained in this article regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the department may include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the information mandated in paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection. 
All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the department. 
(e)  Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited. 
(1)  The department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its adoption. 
(2)  If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from the department, the department may authorize the discharge of such wastewater. permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in this article, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the board. 
(f)  Right of revision. The City of Detroit and the City of Rochester Hills reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. Ninety days after adoption by the board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(g)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or expense. 
a.  Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within 60 days of the effective date of this article. 
b.  New significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a concentration of five percent or greater in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass-through or cause interference with the POTW. The industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory. 
(3)  At least once every two years, the department shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within 30 days of notification by the department. 
(h)  Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state or city laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its control center and notify the department of the discharge. 
a.  The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. 
b.  Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. 
c.  When required by the department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent such future occurrences. 
d.  Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or property. 
(i)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees whom to contact in the department in the event of an actual or excessive or prohibited discharge. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-519. - Recovery of costs. 
Any user discharging in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and any owner whose tenant discharges in violation of any of the provisions of this article, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the city's or the department's POTW, or causes the city or the department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the city and the department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the city or the department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the city or the department shall notify the user of its determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's or the department's NPDES permit and the city's or the department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this division. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this article or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 540, § 10, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-520. - Hazardous waste notification. 
All industrial users, who discharge into the City of Rochester Hills Collection System, shall notify the department in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-521. - Authorized representative. 
The authorized representative, as defined in this article, may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual designated where: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined as the authorized representative. 
(2)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(3)  The written authorization is submitted to the department. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-522. - Pollution prevention. 
The department shall encourage and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs that are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels required by this article. The department may require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-522A. - Pretreatment and control facilities. 
(a)  Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities. Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Design and installation. When the pretreatment or equalization of sewage flows is permitted, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the applicable city codes, this Code, and laws. 
(2)  Maintenance and operation. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(b)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. 
(1)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are determined necessary by the city for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any hazardous or flammable wastes, oil, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for residential dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city engineer and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)  All food service establishments discharging kitchen or food preparation wastewater including, but not limited to, restaurants, motels, hotels, hospitals, cafeterias, schools, night clubs, delicatessens, meat cutting-preparation, bakeries, bagel and donut shops, grocery stores or any other facility where food is manufactured, sold or prepared, except for small areas designated as employee break areas or the equivalent and residential dwelling units, discharging wastewater containing fats, oils, and grease to the sanitary sewer and/or the POTW shall install, operate, and maintain a sufficiently-sized oil and grease, water and solids separator (hereinafter called grease trap) necessary to achieve and maintain compliance with the limits indicated in this Code. 
(3)  Unless otherwise authorized by the city engineer, all grease traps shall be of the outdoor, inline variety. With special authorization by the city engineer, grease traps of the indoor, under-counter, stand-alone variety may be allowed. In this case, maintenance of indoor grease traps shall be performed as frequently as necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the "25 percent rule," meaning that accumulated grease shall not be allowed to exceed 25 percent of the depth of the grease interceptor. All grease interceptors and traps shall also comply with all plumbing code requirements. 
(4)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(5)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained by the owner and shall be operated continuously in an efficient manner whenever the facility is in operation. The city shall have the right to inspect maintenance and disposal records related to the operation of grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(6)  The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of the grease, oil and sand interceptor waste. All waste removed from each interceptor must be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste. No interceptor pumpage may be discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floatable materials, wastewater, sludges and solids, and jet flushing to remove measurable build-up on tank walls. Top skimming of outdoor grease traps, decanting, or back flushing of the grease trap or its wastes for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is prohibited. 
(7)  Grease traps and other interceptors shall be installed in compliance with the current plumbing codes adopted by the city. The city engineer shall make final determination and approval of a grease trap's size. If additional pretreatment and/or maintenance is required to meet the provisions in this section, the city engineer may require an establishment in existence prior to the effective date of this section to upgrade to the requirements of this section. 
(8)  Maintenance of an outdoor grease trap shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the "25 percent rule." 
(9)  Use of any bacteriological, chemical, or enzymatic addition for the purpose of maintaining a grease trap is prohibited unless written approval is obtained from the city engineer. 
(10)  Should any user fail to properly clean and maintain a grease, oil or sand interceptor as required herein, the city, at its option, may contract for appropriate repair, cleaning and maintenance by a licensed contractor, the cost of which shall be collectable by the city from the user at a charge of actual cost plus 25 percent for administration. 
(c)  Control manholes. When required by the city engineer, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of waste. 
(1)  Construction and location. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city council. 
(2)  Maintenance. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 11, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-523. - Fees. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-524. - Types of fees. 
The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the department's industrial waste control and pretreatment programs; 
(2)  User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; and 
(3)  Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(4)  Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-525. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through, or otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of this article. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-526. - Applicability to significant users. 
(a)  All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the effective date of this article, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all information specified in this article and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). 
(b)  All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The application must include all information specified in this Code and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW. 
(c)  Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval from the department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-527. - Permit application. 
(a)  Application or reapplication. The department may require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the same to the department for determining whether the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with the department's request in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Failure of the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this article. 
(1)  A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, unless an earlier date is specified or required by 40 CFR 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in this article. 
(2)  A separate permit application shall be required for each separate facility. 
(3)  Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the department. 
(b)  Required information. In support of an application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility; 
(2)  Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and legally; 
(3)  All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the Standard Industrial Classification manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(4)  Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in this article, those pollutants limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. 
a.  For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one year period shall be provided. 
b.  For industries subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process waste stream. 
c.  Combined waste streams proposed to be regulated by the combined waste stream formula shall also be identified. 
d.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC 1314(g) and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. 
(5)  A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to paragraph (b)(4) of this section, identify which pollutants are associated with each process; 
(6)  Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in paragraph (b)(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity; 
(7)  A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the week: 
(8)  The average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; 
a.  Each national categorical process waste stream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and stormwater flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and 
b.  Each combined waste stream; 
(9)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each National Categorical Process waste stream and which connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined waste stream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information furnished in paragraph (b)(8) of this section; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements only; 
(11)  A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this article and of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional; 
(12)  Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of this article; 
(13)  Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process; 
(14)  A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process type; 
(15)  If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source; 
(16)  If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this division and the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance procedures; 
(17)  Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and 
(18)  Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-528. - Permit issuance. 
Upon receipt of an application, the department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing regarding any of the following: 
(a)  The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit; 
(b)  The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant industrial user but is found by the department to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall make such determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6); 
(c)  The application is incomplete or the information only partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12 or by the department, and that additional information and data are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is unacceptable; 
(d)  The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its determination and the basis of the determination. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-529. - Permit withheld. 
The department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to the department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-530. - Issuance of proposed permit for review. 
(a)  If the department determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. 
(b)  An industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in this article, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Only one facility location shall be included in each permit. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-531. - Permit contents. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this article, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or City of Rochester Hills without repetition therein. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-532. - Other permit conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits may also contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in this article, or the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; 
(2)  Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(3)  Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user; 
(4)  Restrictions on which of the user's discharge waste streams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW; 
(5)  Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules; 
(6)  Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges; 
(7)  Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application; 
(8)  Additional reporting requirements: 
a.  All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by the department, or on an alternative form approved by the department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this division. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be established by the department. Analytical data generated by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit. 
b.  Permittees not subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the requirements of this article. The report shall show the concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with this article. 
c.  Permittees subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by the department. 
i.  A compliance report shall be submitted to the department no later than 90 days following the final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later than 90 days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the department and incorporated into the industrial users discharge permit and in accordance with this article. 
ii.  The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the department or on an alternate form approved by the department, and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with this article. The report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined waste stream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the department, provided there have been no changes to the elements composing the combined waste stream. 
d.  Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for significant industrial users subject to production based standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required to determine compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. 
i.  The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 CFR Part 403, or by the department, but no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
ii.  All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. 
iii.  If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the department using the procedures as prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in such report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. 
e.  This report, and those required under this article, shall include the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations." 
Said certification shall be signed by the facility's authorized representative, as defined in this Code. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative definition must be submitted to the department prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
f.  If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the user shall notify the department within 24 hours of the time said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the department within 30 days after said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. 
(9)  In the event the director determines that an industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this division, the department shall provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against pass-through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit; 
(10)  Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and 
(11)  Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-533. - Permit duration. 
(a)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period. except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise provided for under this article, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more than five years nor less than one year. 
(b)  Existing permit extended. The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-534. - Permit modification. 
(a)  Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the department during the term of the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in this article are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change; 
(2)  Change(s) in the department's NPDES permit; 
(3)  Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court order; 
(4)  Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as control authority; 
(5)  An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing permit; 
(6)  A change of conditions within the POTW; 
(7)  A finding of interference or pass-through attributable to the industrial user; 
(8)  Amendments to, or promulgation of, National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements including 40 CFR Part 403 and those delineated in Appendix A of this article. 
a.  Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the department for a modified permit within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised National Categorical Pretreatment Standard to which the industrial user shall be subject. 
b.  Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. 
c.  In addition, the department may initiate this action; 
(9)  Changes in the monitoring location; 
(10)  Typographical errors or omissions in permits; 
(11)  The department may modify the permit on its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or 
(12)  The user may request a modification of the permit. 
(b)  When initiated by the department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in this article, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-535. - Permit custody and transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. 
(b)  A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. 
(c)  It shall be the permit holder's duty to notify the department of any such change at least 30 days before the date of the change. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. 
(e)  If a change takes place, the department may require the application for a new or modified permit. 
(f)  Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the department allows to be retained. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-536. - Permit notification requirements. 
All industrial users shall promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-537. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the department and the industrial user, and to enable the department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this division. In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the department, said facility shall be provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the department. The industrial user shall provide the department with: 
(1)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the POTW; 
(2)  A flow schematic showing: (i) which connections receive each national categorical process waste stream, (ii) which connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water, and (iii) which lines handle each combined waste stream. This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the department may install such structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the department for any costs incurred therein. 
(b)  The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user, the department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring facilities. 
(2)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. 
(3)  Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the department's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-538. - Inspection, sampling and record-keeping. 
(a)  Right established. For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any other applicable provisions of this article or applicable state or federal laws and regulations, the department may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The department's employees or authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities. 
(b)  Inspection activity. Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. 
(1)  Upon arrival at the industrial user's premises, the department shall inform the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. 
(2)  The department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity. 
(3)  While performing work on private property, employees or authorized representatives of the department shall observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial user. 
(4)  Duly authorized employees or representatives of the department shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(5)  Duly authorized department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility site. 
(6)  Department employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this division. Which shall be maintained by the department as confidential in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Security measures. Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from the department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(d)  Sampling. Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The department may require such samples to be split with the department for the department's independent analysis. 
(e)  Record-keeping. Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from monitoring activities required by this article, or by 40 CFR 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste Program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA. 
(f)  Accessibility of records. Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the department at all reasonable times, and allow the department to copy such records. 
(g)  Department sample results. In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user, the department employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be controlling unless proven invalid. 
(h)  Discharge violation report. In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is obtained by the department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in this article, or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the department within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the limitation in the future. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-539. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
(b)  When submitted to the department, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked 'confidential' When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the State Disposal System permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be non-confidential by the governmental agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the department releases pursuant to a request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information released to the governmental agency. The department will use sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim. 
The department shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the department shall be made in writing. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Except as otherwise determined by the department or provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with the City of Rochester Hills shall be made available upon request by such user or the user's authorized representative during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-540. - Statues, laws and regulations {National Categorical Pretreatment Standards}. 
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards defined in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this article to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or organization of government other than the City of Rochester Hills shall be construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-541. - Enforcement 
It shall be a violation of this article for any user to: 
(1)  Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge; 
(2)  Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time frames provided in this article; 
(3)  Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided, that upon request reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the department; 
(5)  Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers; 
(6)  Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit; 
(7)  Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of this article including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this division shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this division, and such permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this division until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal Regulations, regardless of compliance schedules. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-542. - Upsets 
(a)  Affirmative defense. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards where the requirements of subsection (b) of this section are met. 
(b)  Basis for affirmative defense. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
a.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
(d)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-543. - Bypass. 
Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the department at least ten days in advance. 
(2)  Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(3)  Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user properly notified the department as described in subsection (3)b. of this section. 
(4)  Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in subsection (3)c. of this section, the department may approve an anticipated bypass. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-544. - Pollution prevention initiatives. 
Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined in this article during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum non-detect limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response. The department may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as a part of the department's enforcement response. Upon approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiative, or BMPs shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiative or BMPs. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-545. - Emergency suspension and orders. 
(a)  Authority. The department may order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the department, such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Voluntary stoppage upon notification. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. 
(c)  Informal verification. In the event the department provides informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24 hours. 
(d)  Failure to voluntarily stop. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or the environment. 
(1)  Notice to user; hearing. In the event such steps are taken, the director shall notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the department shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or his designated representative, within ten days of such action. 
(2)  Notice to city. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the department within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
(e)  Permit or service reinstatement. Upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-546. - Notice of suspected violation. 
Except in the case of an actual or threatened discharge as specified in subsection (e) of this section, whenever the department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this division, the department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the department from escalating its enforcement response. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-547. - Actions to eliminate or remedy violation. 
(a)  Administrative actions. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any prohibition of this division, the department, may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action, except in the case of emergency or flagrant violation, in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as possible. 
(b)  Conferences. The department may order any person, who violates this article, to attend a conference wherein the department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule: 
(1)  Serving of notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. 
(2)  Agenda. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this division. Nothing contained herein shall require the department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(3)  Modification of permit. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the department's duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of such agreement. 
(4)  Good faith and expeditious efforts. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this division and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder. 
(c)  Compliance schedules. The user and the department may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement, administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following conditions: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, and completing construction; 
(2)  No single increment referred to in subparagraph (1) of this subsection shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this article. 
(d)  Administrative orders. The department may order any industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this division or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order. 
(e)  Show cause hearing. The department may order any industrial user, who violates this division or allows such violation to occur, to show cause before the department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(1)  Notice of hearing. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before the department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative. 
(2)  Proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the board. A hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may: 
a.  In the name of the board, issue notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
b.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
(3)  Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter. 
(f)  Actions ordered. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the hearings officer shall issue order to the industrial user directing any of the following actions: 
(1)  Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this division, or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation; 
(2)  Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time period; 
(3)  Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a specified time period; 
(4)  Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date; 
(5)  Control of discharge quantities; 
(6)  Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the department during compliance efforts; and/or 
(7)  Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed. 
(8)  A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this division or of a duly issued permit did not occur. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-548. - Public notification of significant noncompliance. 
The department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit and the City of Rochester Hills a list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 102-549. - Legal action for violations. 
(a)  Criminal action. Any user, who violates any provision of this article, or any owner whose tenant violates any provision of this article, including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required under this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The city and the department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this article. 
(b)  Civil action. Whenever the city or the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any requirement of this article, the city or the director may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and the owner from allowing the discharge, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. 
(c)  Additional relief. The city and the department may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit neither constitutes an exclusive election of remedies nor prohibits the city, the department, director, board, or City of Detroit from commencing action in federal court for discharges believed to be in violation of this division, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. 
(d)  Cost recovery. In addition, the city and the City of Detroit may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this division, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(e)  Payment of fines, etc. All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the city and the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 540, § 12, 11-9-2009)  
Sec. 102-550. - Reconsideration and appeal to authority. 
(a)  Generally. Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its construction, application and enforcement of this division. The procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Selection of reconsideration or appeal. Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the department by the director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this article. 
(1)  An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger, who is adversely affected (i) by a permit issued as final by the department, or (ii) by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration. 
(2)  Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article, a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative, and received at the department's general offices within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request. 
(3)  A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed waived. 
(c)  Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the applicant of the time and place for a hearing. 
(1)  A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings officer who is designated by the director and may be an employee of the department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may reject a request for reconsideration. The department shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected. 
(3)  Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time. 
(4)  The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the department or from the court reporter. 
(5)  Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation to the director. The hearing officer shall send such decision to the requester by certified mail. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through, interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration. 
(d)  Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for an appeal, the department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set by the board until rules are promulgated pursuant to Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition: 
(1)  Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the department's action, determination or decision regarding the request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this article. 
(2)  Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected. 
(3)  The department shall appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the department. 
(4)  The written recommendation of the hearing officer shall be submitted to the board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(5)  In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department may appeal any final decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through, interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the appeal. 
Appendix A 
Aluminum Forming 	40 C.F.R. Part 467 
Asbestos Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 427 
Battery Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 461 
Builder's Paper and Board Mills 	40 C.F.R. Part 431 
Canned and Preserved Fruits/Vegetables 	40 C.F.R. Part 407 
Canned and Preserved Seafood Proc[essing] 	40 C.F.R. Part 408 
Carbon Black Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 458 
Cement Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 411 
Centralized Waste Treatment 	40 C.F.R. Part 437 
Coal Mining 	40 C.F.R. Part 434 
Coil Coating 	40 C.F.R. Part 465 
Copper Forming 	40 C.F.R. Part 465 
Dairy Products Processing 	40 C.F.R. Part 405 
Electrical and Electronic Components I & II 	40 C.F.R. Part 469 
Electroplating 	40 C.F.R. Part 413 
Explosives Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 457 
Feed Lots 	40 C.F.R. Part 412 
Ferroalloy Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 424 
Fertilizer Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 418 
Glass Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 426 
Grain Mills 	40 C.F.R. Part 406 
Gum and Wood Chemicals Mfg 	40 C.F.R. Part 454 
Hospital 	40 C.F.R. Part 460 
Ink Formulating 	40 C.F.R. Part 447 
Inorganic Chemicals Manufacture (I & III) 	40 C.F.R. Part 415 
Iron and Steel 	40 C.F.R. Part 420 
Landfills 	40 C.F.R. Part 445 
Leather Tanning & Finishing 	40 C.F.R. Part 425 
Meat Products 	40 C.F.R. Part 432 
Metal Finishing 	40 C.F.R. Part 433 
Metal Molding and Casting 	40 C.F.R. Part 464 
Metal Products and Machinery 	40 C.F.R. Part 438 
Mineral Mining and Processing 	40 C.F.R. Part 436 
Nonferrous Metals Forming 	40 C.F.R. Part 471 
Nonferrous Metals Mfg. I 	40 C.F.R. Part 421 
Nonferrous Metals Mfg. II 	40 C.F.R. Part 421 
Ore Mining and Dressing 	40 C.F.R. Part 440 
Organic Chemicals, Plastics, and Synthetic Fibers 	40 C.F.R. Part 414 
Paint Formulating 	40 C.F.R. Part 446 
Paving and Roofing Material 	40 C.F.R. Part 443 
Pesticide Chemicals 	40 C.F.R. Part 455 
Petroleum Refining 	40 C.F.R. Part 419 
Pharmaceutical 	40 C.F.R. Part 439 
Phosphate Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 422 
Photographic 	40 C.F.R. Part 459 
Plastics Molding and Forming 	40 C.F.R. Part 463 
Porcelain Enameling 	40 C.F.R. Part 466 
Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard 	40 C.F.R. Part 430 & 431 
Rubber Manufacturing 	40 C.F.R. Part 428 
Soap and Detergent Mfg 	40 C.F.R. Part 417 
Steam Electric 	40 C.F.R. Part 423 
Sugar Processing 	40 C.F.R. Part 409 
Textile Mills 	40 C.F.R. Part 410 
Timber Products 	40 C.F.R. Part 429 
Transportation Equipment Cleaning 	40 C.F.R. Part 442 
Waste Combusters 	40 C.F.R. Part 444 
 
Appendix B 
An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the Total Phenols Limitation specified in Section _______________, to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the Total Phenols Limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the Total Phenols Limitation, upon election: 
2-Chlorophenol 	2.0 mg/l 
4-Chlorophenol 	2.0 mg/1 
4-Chloro-3-methylphenol 	1.0 mg/l 
2,4-Dichlorophenol 	5.5 mg/l 
2,4-Dinitrophenol 	2.0 mg/l 
4-Methylphenol 	5.0 mg/l 
4-Nitrophenol 	15.0 mg/l 
Phenol 	14.0 mg/l 
 
Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters. 
Appendix C. Interim Discharge Limitations 
No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations: 
(a)  Compatible pollutants: 
(1)  Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour period. 
(2)  Any Total Suspended Solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
(3)  Any Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
(4)  Any Phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over an operating period representative of a User's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 146. 
(b)  Non-Compatible Pollutants 
Cadmium (Cd) 1.0 mg/l 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Secs. 102-551—102-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION STORMWATER CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-701. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized enforcement agency means the city engineer and his/her authorized representatives, which shall specifically include all inspectors and article enforcement, and any other individual designated by the Mayor of Rochester Hills to enforce this article. Where applicable the terms may also mean the director of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or his/her designated official, and/or the United States EPA Administrator or his/her designated official. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
City means the City of Rochester Hills. 
Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
County means the County of Oakland. 
Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres or more requiring an issued permit and small construction activities impacting one to five acres of land deemed to operate under a national permit. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 102-729 of this article. 
Illicit connections means either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial sctivity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
MS4 means a municipal separate storm sewer system. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), or by the State of Michigan under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) and codified in the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act Protection at MCL 324.101. et seq, that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States or State of Michigan, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Storm sewer system or storm drainage system means a publicly-owned facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-702. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Secs. 102-703—102-725. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 102-726. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless expressly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-727. - Enforcement, responsibility for administration. 
This article shall be enforceable by the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-728. - Minimum standards. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-729. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  Discharges from footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the city engineer as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the city engineer prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Exempt discharges. The following discharges are exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(c)  Prohibition of illicit connections . 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to a storm drain system or MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-730. - Suspension of storm sewer system access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations . The city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm sewer system or the waters of the United States or State of Michigan. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system or waters of the United States or State of Michigan, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge . Any person discharging to the storm sewer system in violation of this article may have their storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city engineer will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its storm sewer system access. The violator may petition the city engineer for reconsideration and hearing. 
(c)  Violation. A person violates this article if the person reinstates storm sewer system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-731 - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-732. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability . This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities . 
(1)  The city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the city engineer or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The city engineer has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city engineer and/or designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person operating the facility. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity violated this article if the person denies the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city engineer and/or authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-733. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
The city engineer shall adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States or State of Michigan. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-734. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee(s), shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. This responsibility does not apply to publicly or privately owned drains that are not owned by the property owner and are otherwise the responsibility of the drain owner. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-735. - Notification of release or discharge. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the United States or State of Michigan said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city engineer within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Secs. 102-736—102-755. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 102-756. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a the city or the authorized enforcement agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-757. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city engineer to the mayor. The notice of appeal must be received by the mayor's office within seven days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the mayor or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the mayor or designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-758. - Enforcement measures after appeal 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the denial of an the appeal, then representatives of the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-759. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within 60 days or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for the cost of the abatement by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the legal rate then applicable shall be assessed on a per annum basis on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-760. - Injunctive relief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-761. - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of bringing enforcement proceedings to seek the penalties and remedies authorized by this article, the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency may impose alternative compensatory actions upon a violator, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. The decision to seek alternative compensatory actions does not waive the city or authorized enforcement agency's right to seek legal enforcement from a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-762. - Violations deemed a public nuisance 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-763. - Criminal prosecution. 
All violations of this article shall be municipal civil infractions and upon a determination of responsibility therefor shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.00. 
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Sec. 102-764. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 4-5-2006)  
Chapter 106 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; tree conservation, § 126-261 et seq.; zoning, ch. 138; plant materials, § 138-1176 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 106-1—106-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Obnoxious plants and trees, MCL 124.151 et seq., MSA 12.270(1) et seq.; planting of trees along highways, MCL 247.231 et seq., MSA 9.351 et seq.; care of trees and shrubs along highways, MCL 247.241 et seq., MSA 9.361 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ANSI A300 means the most recent revision of the American National Standard for tree care operations, all parts and companion publications. ANSI A300 definitions are incorporated by reference and shall be controlling. 
Certified Arborist means an individual engaged in the profession of arboriculture who, through experience, education and related training, possesses the technical competence to provide for or supervise the management of trees and other woody plants (per ANSI A300, 4.2) and is certified by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
Director means the director of the city department of parks and forestry, and any representative, employee or agent authorized by the director to administer or enforce this article. 
Drip line means an imaginary vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
Lion's tailing means the removal of an excessive number of inner, lateral branches from parent branches. 
Ornamental tree means a tree less than 25 feet tall, with a crown spread of ten feet or more at maturity. 
Park tree means any tree, shrub, or other woody vegetation planted or located within a city park. 
Pathway means a non-motorized vehicle-pedestrian pathway. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity. 
Pruning means the selective removal of plant parts to meet specific goals and objectives (per ANSI A300, 4.30). 
Public utility means water, sewer and storm drainage systems and facilities, as well as electric, gas, telephone and cable television lines. 
Street tree means any tree, shrub, or other woody vegetation planted or located within a public street or road right-of-way under the city's jurisdiction. 
Topping means the reduction of a tree's size using internodal cuts without regard to tree health or structural integrity. 
Tree lawn means the area between a sidewalk or pathway and the curb or street edge. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.02; Ord. No. 566, § 6, 4-2-2012) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-27. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds trees growing in street or road rights-of-way, parks and other public property of the city are a vital element in the appearance, character and welfare of the city and its residents. These trees provide not only aesthetic benefits but functional ones as well by removing gaseous and particulate contamination from the air, sequestering carbon, returning oxygen to the atmosphere, reducing traffic noise, screening objectionable views, providing shade that reduces air temperatures, and reducing storm water runoff and soil erosion. 
(b)  However, despite their many qualities, trees that interfere with the use of street or road rights-of-way, parks and other public grounds of the city and dead, damaged or structurally unsound trees located on both public and private property in the city may, when they are not properly planted, maintained or removed, endanger pedestrians, motorists and adjacent residents; cause damage to streets, pathways, sidewalks, public utilities; and other property; harm other trees; and become a detriment, hazard, threat or potential liability for the city. 
(c)  Therefore, the purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its residents by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees growing in, overhanging, encroaching into or interfering with public street and road rights-of-way, parks and other public grounds of the city and for the pruning or removal of trees located on private property in the city which threaten pedestrian or traffic safety or which may interfere with public utilities or public improvements. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.01; Ord. No. 566, § 6, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-28. - Promulgation of rules. 
The director is authorized to promulgate additional rules, regulations, and specifications consistent with this article concerning the planting, care, maintenance, removal, pruning, and protection of street trees, park trees, or trees on other public property owned or leased by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.07; Ord. No. 566, § 6, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-29. - Conflict with tree conservation standards. 
If a conflict or disparity occurs between any sections and regulations of this article and those contained in article III of chapter 126 pertaining to tree conservation, with respect to an activity which is regulated under both articles, the more stringent section or regulation shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.09; Ord. No. 566, § 6, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-30. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforceable by the director, the county sheriff's department, the building department, and other enforcement officers as the mayor may designate. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.08; Ord. No. 566, § 6, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 106-31—106-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 106-56. - Street tree planting requirements. 
The planting of street trees shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Prohibited species. The following prohibited tree species shall not be planted as street trees: 
a.  Acer negundo (box elder); 
b.  Acer saccharinum (silver maple); 
c.  Ailanthus altissima (tree of heaven); 
d.  Catalpa species; 
e.  Elaeagnus species (autumn and Russian-olive); 
f.  Morus species (mulberry); 
g.  Populus species (poplar); 
h.  Rhamnus species (buckthorn); 
i.  Salix species (willow); and 
j.  Ulmus pumila (Siberian elm). 
(2)  Spacing and distance requirements. The planting of new street trees shall conform to the following minimum spacing and distance requirements, unless the director determines closer spacing or a lesser distance will not create an unsafe condition, threaten pedestrian or traffic safety, interfere with public utilities or public improvements, or be too close to allow for the tree to grow to mature size: 
a.  Minimum planting distances. Minimum planting distances shall be as follows: 
	Tree Type 
From Fixed Objects 	Deciduous Shade 	Evergreen 	Ornamental 	Shrub 
Curbs or street edge 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Hydrants 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Public streetlights 	25 feet 	25 feet 	10 feet 	—- 
Sidewalks/pathways 	5 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	5 feet 
Driveways 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Street Corners 	(See section 138-1079) 	
Public utility poles/overhead wires 	25 feet 	25 feet 	15 feet 	—- 
Underground public utility lines 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
Adjacent trees (center to center) 	25 feet 	20 feet 	15 feet 	5 feet 
Adjacent lot 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 
b.  Where there are sidewalks and a "tree lawn" at least eight feet wide, trees should be located halfway between the sidewalk and street. Trees shall not be planted by private property owners in "tree lawns" less than eight feet wide. Evergreen trees shall not be planted in any tree lawn less than 20 feet wide. 
c.  Trees shall not be planted in the "corner clearance triangle" formed by the first 25 feet along the road right-of-way line in each direction from the corner. 
d.  Prior to planting "Miss Dig" shall be contacted to have underground utility lines marked at least three days before planting. 
e.  Trees shall be planted at least 15 feet away from curb or road edge where speed limit is more than 35 mph. 
(3)  Free from insects and disease. Trees being planted as street trees shall be free from insects or disease that could affect other susceptible trees with such organisms and would likely cause significant decline or death. 
(4)  Traffic engineering standards. The planting of street trees shall conform to additional requirements concerning safe vehicle recovery area and other engineering standards as may be prescribed by the city transportation engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.03; Ord. No. 566, § 7, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-57. - City authority. 
Subject to article III of chapter 126 of this Code, the city may plant, prune, trim, treat, maintain and remove street trees, park trees or trees on other public grounds and rights-of-way of the city as the director determines necessary in order to provide for public safety by improving the structure and enhancing the symmetry of the trees. This authority specifically includes the power to remove any tree or portion thereof which the director determines: 
(1)  Is in an unsafe condition confirmed by a certified arborist engaged by the city; 
(2)  Is afflicted with pests or diseases that may cause a serious threat to other trees; 
(3)  Threatens pedestrian or traffic safety; or 
(4)  May interfere with public utilities or public improvements. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.04.01; Ord. No. 566, § 7, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-58. - Adjacent owners planting street trees. 
(a)  Permit required. Street trees may be planted by an adjacent private property owner, at his sole cost, provided a permit is obtained pursuant to section 94-33 of this Code prior to planting. Adjacent property owners shall not be charged a permit fee for planting trees. 
(b)  Selection and location. The selection and location of the trees shall conform to the provisions and requirements of this article and corner clearance requirements of section 138-1079, and the director shall have authority to designate location, size, species and/or variety of the trees as a condition of any permit for planting. 
(c)  Condition. Whether expressly stated or not, a condition of any permit for the planting of street trees shall be that the city may prune, trim, treat, maintain, and remove any such tree without compensation to the adjacent private property owner. 
(d)  Planted without permit. A person who plants a street tree without an approved permit may be required to remove the tree(s) at that person's sole expense if the director determines the tree(s) have not been planted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.04.02; Ord. No. 566, § 7, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-59. - Protection of public trees. 
No person shall, without obtaining a right of way tree permit from the director, do any of the following in relation to any street tree, park tree or tree on any other public property and rights-of-way of the city: 
(1)  Objects on trees. Fasten any sign, card, poster, wire, spike, nail, rope or other material to, around or through a tree; 
(2)  Fire. Permit any fire to burn where the fire or its heat, smoke or fumes may or will injure a tree; 
(3)  Chemicals. Permit any chemical to seep, drain or be emptied on or near a tree in an amount that may be toxic to the tree; 
(4)  Free passage to root system. Deposit, store, place or maintain any stone, brick, sand, soil, concrete, excessive mulch, plastic sheeting or other material, including raised planting beds around the base of a tree, which may or will impede the free passage of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of a tree; 
(5)  Protective construction barrier. Fail to provide, erect or maintain a protective barrier approved by the director around a tree likely to be injured during any construction; 
(6)  Electrical wires. Knowingly permit any electrical wires to contact or be attached to a tree; 
(7)  Excavation or paving within drip line. Excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench or lay any paved drive or pathway/sidewalk within the drip line of a tree; 
(8)  Vehicles within drip line. Drive, park, haul or store any automobile, truck, trailer, boat, motorcycle, snowmobile, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle within a tree's drip line, unless or except while within the clearly delineated traveled portion or parking area of any street, road, parking lot or driveway; or 
(9)  Climbing using spurs. Climb a tree while wearing spurs, unless that person is in the process of removing the tree. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.04.03; Ord. No. 566, § 7, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-60. - Prohibited pruning practices. 
The topping or lion's tailing of any street tree, park tree or tree on any other public ground or right-of-way of the city is prohibited, except with respect to shrubs or bushes located within a public street or road right-of-way. However, pruning and maintenance of street trees in accordance with the latest version of ANSI A300 shall be allowed. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.04.04; Ord. No. 566, § 7, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-61. - Street tree removal by private persons. 
(a)  Right of way permit required. No person shall remove or destroy any street tree without first obtaining a permit in accordance with section 94-33 of this Code. 
(b)  Condition of removal. As a condition of removal of a street tree, the director may require the person removing or causing removal of the street tree to plant, at the person's sole expense, a tree of a kind and size designated by the director in place of the one removed at the removal site, at an alternate site on city-owned property approved by the director, or pay into the city tree fund an amount equal to the cost of planting an approved tree. 
(c)  Liability protection. As a further condition of removal of a street tree, the director shall require the person removing or causing removal of a street tree to present a certificate of insurance evidencing insurance coverage in an amount the city's transportation engineer deems necessary to indemnify for any liability for bodily injury or property damage which may arise from the tree removal operation or submit a hold harmless from liability statement acceptable to the city's transportation engineer. 
(d)  Protection of adjacent trees. Any person removing a street tree shall protect adjacent trees from damage in a manner approved by the director. 
(e)  Stumps and debris. Any person removing a street tree shall cut or remove the stump to below the surface of the ground and shall remove and dispose of all debris from the removed street tree. The person removing the stump shall contact "Miss Dig" to have underground utility lines marked at least three days before stump removal. After stump removal, the soil grade shall be reestablished to be consistent with the adjacent grade. 
(f)  Bond. To ensure faithful performance of the conditions and requirements of this section, any person removing a street tree may be required, prior to removal, to submit to the director a cash bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of completing the work, which bond shall be refunded upon satisfactory completion of the work. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.04.05; Ord. No. 566, § 7, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 106-62—106-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 106-91. - Authority of city. 
If the owner of any private property on which a tree endangers or interferes with any public street or road right-of-way, sidewalk, pathway, public utility, traffic control signals, signs or devices, or other public property of the city fails to correct the endangerment or interference as required under this division within 14 days after receiving written notice from the city requesting the work to be performed, the city shall have the authority to prune or remove the tree as determined necessary by the director in order to achieve and maintain public safety. The city may charge the owner for the cost of the work plus a 30 percent administration fee. If the charges are not paid, they may be assessed against the property in accordance with section 90-30 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.05.04; Ord. No. 566, § 8, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-92. - Maintenance by owner. 
The owner of any private property adjacent to any public street or road right-of-way, sidewalk or pathway in the city shall be responsible for maintaining trees and shrubs located on the private property (or within any public right-of-way between the private property and the adjacent sidewalk or pathway) that overhang or encroach into or over any public street or road right-of-way, sidewalk or pathway by keeping branches pruned to maintain a minimum height clearance of 14 feet over and three feet back from the edge of the street or road, and eight feet over and one foot back from the edge of a sidewalk, and ten feet over and one foot back from the edge of a pathway. In addition, the owner shall keep the trees and shrubs pruned to not obstruct or obscure streetlights, street identification signs, fire hydrants, or traffic control devices or signs. Trees and shrubs must be maintained to provide clearance of at least one foot back from the edge of the sidewalk or pathway. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.05.01; Ord. No. 566, § 8, 4-2-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 566, § 8, adopted April 2, 2012, retitled § 106-92 from "Pruning by owner" to "Maintenance by owner."  
Sec. 106-93. - Structurally unsound trees and branches. 
The owner of any private property with a tree that endangers any public street or road right-of-way, sidewalk, pathway or other public property of the city shall be responsible for removing structurally unsound trees and dead, broken, poorly attached or decayed limbs and branches that may endanger the public. The owner shall also promptly remove from the public street or road right-of-way, sidewalk or pathway any branches or limbs that fall from the tree. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.05.02; Ord. No. 566, § 8, 4-2-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 566, § 8, adopted April 2, 2012, retitled § 106-92 from "Fallen, broken, decayed limbs" to "Structurally unsound trees and branches."  
Sec. 106-94. - Corner clearance. 
Trees and shrubs growing within the required corner clearance zone, as distinguished from new plantings which are prohibited in section 138-1079, shall be removed by the property owner or else kept pruned to a maximum height of 30 inches or less above the public street or road surface. Alternatively, large existing trees need not be removed and may be left within the required corner clearance zone, provided they are kept pruned to achieve and maintain the minimum height clearances set forth in section 106-92, or as approved by the city's transportation engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.05.03; Ord. No. 566, § 8, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 106-95. - Removal. 
(a)  Public nuisance. Any tree growing or located on private property in the city which, in the director's judgment, threatens pedestrian or traffic safety or may interfere with public utilities or public improvements due to damage, death, injurious disease, or insect infestation of the tree shall be considered a public nuisance. 
(b)  Notice and abatement. The city may, after providing notice to the owner of the private property, cause the tree to be removed as the director deems necessary in order to abate the public nuisance, and the city shall assess the cost of abatement to the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 4-14.06; Ord. No. 566, § 8, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 106-96—106-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 539, § 2, adopted Sept. 28, 2009, repealed Ch. 106, Art. III, §§ 106-121—106-126 in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to weed control. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
Secs. 106-121—106-126. - Reserved. 

Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
Chapter 110 - FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-201 et seq.; fees, ch. 54. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 110-1. - Master land use plan. 
The fee for a master land use plan shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 10-22-1997; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000)  
Secs. 110-2—110-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOODS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 110-31—110-55. - Reserved. 
_____ 
DIVISION 2. - DRAINAGE 
 
Sec. 110-56. - Review and inspection fees for grading plan. 
The review and inspection fees for the grading plan as provided in section 114-57 shall be as follows: 
			Building 
Department 
(1) 	Plot plan review and inspection: 
	a. 	Single-family unit: 		
		With master grading and drainage plan 	$280.00 	
		Without master grading and drainage plan 	300.00 	
		Surcharge for third and each additional review 	85.00 	
	b. 	Multiple per building 	265.00 	
	c. 	Additions (garages, pools) 	85.00 	
(2) 	Reinspection: 	
	a. 	Single-family units 	85.00 	
	b. 	Multiple, per building 	85.00 	
	c. 	Additions 	85.00 	
(3) 	Floodplains: 	
	a. 	Predetermined floodplain 	No charge 	
	b. 	Floodplain determination 	280.00 	
	c. 	Initial field inspection 	85.00 	
(4) 	Steep Slope Analysis: 	
	a. 	Planning Department 	85.00/hr. 	
	b. 	Building Department 	85.00/hr. 	
	c. 	Department of Public Service 	85.00/hr. 	
	d. 	Fire Department 	85.00/hr. 	
 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.15), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 597 , § 1, 3-27-2017) 
_____ 
Secs. 110-57—110-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 110-86. - Floodplain use permit. 
The fees for floodplain use permits as provided in section 114-158 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Nonrefundable application fee ..... $425.00 
(2)  Permit fee ..... 75.00 
(3)  FEMA map amendment or map revision ..... 200.00 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.0A.01)  
Sec. 110-87. - Inspection. 
Pursuant to division 2 of article III of chapter 114, there shall be an inspection escrow deposit established at the time of floodplain use permit issuance in an amount determined necessary by the engineering department to pay for the cost of inspection services. The minimum escrow deposit shall be $480.00 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.0A.02)  
Sec. 110-88. - Administrative charge. 
Twenty percent of the total fees due under this division shall be added as a city administrative fee, but not less than $75.00. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.0A.03; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Secs. 110-89—110-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LAND DIVISION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 110-116—110-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DIVISION OR PARTITION OF LAND 
 
Sec. 110-141. - Division of land. 
(a)  Fees to be charged pursuant to section 122-29 shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a land division resulting in two newly created parcels, the fee shall be a minimum of $200.00 plus an additional charge of $10.00 for any additional newly created parcels thereafter. 
(2)  For a private road, the fee shall be in the amount of $250.00, plus $10.00 per description, plus an engineering fee of $300.00, plus a fee of $30.00 per acre or fraction thereof. 
(3)  In addition, when there is a necessity for a public hearing, a fee of $300.00 shall be paid by the applicant to the planning department. 
(b)  All fees shall be paid at the time an application for division or partition of land is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.11), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Secs. 110-142—110-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 110-171. - Subdivision plan and plat reviews. 
Fees for the review of preliminary and final plats and open space plans and the other requirement of article III of chapter 122, such as the cost of street trees, shall be calculated to defray the administration, planning, engineering and legal expenses incurred thereby. All fees and charges must be paid at the time indicated in this article. The fees shall be as follows for the following departments and reviews: 
(1)  Building department. 
a.  Charge for each review, $85.00 per hour. 
1.  Minimum escrow deposit prior to review, $250.00. 
(2)  Department of public service. 
a.  Prepreliminary: minimum fee of $800.00 up to ten acres plus $75.00 per acre or fraction thereof up to a maximum fee of $2,500.00. 
b.  Tentative-preliminary: minimum fee of $950.00 up to ten acres plus $95.00 per acre or fraction thereof up to a maximum fee of $3,500.00. 
c.  Final-preliminary: minimum fee of $500.00 up to ten acres plus $45.00 per acre or fraction thereof up to a maximum fee of $1,800.00. 
d.  Final plat: minimum fee of $1,800.00 plus $95.00 per acre or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Planning department. 
a.  Concept review: 
1.  First meeting: no fee. 
2.  Second and each additional meeting: $250.00. 
b.  Tentative-preliminary: 
1.  Regular plan: $900.00 plus $10.00 per lot. 
2.  Open space option: an additional $500.00. 
c.  Final-preliminary: $600.00 plus $10.00 per lot. 
d.  Final plat: $600.00 plus $10.00 per lot. 
e.  Internal review, consultation and/or field inspection: 
1.  If service(s) conducted by city staff, service shall be charged at a rate of $85.00 per hour. 
2.  If outside consultants are employed to conduct planning reviews, consultations and/or inspections, the fee will be equivalent to the city's cost for such consultant services. 
(4)  Fire department. Charge for each review, $85.00 per hour (one hour minimum). 
(5)  Administrative charges. Twenty percent of the sum of the fees in subsections (1) through (3) of this section shall be an administrative fee. The minimum shall be $100.00. 
(6)  Legal document review. For the legal review of deeds, easements, restrictive covenants, maintenance agreements, or other legal documents, the applicant shall be charged a fee corresponding to the city's cost for legal services. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.13.01; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 597 , § 2, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-172. - Development fees. 
The fees in section 110-171 cover review of subdivision plans and plats only. City charges for review of construction plans for improvements and for inspection of construction, engineering fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other applicable development charges shall be as provided in this section. 
(1)  Engineering review of utility and road construction. The review fee shall be based on a percent of the estimate, as determined by the department of public service, of the projected construction costs for retention/detention facilities, public or private roads, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and pathways. 
a.  The first two reviews shall be charged according to the following schedule: 
Construction Costs 	Percentage 	Minimum 
Fee 
$0.00 to $50,000.00 	3.75 	$   750.00 
$50,000.00 to $100,000.00 	3.25 	  2,200.00 
$100,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 	1.75 	  3,750.00 
Over $1,000,000.00 	1.25 	 18,750.00 
 
b.  Subsequent reviews. There shall be an hourly surcharge for the third and each subsequent review, as outlined in subsection (3) of this section. 
c.  Consultants. If consulting engineering personnel are used to conduct construction plan review, one-quarter percent of the fee will be retained by the city. 
(2)  Off-site improvements review. Charges for reviews shall be based on a percent of the estimated dollar amount of the work to be done, according to the above schedule. 
(3)  Construction engineering services. Fees for construction engineering services shall be as follows: 
a.  Review, consultation, inspection fees. 
1.  Per-hour charge, $63.00. 
2.  There shall be a minimum four-hour charge for cancellations without prior notification to the city of $252.00. 
3.  If consultant-engineering personnel are used to conduct construction reviews, consultations, and/or inspections, the fees will be equivalent to the city's cost for such consultant services, plus a 20-percent administrative fee. 
4.  Escrow for services fees. There shall be an escrow account established for review, consultation, and inspection fees before work is commenced based on the construction contract amount according to the following schedule: 
Construction 
Contract Amount 	Percentage Amount 
of Deposit 	Minimum 
Fee 
Up to $50,000.00 	10 	$2,300.00 
$50,000.00 to $100,000.00 	 7 	 5,000.00 
Over $100,000.00 	 5 	 7,000.00 
 
(4)  Administrative charges. An administrative charge shall be added to such fees or deposits as prescribed in this section as set forth in section 110-205. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.13.02; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 110-173. - Sidewalk construction. 
Fees for the review of construction plans and inspections for sidewalks shall be calculated according to the following schedule to defray costs incurred by the city to provide these services. The fees must be paid at the time of application or in advance of services provided: 
(1)  Application and permit fees. 
a.  Subdivision lot with land improvements. The application and permit fee for a subdivision lot submitted with a land improvement permit application shall be $100.00. 
b.  Site without land improvements. The application and permit fee per site for an application submitted without a land improvement permit application shall be $80.00 plus $0.50 per linear foot of sidewalk. The maximum fee under this subsection shall not exceed $130.00. 
(2)  Inspection fees. 
a.  Field inspection. The fees in subsection (1) of this section shall include a field inspection of one hour or less. 
b.  Additional or longer inspections. Additional fees shall be charged for additional inspections or inspections of more than one hour at the inspection rate specified in subsection 110-171(1), pertaining to construction engineering services. 
(3)  Administrative charges. An administrative charge shall be added to the fees prescribed in this section as set forth in section 110-205. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.13.03; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 9-1-1999; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 7-19-2006; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 565, § 4, 1-9-2012; Ord. No. 597 , § 3, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 110-174—110-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED CONDOMINIUMS 
 
Sec. 110-201. - Building department. 
There shall be charges for and an escrow deposit made at the time of application for preliminary plan review for one-family residential detached condominiums, as provided in article IV of chapter 122, in an amount determined necessary by the planning department to pay for the cost of plan review by the city building department. The minimum escrow deposit shall be $250.00. The city building department shall charge $85.00 per hour for its review. 
(Code 1976, § 4-16.0A.01; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 597 , § 4, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-202. - City attorney. 
The fees for the city attorney connected with one-family residential detached condominiums shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the legal review of deeds, easements, restrictive covenants, maintenance agreements, or other legal documents, the applicant shall be charged a fee corresponding to the city attorney's hourly rate. 
(Code 1976, § 4-16.0A.02; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 110-203. - Public service department; city engineer. 
The fees for the public service department and city engineer related to one-family residential detached condominiums shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary plan: minimum of $950.00 up to ten acres plus $95.00 per acre for each acre in excess of ten acres. The maximum charge shall be $3,500.00. 
(2)  Final plan: minimum of $500.00 up to ten acres plus $45.00 per acre for each acre in excess of ten acres. The maximum charge shall be $1,800.00. 
(3)  Master deed and exhibits: minimum of $700.00 up to ten acres plus $35.00 per acre (no maximum). 
(4)  Charge for steep slope analysis, if applicable. Charge will be applied to platted and unplatted parcels in accordance with section 138-1082. Department of public services, $75.00 per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 4-16.0A.03; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 110-204. - Planning department. 
Planning department fees for one-family residential detached condominiums shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary plan: $900.00 plus $10.00 per building site. 
(2)  Final plan: $600.00 plus $10.00 per building site. 
(3)  Master deed: $500.00 for each review by city attorney. 
(4)  Internal review, consultation and/or field inspection: 
a.  If service(s) conducted by city staff, service shall be charged at a rate of $75.00 per hour. 
b.  If outside consultants are employed to conduct planning reviews, consultations and/or inspections, the fee will be equivalent to the city's cost for such consultant services. 
c.  Charge for steep slope analysis; if applicable. Charge will be applied to platted and unplatted parcels in accordance with section 138-1082, planning department, $75.00 per hour. 
d.  A down payment or escrow account may be required to cover anticipated services. 
(Code 1976, § 4-16.0A.04; Ord. No. 456, § 1, 1-5-2000); Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 110-205. - Administrative charge. 
The administrative charge shall be an amount equal to 20 percent of the total of all fees outlined in this division. An escrow deposit for administrative costs shall be made each time an escrow deposit and/or fees are paid to the city and shall be equal to 20 percent of the escrow deposit and/or fees paid. 
(Code 1976, § 4-16.0A.05; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 110-206. - Condominiums. 
Fire department review (per hour) $85.00 {one-hour minimum}. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 597 , § 5, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 110-207—110-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NATURAL RESOURCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 110-231—110-255. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOIL EXCAVATION AND LANDFILL 
 
Sec. 110-256. - Permit fees. 
The fees for permits as provided in section 126-64 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Permit (annually) ..... $3,000.00 
(2)  Excess earth removal permit ..... 100.00 
Plus per month ..... 150.00 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.13), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003)  
Secs. 110-257—110-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TREE CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 110-286. - Planning department. 
Planning department fees pertaining to tree removal permits as provided in article III of chapter 126 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Escrow fee for plan review/inspections. There shall be an escrow account established for site plan/plat review and inspections. Escrow deposits are to be made at the time of application. Any additional consulting and/or administrative fees shall be paid prior to permit issuance or approval. The minimum escrow deposit shall be $750.00. 
(2)  Internal review, consultation and/or field inspection . If service(s) conducted by city staff, service shall be charged at a rate of $85.00 per hour. 
(3)  Consulting fee. When consulting personnel are employed for site plan/plat review, preconstruction meetings, and site inspections, their cost will be deducted from the escrow deposit. If costs exceed the escrowed amount, additional fees charged will be equivalent to the city's cost for such consulting service. 
(4)  Administrative fee. Twenty percent of the sum of the fees in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section shall be an administrative fee. 
(5)  Payment. All escrow fees are payable to the city at the time of application. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.0A.01; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 597 , § 6, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-287. - Parks and forestry department. 
(1)  Parks and forestry department fees pertaining to site plan, plats, single-family, and site condominium review shall be as follows: 
a.  Hourly fee ..... $ 75.00 
b.  Minimum escrow deposit ..... 250.00 
(2)  Parks and forestry department fees pertaining to tree removal permits as provided in article III of chapter 126 shall be as follows: 
a.  Minimum fee. A minimum fee of $90.00 shall be paid at the time of submission of the plan. 
b.  Additional costs. Costs exceeding the fee amount will be charged at a rate of $75.00 per hour. 
c.  Time of payment. The minimum fee shall be payable to the city at the time of application. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.0A.02; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Secs. 110-288—110-315. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WETLAND AND WATERCOURSE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 110-316. - Wetland and watercourse permits. 
(a)  The fees for wetland and watercourse use permits pursuant to article IV of chapter 126 pertaining to wetland and watercourse protection shall be charged for the following: 
(1)  Wetland and watercourse determination: consultant investigation and inspection. 
(2)  Use permit: consultant plan review, investigation, and inspection. 
(b)  There shall be charges for and an escrow deposit made at the time of application to pay for the cost of city-retained consultants for investigation, plan review and inspection services, notice expense, and city administration costs shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a parcel two acres in size or less: ..... $500.00 
(2)  For a parcel two acres to five acres in size: ..... 1,000.00 
(3)  For a parcel greater than five acres in size: ..... 1,500.00 
The administrative cost shall be an amount equal to 20 percent of the total consultant charges or $100.00, whichever is greater. The minimum escrow deposit shall be $300.00. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.0A.01; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 110-317. - Appeal. 
The person filing an appeal pursuant to article IV of chapter 126 pertaining to wetland and watercourse protection shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 482, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2003, repealed § 110-317, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 110-317 pertained to other than one-family residential development and derived from Code 1976, § 4-13.0A.02.  
Sec. 110-318. - Variances. 
The applicant for a variance pursuant to article IV of chapter 126 pertaining to wetland and watercourse protection shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 482, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2003, repealed § 110-318, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 110-318 pertained to use permit for other than one-family residential development and derived from Code 1976, § 4-13.0A.03.  
Sec. 110-319. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 482, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2003, renumbered § 110-319 as § 110-317. Former § 110-319 pertained to appeal and derived from Code 1976, § 4-13.0A.04.  
Sec. 110-320. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 482, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2003, renumbered § 110-320 as § 110-318. Former § 110-320 pertained to variances and derived from Code 1976, § 4-13.0A.05.  
Secs. 110-321—110-345. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLANNING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 110-346—110-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UNPLATTED LAND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 110-371. - Building department. 
The fees for building department reviews and inspections pursuant to article III of chapter 130 pertaining to unplatted land development shall be as follows: 
(1)  Escrow deposit (site plan and plats) ..... $250.00 
(2)  Assessment for each review, per hour .....  85.00 
(3)  Steep slope analysis, per hour .....  85.00 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.0A.01; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 597 , § 7, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-372. - Department of public service. 
The fees for department of public service reviews and inspections pursuant to article III of chapter 130 pertaining to unplatted land development shall be as follows: 
(1)  Site plans. 
a.  Up to ten acres ..... $1,100.00 
b.  Over ten acres ..... 1,100.00 
plus $90.00 per acre or 
fraction thereof over ten acres 
c.  Steep slope analysis, per hour .....    75.00 
(2)  Construction plan review fee. The review fee shall be based on the estimate, as determined by the department of public service, of the projected construction costs for retention/detention facilities, public or private roads, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and pathways. Charges for the first two reviews shall be based on the dollar amount of work to be done according to the following schedule: 
Construction Costs 	Percentage 	Minimum 
Fee 
$0.00 to $50,000.00 	3.75 	$ 750.00 
$50,000.00 to $100,000.00 	3.25 	2,200.00 
$100,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 	1.75 	3,750.00 
Over $1,000,000.00 	1.25 	18,750.00 
 
In addition, there shall be an hourly surcharge for the third and each subsequent review, as set forth in subsection (4) of this section. 
a.  If consultant engineering personnel are used to conduct construction plan review, one-quarter percent of the fee will be retained by the city. 
(3)  Off-site improvements. Charges for review shall be based on the dollar amount of the work to be done, according to the above schedule. 
(4)  Construction engineering services. Construction engineering services fees shall be as follows: 
a.  Review, consultation, inspection fees. 
1.  Per-hour charge, $75.00. 
2.  There shall be a minimum four-hour charge for cancellations without prior notification to the city of $300.00. 
If consultant engineering personnel are employed to conduct construction consultations, and/or inspections, the fees will be equivalent to the city's cost for such consultant employment plus a 20 percent city administrative fee. 
b.  Escrow for services fees. There shall be an escrow account established for review, consultation, and inspection fees before work is commenced based on the construction contract amount according to the following schedule: 
Construction 
Contract Amount 	Percentage 
Amount of 
Deposit 	Minimum 
Fee 
Up to $50,000.00 	10 	$2,300.00 
$50,000.00 to $100,000.00 	7 	5,000.00 
Over $100,000.00 	5 	7,000.00 
 
c.  Private road escrow deposit. For private roads, there shall be an escrow deposit made based on the cost of grading, gravel, paving, curbing, shoulders and ditching according to the above schedule. 
d.  Administrative charges. Twenty percent of the sum of the fees or escrow deposits, as set forth in this subsection shall be added to such fees or deposits as an engineering administrative fee; however, such fee shall not be less than $100.00. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.0A.02; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 7-19-2006; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 110-373. - Planning department. 
The fees for planning department reviews and inspections pursuant to article III of chapter 130 pertaining to unplatted land development shall be as follows: 
(1)  Site plans. 
a.  Multifamily or cluster and mobile home parks, $1,000.00 plus $18.00 per unit. 
b.  Commercial, $1,500.00 plus $75.00 per acre. 
c.  Industrial, $1,500.00 plus $75.00 per acre. 
d.  Research office, $1,500.00 plus $75.00 per acre. 
e.  If service(s) conducted by city staff, service shall be charged at the rate of $75.00 per hour. 
(2)  Rezoning requests, $750.00. 
(3)  Special/conditional land uses, $750.00. 
(4)  Semipublic uses (schools, churches), $1,500.00 plus $475.00 per acre. 
(5)  Extensions of approval (site plans and plats): 
a.  Administrative approval, $250.00 
b.  Planning commission or city council approval, $500.00 per meeting. 
(6)  Landscape plan review. 
a.  Plan review escrow deposit, $500.00 minimum. 
b.  Internal review, consultation and/or field inspection: 
1.  If service(s) conducted by city staff, service shall be charged at a rate of $75.00 per hour. 
2.  If outside consultants are employed to conduct planning reviews, consultations and/or inspections, the fee will be equivalent to the city's cost for such consultant services. 
c.  Landscape planting inspection fee. Landscape plan construction costs should be submitted to the city and include an itemized cost list for plant materials and mulch. Sod, fill dirt, topsoil, finished grading, and irrigation systems should not be included. All such estimates are subject to review and approval by the planning department. Revised landscape planting plans shall require the resubmittal of the landscape plan and recalculation of estimated planting costs. Additional review fees may be required for subsequent resubmittal of plans. 
 Landscape 
Planting Costs 	Percentage 	Minimum 
Fee 
$0.00 to $4,999.00 		$500.00 
$5,000.00 and greater* 	3.00 	$500.00 
* 3 percent of amount greater than $5,000.00 is in addition to minimum fee of $500.00 

 
In addition, all inspections fees must be paid prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(7)  Brownfield Redevelopment Plan Review Fee, $2,500.00 minimum to begin review process. 
(8)  For work not covered in the scale in this section, the rate of charge shall be the actual cost to the city for the service, plus an administrative fee of 20 percent, with a minimum charge of $100.00. 
(9)  For additions to existing facilities the per acre fee shall not apply. 
(10)  Charge for steep slope analysis, if applicable. Charge will be applied to platted and unplatted parcels in accordance with section 138-1082. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.0A.03; Ord. No. 455, § 1, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 110-374. - Legal documents review. 
The fees for legal documents review pursuant to article III of chapter 130 pertaining to unplatted land development shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the legal review of deeds, easements, restrictive covenants, maintenance agreements, or other legal documents, the applicant shall be charged a fee of $115.00 per document. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.0A.04; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Sec. 110-375. - City administrative charges. 
City administrative charges for reviews and inspections pursuant to article III of chapter 130 pertaining to unplatted land development shall be 20 percent of the total or $100.00 minimum. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.0A.05; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec 110-376. - Fire department. 
The charge for each review by the fire department shall be $75.00 per hour. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1, 6-22-2009)  
Secs. 110-377—110-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 503, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2005, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 110-401—110-406, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 412, § 1, adopted Apr. 16, 1997; and Ord. No. 482, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2003. 
 
Sec. 110-401. - Sign erector registration fee. 
The sign erector registration fee as provided in section 134-75 shall be $15.00. The administration fee for registration shall be $15.00. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 1, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 597 , § 8, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-402. - Application fee. 
A nonrefundable fee shall accompany each sign permit application associated with subsections 110-403(a) and (b) and section 110-404. The sign application fee shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 1, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 597 , § 9, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-403. - Permanent sign fees. 
(a)  Prior to erection of a permanent sign, the following charges shall be paid: 
(1)  Plan review fee. 
a.  Where review of construction documents is performed by city employees, the review fee shall be charged at $85.00 per hour or fraction thereof. 
b.  Where the review of construction documents is performed by outside consultants, the review fee shall be charged at 1.5 times the actual cost. Payment shall be in advance based on estimated cost. 
(2)  Sign permit fees. 
a.  Wall signs: $85.00. 
b.  Monument signs: $165.00. 
Permit fee covers one inspection for wall signs and two inspections for monument signs. All additional inspections will require the re-inspection fee prescribed in subsection (3), below. 
(3)  Reinspections. For reinspections under this article, the fee shall be $85.00 per inspection. 
(b)  Whenever a panel or the lettering of an existing sign is being changed, including alteration of the sign message, and it appears that no additional sign area will be used and there is no relocation of the sign, a permit fee of $85.00 shall be charged in addition to the application fee. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 1, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 597 , § 10, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-404. - Temporary signs. 
Before the erection of a temporary sign, a permit fee shall be paid, as follows: 
(1)  First 30-day period: ..... $110.00 
(2)  For additional displays of same sign (covering up to three additional displays during same year): ..... 110.00 
(Ord. No. 503, § 1, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 543, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 597 , § 11, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 110-405. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 110-405, in its entirety. Former § 110-405 pertained to "Bonds". See Code Comparative Table for derivation.  
Sec. 110-406. - Cancellation of permit. 
If a sign permit is cancelled all fees shall be refunded except the application fee, plan review fee, 25 percent of the permit fee, and $85.00 per inspection. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 1, 11-16-2005; Ord. No. 597 , § 12, 3-27-2017)  
Secs. 110-407—110-436. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ZONING 
 
Sec. 110-437. - Zoning board of appeals filing fees. 
Zoning board of appeals filing fees as provided in section 138-108 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Variance, interpretation or appeals of decision requests regarding alterations, modifications, additions or accessory buildings for existing single-family residence, $150.00. 
(2)  All other variance, interpretation, appeals of decision or approval requests, $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003)  
Sec. 110-438. - Zoning ordinance text and map changes. 
The fees for zoning ordinance text and map changes as provided in section 138-7 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Text, $25.00. 
(2)  Map, $4.00. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.34), 3-19-1997; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 3-12-2003; Ord. No. 487, § 3, 10-1-2003)  
Sec. 110-439. - Zoning verification or compliance review. 
The fees for a zoning verification review or zoning compliance review shall be as follows: 
(1)  Zoning verification ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  Zoning compliance ..... 300.00 
(3)  Additional research required to provide information other than that included in a zoning verification or zoning compliance review shall be billed hourly at $75.00 per hour. 
( Ord. No. 572, § 1, 2-11-2013 )  
Chapter 114. - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; land division, ch. 122; natural resources, ch. 126; wetland and watercourse protection, § 126-491 et seq.; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq., MSA 13A.9301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 114-1—114-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRAINAGE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, MCL 324.9101 et seq., MSA 13A.9101 et seq.; soil conservation districts, MCL 324.9301 et seq., MSA 13A.9301 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 114-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means the person holding a general contract for the construction of a building or structure. If no such person is employed by an owner, the owner of the property affected shall be the building contractor. 
Drain means every ditch, stream, watercourse, swale, sewer, pipe or other conduit of any kind, whether natural or artificial, whether or not established by any public authority, over or through which surface waters normally pass within the city. 
Engineer means the engineering department for the city. 
Landscape contractor means a person, whether a licensed landscape contractor or not, who performs any grading, earth filling, earth removing, planting or landscape construction or maintenance work for hire. 
Owner means the fee title holder, a land contract vendee, a lessee, a tenant of the property and the persons, individually and collectively, entitled to possession of the property. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-27. - Purpose. 
Drainage in the city shall be regulated as provided in this article to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and property owners of the city and to prevent flooding and damage to property as a result of blockage of drainage and improper grading in connection with the construction of buildings and improvement of property. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.01)  
Sec. 114-28. - Standards. 
(a)  The soil erosion and sedimentation control standards and specifications developed by the county soil conservation district are adopted by reference, together with all supplements and amendments thereto as well as modifications and additions as may be adopted by city council resolution. 
(b)  The city council is authorized to establish engineering standards and specifications pertaining to drainage and grading in the city. All persons doing any construction and/or grading in the city and submitting grading plans shall comply with such standards and engineering specifications. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-07.03, 4-07.04.01(A)(f))  
Sec. 114-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspections. The engineering department may make such inspections of the property as it determines necessary in order to ensure compliance with the approved grading plan and this article. 
(b)  Stoppage of work. Upon it being determined through inspection that the grading or soil erosion and sedimentation controls are not consistent with the approved grading plan, the engineering department may notify the contractor and/or the owner and stop all grading, drainage or land improvement work until there is compliance with the approved grading plan. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-07.04.05, 4-07.04.06)  
Secs. 114-30—114-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LAND IMPROVEMENT PERMIT 
 
Sec. 114-56. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to build, change, alter or enlarge or permit the building, changing, alteration, or enlargement of any existing, proposed or future structure or land or part thereof; to change the grade of land so as to affect the drainage or change the drainage pattern of any land or part thereof; or to cause any change in the natural cover or topography of land which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or to sedimentation of the waters of the city without first obtaining a land improvement permit or its equivalent as provided in this article in accordance with this article and all other applicable sections of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.04)  
Sec. 114-57. - Grading plan. 
(a)  Required. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any building or structure, other than for remodeling or work within an existing structure not affecting the land outside of the structure, and prior to any grading or other land improvement which might or will alter or change drainage or result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation, the owner, building contractor and/or landscape contractor shall file a grading plan with the engineering department. 
(b)  Contents. The plan shall depict two-foot or less contours of the area, shall be on a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet and shall show all property within 100 feet of the property for which the permit is being sought. Specifically, the plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Existing grades; 
(2)  Proposed finished grades; 
(3)  The grade of all buildings and structures; 
(4)  The location and elevations of all utilities, including manholes on or within 100 feet of the property; 
(5)  Slope, type of construction and location of existing and proposed driveways; and 
(6)  Provision for temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control in accordance with, but not necessarily limited to, the minimum control measures required in the soil erosion and sedimentation control standards and specifications developed by the county soil conservation district adopted in subsection 114-28(a). 
(c)  Subdivisions. The plan shall conform to the master grading and drainage plan established for a subdivision, if the lot or parcel is a part of a subdivision with an approved master grading and drainage plan. 
(d)  Certification. The plan shall be prepared and signed or sealed by a registered civil engineer, architect or land surveyor. If landscaping is performed, the engineering department may determine how detailed the plan shall be depending on the circumstances. 
(e)  Fees. Simultaneously with the filing of the grading plan, the owner and/or contractor shall pay a review and/or inspection fee as provided in section 110-56. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-07.04.01, 4-07.04.02; Ord. No. 410, § 1(1-08.02.15), 3-19-1997)  
Sec. 114-58. - Exclusions. 
(a)  Site plans or subdivision plats. Notwithstanding the requirements of section 114-57, no specific grading plan or payment of fees required by this division shall be required when a parcel of property is being developed pursuant to and in accordance with an approved site plan or subdivision plat and a grading plan pursuant to such site plan or subdivision plat is required by chapter 138 and other applicable sections of this Code or when there is a permit issued pursuant to article II of chapter 126 pertaining to soil excavation and landfill. Upon approval of a grading plan submitted pursuant to an approved site plan or plat, the engineering department shall stamp the plan as approved for drainage and soil erosion and sedimentation control, which stamp shall constitute a land improvement permit. 
(b)  Landscaping. No plan or permit shall be required for landscaping, farming, gardening, or any other land improvement of a minor nature, so long as these activities do not affect or change the drainage or result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation in violation of this article. The engineering department shall, upon request, review informal landscaping plans in order to clarify whether a plan and permit would be required. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.04.04)  
Sec. 114-59. - Approval and issuance. 
The engineering department shall review the plan required pursuant to this division to determine if the plan conforms to all city requirements. Upon approval of the plan, the city shall issue a land improvement permit. All construction and grading shall conform to the approved grading plan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.04.03)  
Sec. 114-60. - Grading survey. 
Prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy when a building permit has been issued or prior to completion of the work under a land improvement permit when no building is involved, a grading survey, prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor, shall be submitted to the engineering department showing finish grades and all floor, swale, yard, lot, corner and drainage course elevations and certifying the site is graded in accordance with the grading plan and all permanent soil erosion and sedimentation controls are in place. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.04.07)  
Sec. 114-61. - Cash, letter of credit or surety bond. 
(a)  Required. Whenever a permit holder seeks to occupy premises prior to the completion of all work required by the grading plan pursuant to this division or when the applicant for a permit occupies the premises at the time of application and continued occupancy is contemplated during the time of the work, the permit holder or applicant shall deposit cash, an irrevocable bank letter of credit, or a corporate surety bond forfeitable to the city in an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the remaining work to be performed pursuant to the approved grading plan. Where the value of the work to be completed does not exceed $10,000.00, a cash deposit shall be required. 
(b)  Cost estimate. The estimate of the cost shall be solely in the discretion of the engineering department. 
(c)  Forfeiture. Such cash deposit, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or corporate surety bond shall run to the city and shall be forfeitable by its terms and conditions, automatically, 15 days after notice to the permit holder or applicant that the requirements of the grading plan or temporary certificate of occupancy have not been met or for occupancy established prior to the time of applying for a permit, according to a timetable to be determined by the engineering department. 
(d)  Completion of work. Such cash deposit, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or bond shall provide that, upon the passage of 15 days after such notice in writing by first class mail to the last known address of the applicant, such amount shall automatically be transferred to the city, and the city shall thereafter be authorized to complete the work in accordance with the grading plan requirements utilizing such amount and, after retaining 15 percent of the cost of such completion as a city administrative expense, refund any balance to the permit holder or applicant who deposited such. 
(e)  Payment. Following the deposit of such cash, irrevocable letter of credit or bond, no partial payment of any portion of such amount will be permitted even though a portion of the work may be completed, but, rather, all of such amount shall be retained until the work is completed in full. 
(f)  Multiple ordinance provisions. Cash, a letter of credit or a bond posted to guarantee completion of work pursuant to the provisions of another section of this Code or ordinance shall constitute compliance with this section if the amount of cash, letter of credit or bond is sufficient to guarantee completion of the work under the grading plan and to ensure compliance with the requirements of such other section of this Code or ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.04.08)  
Secs. 114-62—114-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED CONDUCT 
 
Sec. 114-91. - Drainage. 
It shall be unlawful to change the existing or natural drainage of lands within the city so as to obstruct, impede, accelerate, channel or concentrate the flow of rain or surface waters onto or from the lands of another so as to cause damage thereto or create a nuisance thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.05.01)  
Sec. 114-92. - Easements and private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the flow of surface water over easements for public utilities or to impede the flow of surface water across private property in a manner different from the approved grading plan and drainage pattern. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.05.02)  
Sec. 114-93. - Landscaping. 
It shall be unlawful in landscaping, final or otherwise, to grade the surface of any property, fill it with earth, remove earth, do any planting or landscape construction or maintenance work which shall create a condition prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.05.03)  
Sec. 114-94. - Covering manholes. 
It shall be unlawful to cover up any manhole. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.05.04)  
Sec. 114-95. - Utility system. 
It shall be unlawful to cover up any part or other appurtenances of any utility system with fill dirt, landscaping berms, paving, etc., without first obtaining a permit to do so. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.05.05)  
Sec. 114-96. - Stormwater and sanitary sewer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the entry of any roof water, groundwater or surface water into the sanitary sewer system or to direct any roof water, groundwater or surface water in such a manner that it enters the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Any person who has a stormwater, roof water or groundwater connection to a sanitary sewer shall install splash blocks and conductors to carry roof water not less than five feet from the building wall and grade in accordance with this article, and such work shall be completed to the satisfaction of the engineering department within 60 days of notice to comply with this subsection. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.05.06)  
Sec. 114-97. - Footing drain discharge. 
(a)  Generally. All footing drain discharge shall be deposited into the storm sewers or other stormwater drainage facility in accordance with the city's engineering standards or upon the surface of the ground when no storm drainage facility is available. 
(b)  Deposit on surface. Where a footing drain discharge is deposited upon the surface of the ground, the place of deposit shall be in that yard area that drains directly to a street, road or alley or to the drainage easement, if possible under existing topography conditions. If it is not possible, any discharge to another property shall be far enough away from the property line so that the flow of water shall be disbursed or spread across the surface of the ground to avoid erosion or damage to adjacent properties. 
(c)  Use of pump. Whenever footing drain discharge is ejected or carried to the drainage system by means of a pump or lift and where it is not deposited on the surface of the ground, there shall be a relief line installed wherever there is a probability that the drainage system may become inoperative due to freezing or surge charging. 
(d)  New construction with sump. For all new construction, where a sump or similar pump or lift is used, the discharged water shall be deposited directly into a storm sewer or a drainage system approved by the engineering department. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.06)  
Sec. 114-98. - Deposit of soils, materials, debris. 
(a)  Ditches or drains. Dirt, sand, gravel, clay or any other type of soil; builders' materials of any sort or nature; and debris from any building operation shall not be moved into or deposited in any ditch, drainage course, drain or gutter so as to block the ditch, drainage course, drain or gutter. 
(b)  Street right-of-way. No materials of any sort or debris shall be unloaded or deposited or stored on any lands dedicated to the public use for right-of-way for a street, but the materials shall only be unloaded onto, deposited or stored on the private land adjoining such publicly dedicated right-of-way for street purposes to be served by such building materials. 
(c)  Violations. Procedures for violation of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Responsible party. The building contractor shall be held prima facie responsible for the existence of any prohibited materials in ditches, drainage courses, drains or gutters on or in front of the lot upon which the building contractor is conducting his operation. Such area in front of the lot shall be determined by the continuation of the side lot lines in their same direction until they cross the ditch, etc., and the areas between such extended lines. 
(2)  Notice to correct. Upon the discovery by the city inspector of the deposit of any such materials in violation of this section in roadside ditches, he shall thereupon notify the building contractor of such violation by posting a notice on or in the house or structure being built upon the adjoining land or by nailing such notice to a stake placed in the ground in a conspicuous position. 
(3)  Stop work order. At the same time such notice is posted, the city inspector shall, in a like manner, post a stop work order on the building, which will prohibit any further grading or drainage work. 
a.  Withdrawal. If, within 24 hours after the posting of the first notice as provided in this subsection, the building contractor shall have removed all prohibited materials and deposited the materials on private lands adjoining, the city inspector shall authorize the withdrawal of the stop work order. 
b.  Prohibition continued. If such prohibited material is not removed and deposited upon adjoining private lands within 24 hours after the posting of such notice, the building contractor shall be guilty of a violation of this section. The stop work order shall continue in effect, and all grading and drainage work shall be prohibited until the violation is cured. 
(d)  Duration. The operation of this section shall be restricted to the time extending from the date of issuance of a building permit or land improvement permit to the date of issuance of occupancy permit. 
(e)  Exclusion. This section shall not be interpreted to refer to the depositing of any soil or debris in roadside ditches caused by the elements or by acts of nature. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.07)  
Sec. 114-99. - Grading. 
(a)  Generally. The land surrounding any home, building or structure erected in the city shall be graded so as to readily carry all rain or surface waters away from such structure to a point where it will not infiltrate around the basement wall or foundation footings and to prevent or minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  Parcels around structures. It shall be the duty of the building contractor to erect any home, building or structure in such a manner as to permit the parcel of property to be graded, and it shall be the duty of the building contractor to grade the parcel of property and implement soil erosion and sedimentation controls in accordance with the requirements of the grading plan approved pursuant to division 2 of this article and to maintain the grade and soil erosion and sedimentation controls until title to the property passes to another or until a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever last occurs. Thereafter, the owner of such property shall maintain such grade and soil erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(c)  Subdivision plats. The building contractor shall also adhere to and maintain the grades and soil erosion and sedimentation controls of any drainage plan that may have been established in any approved subdivision plat, unless different grades have been approved through the issuance of a land improvement permit. If there is no master grading and drainage plan for the plat or none which will accomplish the requirement of this section, grading and soil erosion and sedimentation controls must be completed and maintained in such a manner so as not to obstruct, impede, accelerate, channel or concentrate the flow of rain or surface waters onto or from the lands of another so as to cause damage thereto or create a nuisance thereon or result in or contribute to soil erosion or to sedimentation of the waters of the city. The building contractor shall maintain such grade and soil erosion and sedimentation controls until title to the property passes to another or until a final certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever last occurs. Thereafter, the owner of such property shall maintain such grade and soil erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(Code 1976, § 4-07.08)  
Secs. 114-100—114-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOODPLAIN USE AND REGULATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 114-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also called a 100-year frequency flood. 
Development means any humanmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, 
c.  Mudflows, and 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding, as defined in subsection (1)a. of this definition. 
Flood boundary and floodway map means an official map of the city on which the office of federal insurance and hazard mitigation has delineated both the floodway and the floodway fringe. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the city on which the federal emergency management agency and federal insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the federal emergency management agency and federal insurance administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary/floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain (regulated flood prone hazard area) means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas which, on the basis of available floodplain information, must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood. 
Floodway fringe means the area between the floodway and the boundary of the floodplain. 
Harmful increase means an unnaturally high stage on a river, stream or lake which causes or may cause damage to property, threat to life, personal injury, or damage to land or water resources. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 16, 1981. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (i) before the improvement or repair is started, or (ii) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either, (i) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions or (ii) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.02; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 10-4-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-127. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to significantly reduce hazards to persons and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in the city and to comply with the provisions and requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accordance with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and rules and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the federal emergency management agency, as published in the federal register. 
(b)  Further, the objectives of this article include: 
(1)  The protection of human life, health and property from dangerous and damaging effects of flood conditions; 
(2)  The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects, rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding, repair of flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and the redevelopment of flood-damaged homes, neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas; 
(3)  The prevention of private and public economic loss and social disruption as a result of flood conditions; 
(4)  The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the blighting influence of flood damage; 
(5)  Ensuring that the public has access to information indicating the location of land areas subject to periodic flooding; and 
(6)  Preservation of the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a base flood. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.01)  
Sec. 114-128. - Disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific methods of study. 
(b)  Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. 
(c)  Flood heights may be increased by humanmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. 
(d)  Approval of the use of land under this article shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage. 
(e)  This article does not imply that areas outside the floodplain will be free from flood damage. 
(f)  This article does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.07)  
Sec. 114-129. - Delineation of floodplain overlay zone. 
(a)  Floodplain boundaries and regulated designation of flood prone hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled Oakland County Michigan, and All Jurisdictions," and dated September 29, 2006, and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) panel numbers 26125C0379F, 0383F, 0384F, 0387F, 0389F, 0391F, 0392F, 0393F, 0394F, 0403F, 0411F, 0412F, 0413F, 0414F, 0527F, 0531F, 0532F, 0551F, and 0552F, dated September 29, 2006, are adopted by reference to be part of this article, and the areas identified in the FIS and FIRMs that are within the municipal boundaries of the city shall be conclusively deemed to be regulated as floodplains by this article. In addition, the engineering department may determine other undesignated areas are located within floodplains, as defined and regulated by this article, based upon available maps, studies and other data prepared by the city or county, state or federal agencies or upon survey information and engineering data submitted to the city pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Regulatory floodway. A regulatory floodway shall be designated within the floodplain. The areas indicated as being within the floodway on the flood boundary and floodway map shall be conclusively deemed to be regulated as a regulatory floodway by this article. In addition, the engineering department may determine other undesignated areas are located within floodways, as defined and regulated by this article, based upon available maps, studies and other data prepared by the city or county, state or federal agencies or upon survey information and engineering data submitted to the city pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Adoption of study. The study and accompanying maps are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. A copy of each shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Determination of limits. The exact locations and limits of the floodplain and the floodway shall be determined by the city engineering department after submittal by the property owner or developer of survey information and engineering data sufficient for the engineering department to make the determination. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.03; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 10-4-2006)  
Sec. 114-130. - Appeal of administrative action. 
An applicant may appeal any administrative action of the engineering department made under this article to the city council, which shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article consistent with the standards of sections 60.3(d) and 60.6(a) of the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59 et seq.). The action by the city council shall be deemed to constitute a final determination by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.04.06)  
Secs. 114-131—114-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FLOODPLAIN USE PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Environmental requirements, § 138-142. 
 
Sec. 114-156. - Required. 
No activity regulated under division 3 of this article shall be undertaken except as authorized by a floodplain use permit to be issued by the engineering department upon: 
(1)  A showing that all necessary development permits have been issued by appropriate local, state and federal authorities, including a floodplain permit approval, or letter of no authority from the state department of natural resources under authority of part 31 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.). Where a development permit cannot be issued prior to the issuance of a floodplain use permit, a letter from the issuing agency indicating intent to issue contingent only upon proof of zoning compliance shall be acceptable. 
(2)  Compliance with this article. 
(3)  Compliance with all other applicable sections of this Code. 
(4)  Adoption of a resolution of approval by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.04.01)  
Sec. 114-157. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain use permit shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing existing structures, topographical features, and all proposed changes. The site plan shall include existing and proposed ground elevations and contours (one-foot intervals) and a contour showing the base flood elevation; 
(2)  The elevation in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) of the lowest floor of all structures; 
(3)  Where floodproofing will be employed, the elevation in relation to NAVD88 to which a structure will be floodproofed; 
(4)  Where floodproofing will be employed, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing criteria of this article will be met; 
(5)  Where it can be determined that development is proposed within the regulatory floodway, a certification as required by subsection 114-191(c); 
(6)  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(7)  Proof of development permission from appropriate local, state and federal agencies as required by subsection 114-156(1), including a floodplain permit approval, or a letter of no authority from the state department of natural resources under authority of part 31 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.); 
(8)  Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or greater than five acres in size; and 
(9)  Such other additional information, requested by the engineering department, building department, or the city council, which may be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  The applicant may be required to submit engineering data prepared or certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.04.02; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 10-4-2006)  
Sec. 114-158. - Fee. 
The applicant for a floodplain use permit shall pay the fees required in division 3 of article II of chapter 110. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.04.03)  
Sec. 114-159. - Approval. 
(a)  Referral for review. An application for a floodplain use permit shall be referred by the engineering department to the city council for review and consideration as to whether or not a resolution of approval should be adopted. 
(b)  Advisory recommendations. The city council may, in its sole discretion, request advisory recommendations from the engineering department, the planning commission, or other municipal officials or bodies. 
(c)  Criteria. A resolution of approval shall be adopted by the city council if it determines that the proposed use would be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare after considering the following factors: 
(1)  Private or community need for the proposed facility or use; 
(2)  Importance of a proposed waterfront location; 
(3)  Alternative locations not subject to flooding; 
(4)  Compatibility with existing and proposed floodplain development and use; 
(5)  Relationship to comprehensive plans and the floodplain management program; 
(6)  Environmental compatibility; 
(7)  Danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments; 
(8)  Danger from materials swept downstream; 
(9)  Ability of public utilities to function during floods and the prevention of disease and contamination; 
(10)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage; 
(11)  Potential flood heights, velocities, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport; 
(12)  Accessibility to ordinary and emergency vehicles; and 
(13)  Such other factors as may be relevant to the proposed use and the purpose of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.04.04)  
Sec. 114-160. - Elevations required. 
The recipient of a floodplain use permit shall furnish the engineering department with a recording of the actual elevation in relation to NAVD88 of the lowest floor, of all new or substantially improved structures constructed within the floodplain, and for floodproofed structures the elevation to which the structure was floodproofed. Such elevations shall be certified by a licensed professional land surveyor or a licensed professional engineer licensed in the State of Michigan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.04.05; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 10-4-2006)  
Sec. 114-161. - Duration. 
A floodplain use permit shall remain effective for as long as the site plan, plat, building permit or landfill permit for the floodplain development or filling remains effective. The floodplain use permit may be extended upon application to and approval by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.04.07)  
Secs. 114-162—114-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 114-191. - Floodway protection standards. 
(a)  Floodplain development. New construction, alterations, additions, substantial improvements and all other development, including fill, shall be prohibited within the floodplain, except where it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not harmfully increase the water surface elevation of a base flood. In determining whether a harmful increase will occur, compliance with part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.) and Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) shall be required, provided that the allowable increase shall not exceed one foot at any location in the area. 
(b)  Applicability. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply within the regulatory floodway. Subsection (c) of this section shall be applied to land situated within the regulatory floodway. 
(c)  Regulatory floodway development. All development occurring within the regulatory floodway shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Encroachments prohibited. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, alterations or additions, substantial improvements and other development shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Exception. Exception to the prohibition in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall only be made upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the department of natural resources that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not result in any increase in flood levels within the area during the occurrence of a base flood. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.05; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 10-4-2006)  
Sec. 114-192. - Construction standards. 
There shall be no new construction, alterations or additions, or substantial improvements to existing buildings or changes in existing topographical features within the floodplain except as follows: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements within a floodplain shall be: 
a.  Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and 
c.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(3)  All new and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
(4)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(6)  Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this division. 
(7)  The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse not subject to state or federal regulations designed to ensure flood-carrying capacity shall be maintained. 
(8)  Available flood hazard data from federal, state or other sources shall be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this division. Data furnished by the office of federal insurance and hazard mitigation shall take precedence over data from other sources. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.06.01)  
Sec. 114-193. - Manufactured homes prohibited. 
Manufactured homes shall not be placed within the floodplain. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.06.02)  
Sec. 114-194. - Building or structure elevations. 
(a)  Determination. Where buildings or structures are permitted on the floodplain or on any land immediately adjoining the floodplain by other sections of this article, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined by the use to be made thereof in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Residential structures. The lowest floor of a residential structure shall be elevated at least two feet above the base flood level. 
(2)  Nonresidential structures. The lowest floor of a nonresidential structure shall be elevated at least two feet above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied and that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with a base flood. 
(3)  Parking and accessory structures. Floors of parking lot attendants' booths, garages, parking areas, carports, and similar accessory structures may be located below the base flood level. 
(4)  Enclosures below lowest floor. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(b)  Exception for land adjoining floodplain. Neither the elevations nor floodproofing required in this section shall apply to and no floodplain use permit shall be required for new construction or substantial improvements on land immediately adjoining the floodplain when the engineering department determines, based on a certificate provided by a licensed professional engineer, that the new construction or substantial improvement will not be located within the area reasonably expected to be influenced or affected by hydrostatic flood forces normally associated with a base flood. 
(Code 1976, § 4-08.06.03)  
Chapter 118. - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; land division, ch. 122; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Historical records and papers, MCL 399.5; historical activities, MCL 399.171 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 118-1—118-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Historic districts, MCL 399.201 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 118-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alteration means any excavation, new construction, reconstruction, exterior modification, removal, or addition of any exterior feature, including a change of an exposed surface material, or other work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
Commission means the city historic districts commission. 
Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource, including but not limited to demolition by neglect. 
Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
Historic district means an area or group of areas, not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
Historic preservation means the identification, protection, conservation, rehabilitation, restoration, evaluation, reconstruction, or establishment of resources that are significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the city, the state, or the United States. 
Noncontiguous historic district means an historic district created by the city for purposes of this article which is not included in the Stony Creek and Winkler Mill Pond Districts as described in section 118-99 or 118-100 of this article. 
Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource pursuant to a finding under subsection 118-164(d). 
Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer between other resources. 
Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for the purposes of this article. 
Proposed historic district means an area or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by the study committee in accordance with the procedure set forth in division 4 of this article for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of this article. 
Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, or site, object, feature, or open space located within a historic district. 
Site feature means a driveway, walkway, lighting, bench, fountain, well, terrace, canal system, plant or tree, berm, drainage or irrigation course or other object, improvement, or archaeological feature that is important in defining the history of the site and its overall historic character. 
Structure means any abovegrade feature including any building, construction, edifice, or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together by humans in some definite manner, including sheds, fences, walls, barns, carriage houses, outbuildings, signs, porches, decks, railings, and bridges. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." 
Study committee means the city historic districts study committee. 
Work means any construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.02; Ord. No. 449, § 1, 10-20-1999; Ord. No. 528, § 1, 1-12-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 399.201a.  
Sec. 118-27. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.), historic preservation is declared to be a public purpose, and the purpose of this article shall be to do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving historic districts in the city that reflect elements of the city's history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the surrounding areas. 
(3)  Foster civic beauty. 
(4)  Strengthen the local economy. 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the city, state and nation. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.01)  
Sec. 118-28. - Ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary or emergency maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.09.04)  
Sec. 118-29. - Enforcement agency. 
The city building department shall be charged with the enforcement of this article. Authorized representatives of the department are designated as ordinance enforcement officers for purposes of this article with the powers set forth in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.03)  
Sec. 118-30. - Violations. 
(a)  Civil fine. Any person who violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be fined as provided in section 66-37. 
(b)  Restoration. Any person who violates this article may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.11)  
Sec. 118-31. - Authority to acquire historic property. 
(a)  Generally. If all efforts by the historic districts commission to preserve a historic resource fail or if it is determined by the city council that public ownership is most suitable for historic preservation, the city council, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the historic resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants, or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. 
(b)  Recommendation. Such acquisition shall be based on the written recommendation of the historic districts commission. 
(c)  Sale of resources. The city may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.09.01)  
Sec. 118-32. - Appeal from commission decisions. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the historic districts commission concerning a permit application under division 5 of this article may file an appeal, in accordance with section 5(2) of Public Act. No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.205(2), MSA 5.3407(5), (2)), with the state historic preservation review board of the state historical commission. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the commission's decision is furnished to the applicant. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic districts commission may, in accordance with section 11 of Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.211, MSA 5.3407(11)), appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under division 5 of this article may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the state historic preservation review board. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.10)  
Sec. 118-33. - Duty to maintain and repair. 
(a)  Prevention of deterioration. Every resource in any historic district shall be maintained by the owner or person in control thereof so as to: 
(1)  Prevent deterioration of exterior walls or vertical supports, roofs, or horizontal members, exterior chimneys, exterior plaster or mortar, any documented exterior architectural feature; and 
(2)  Prevent deterioration by the weather due to inadequate weatherproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including the necessity of replacing broken windows and doors, if the deterioration has or is likely to cause structural weakness or to otherwise affect the continuation of the resource as a historic resource. 
(b)  Demolition by neglect. Upon a finding by the historic districts commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the commission may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require repair. Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect; or 
(2)  Repair by city. If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the city or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 90-30 of this Code. The city or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this subsection only after obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.09.02)  
Sec. 118-34. - Work done without permit. 
(a)  Restoration by owner. When work has been done upon a resource without a permit and the historic districts commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require the owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Court order. If the owner does not comply with the restoration requirements within a reasonable time, the city may seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  Restoration by city. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the city or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. 
(d)  Entry onto property. When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, the city or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.09.03)  
Sec. 118-35. - Review of work in proposed districts. 
(a)  Review of permit applications. Under this article, permit applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Resolution. Upon receipt from the historic districts commission of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the city council may, in its discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the commission as prescribed in division 5 of this article. 
(2)  Commission review. The historic districts commission shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district. 
(3)  Time limit. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year or until such time as the city council approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Emergency moratorium. If the city council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to historic resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district, based on evidence presented by the historic districts commission to support the determination of the city council, the city council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The city council may extend the emergency moratorium for one additional period not to exceed six months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to historic resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a historic resource subject to an emergency moratorium shall be suspended for the duration of the moratorium 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-06.08.01, 4-06.08.02)  
Secs. 118-36—118-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Historic district commission, MCL 399.204. 
 
Sec. 118-61. - Created; membership. 
(a)  Created. There is created the city historic districts commission, which shall consist of nine members who reside in the city. 
(b)  Tenure. Members shall be appointed by the city council for terms of office of three years. Terms shall expire on December 31 of the year of expiration. 
(c)  Reappointment. Members of the historic districts commission shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(d)  Filling vacancy. A vacancy occurring in the membership of the historic districts commission for any cause shall be filled by a person appointed by the city council for the duration of the unexpired term. The appointment shall be made within 60 days after the vacancy occurs. 
(e)  General membership requirement. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest or knowledge of historic preservation. 
(f)  Special membership requirements. At least two members of the historic districts commission shall be appointed from a list of residents submitted by a duly organized and existing preservation society and at least one member of the historic districts commission shall be either an architect duly registered in the state or a graduate of an accredited school of architecture who has two years of architectural experience, if such person resides in the city and is available for appointment. To the extent available, the city council shall also appoint to the commission an archaeologist, an historian, and an architectural historian who meet the professional qualifications specified by the national park service in 35 CFR 61. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.05.01; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 2-26-2003)  
Sec. 118-62. - Compensation. 
The members of the historic districts commission shall be paid on a per-meeting basis at a rate set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.05.02; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-63. - Officers. 
(a)  Generally. The historic districts commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary, whose terms of office shall be fixed by the commission. 
(b)  Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside over the historic districts commission and shall have the right to vote. The chairperson shall make reports as needed to the city council, mayor, and other city boards, commissions, and departments. The chairperson shall sign certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed, and denials. 
(c)  Vice-chairperson. The vice-chairperson shall, in case of the absence or disability of the chairperson, perform the duties of the chairperson. 
(d)  Secretary. The secretary shall: 
(1)  Keep records. Oversee the keeping of all resolutions, proceedings, maps, archives, and actions of the historic districts commission; and 
(2)  Sign documents. Be authorized to sign official historic districts commission communications. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.05.03; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-64. - Proceedings. 
(a)  Quorum. A simple majority of the current membership of the historic districts commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. 
(b)  Rules of procedure. The historic districts commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of its business which shall provide for the time and place of its regular meetings. 
(c)  Meetings. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Open meetings. All meetings of the historic districts commission shall be open to the public and held in compliance with the open meetings act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Any person or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter applicable to the business at hand before the historic districts commission makes its decision. 
(2)  Special meetings. The historic districts commission shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the chairperson or by at least three members of the historic districts commission. All members of the historic districts commission shall receive written notification in advance of such special meetings. 
(3)  Notice of meetings. Notices of all meetings, including an agenda of matters to be considered, shall be transmitted to the mayor, the city council, the city planning commission, and any existing historical societies in the city. 
(d)  Votes. The affirmative vote of a majority of the historic districts commission members present at a meeting where a quorum exists shall be required for the transaction of business, adoption of resolutions or motions, or any other action by the historic districts commission. 
(e)  Records. The historic districts commission shall make and file with the city clerk a record, which shall be open to public examination, in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq., of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions. 
(f)  Annual report. The historic districts commission shall submit an annual report of its activities to the mayor, city council, and city planning commission, and shall submit such special reports as requested by the city council. 
(g)  Information and recommendations. The city council, mayor, or other city boards, commissions, or departments may request reports, studies, documentation, and/or recommendations from the historic districts commission, which shall attempt to provide the requested material. In addition, the historic districts commission may submit any materials to such persons or entities on its own initiative. The commission may also, through the mayor, request city officials and employees to provide information and records to or to meet with the commission or any committee of the commission. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.05.04; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999; Ord. No. 528, § 2, 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 118-65. - Duties. 
Except as otherwise provided, the historic districts commission shall have the duty of administering and implementing the provisions of this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to extend the historic districts commission's jurisdiction and authority to any property which is not located within a historic district established or proposed under this article. This responsibility shall include the historic districts commission having the duty to: 
(1)  Review plans. Review and approve or disapprove plans and applications for work on resources within historic districts, regardless of whether a building permit is required, as more fully set forth in division 5 of this article; 
(2)  Maintain roster of potential districts. Maintain a current listing of potential historic districts and a brief statement of the significance of each; and 
(3)  Design review standards. Follow design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment to carry out its duties under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.05.05; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-66. - Powers. 
Except as otherwise provided, the historic districts commission shall have the duty of administering and implementing the provisions of this article. This responsibility shall include the historic districts commission having the authority to: 
(1)  Inspection. Request through the mayor periodic inspections of all designated historic districts by appropriate city officers for violations of this article. 
(2)  Request enforcement. Request through the mayor enforcement of this article by the appropriate city officers. 
(3)  Call in experts. Call in experts to aid it in its deliberations, within the limits of its budget, or upon the approval of the city council. 
(4)  Seek injunctive relief. When there is imminent danger of the loss or irreparable alteration of a historic resource protected by this article, request the city to seek such injunctive relief as it deems necessary to preserve the historic resource. 
(5)  Issue certificates, denials or notices. Issue certificates, denials or notices as follows: 
a.  Certificates of appropriateness. Issue certificates of appropriateness permitting work that is determined to meet the criteria set forth in division 5 of this article; 
b.  Denial. Issue a written denial for work that is not appropriate and will not be permitted; 
c.  Notice to proceed. Issue a notice to proceed when work is not appropriate but will be permitted due to financial hardship or community needs; 
d.  Determine no effect. Determine the work does not affect the exterior features of the resource. 
(6)  Advice and guidance to property owners. Render advice and guidance to property owners with respect to any proposed work on a historic resource located within a historic district. 
(7)  Dissemination of information to public. Disseminate information to the public concerning those resources deemed worthy of historic preservation and encourage and advise property owners in the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of historic resources. 
(8)  Advice regarding city-owned historic resources. Advise the city regarding the use of all city-owned historic resources for the purpose of enhancing the goals of historic restoration, education, and preservation. 
(9)  Zoning variances. Where the commission determines the granting of a requested zoning variance would, due to peculiar design or construction, aid or assist with the preservation or enhancement of the historic appearance, the commission may so advise the zoning board of appeals. 
(10)  Historic trees. Consider and designate historic trees in accordance with division 4 of article III of chapter 126 of this Code. 
(11)  Other powers. Have such other powers as are reasonable and necessary for the efficient administration and implementation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.05.06; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-67. - Gifts, grants and bequests. 
(a)  Acceptance and administration. The historic districts commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Public and private grants and funding. Advise the city administration regarding the use of city, state, federal, and private grants and funding for the purpose of historic restoration, education, and preservation. 
(2)  Private gifts. Accept in the name of the city and oversee public and private gifts, grants, or bequests for historical purposes. Upon the approval of the city council and in accordance with the donation policy established for the historic districts commission, accept, in the name of the city, grants, gifts, bequests, and donations, and advise the city administration on their use. 
(b)  Administration of funds. The city treasurer shall hold the funds as trustee of the historic districts commission for all gifts, grants, bequests, and donations, and authorized expenditures shall be certified to the city treasurer by the director of the building department in accordance with established city procedures. 
(1)  Annual budget. As to all funds to be made available by the city council, the historic districts commission shall annually submit a budget as a city department. 
(2)  Annual report. The commission shall annually report to the city council any money it shall receive or expend. 
(c)  Title to real property. Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, the title to all real property accepted and administered by the historic districts commission shall be received and held in the name of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.05.07; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Secs. 118-68—118-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DESIGNATED DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 118-96. - Historic districts created. 
Historic districts within the city are created, which districts shall include the described lands and the historic and nonhistoric resources situated thereon, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.04; Ord. No. 418, § 1(4-06.04), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 438, § 1(4-06.04), 12-16-1998)  
Sec. 118-97. - Recording of designation. 
Within 30 days after any land has been designated or eliminated under this article as part of a historic district, the mayor shall cause a document to be recorded with the county register of deeds describing such land and indicating it has been included in or removed from a historic district pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.04.04; Ord. No. 418, § 1(4-06.04.04), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 438, § 1(4-06.04.04), 12-16-1998)  
Sec. 118-98. - Noncontiguous historic districts. 
The following described parcels shall be noncontiguous historic districts, as illustrated on map 118-B included at the end of this article, except selected sites within the Stoney Creek and Winkler Mill Historic Districts, which is a part of this article: 
Ref. 
No. 	District 	Street Address 	Sidwell 
Number 
 3 	NONCO 	3861 Adams 	15-31-301-011 
 4 	NONCO 	1100 Mead 	15-01-100-001 
 5 	NONCO 	1081 E. Auburn 	15-33-200-009 
 6 	NONCO 	1950 Avon Rd. 	15-13-427-002 
 8 	NONCO 	1005 Dutton 	15-04-227-001 
 9 	NONCO 	1481 Dutton 	15-04-201-002 
10 	NONCO 	Brewster Cemetery 	15-05-326-011 
12 	NONCO 	1207 Livernois 	15-04-427-008 
17 	NONCO 	1425 E. Auburn 	15-25-382-013 
21 	NONCO 	1160 South Blvd. 	15-33-476-020 
22 	NONCO 	1580 South Blvd. 	15-33-378-031 
23 	NONCO 	1365 W. Tienken 	15-09-201-005 
24 	NONCO 	1750 W. Tienken 	15-04-351-001 
26 	NONCO 	2498 W. Tienken 	15-05-454-005 
41 	NONCO 	1812 S. Rochester 	15-22-451-014 
44 	NONCO 	1568 W. Avon 	15-16-377-037 
45 	NONCO 	2332 W. Avon 	15-17-454-017 
46 	NONCO 	1631 W. Avon 	15-21-126-037 
47 	NONCO 	1470 W. Tienken 	15-04-377-035 
50 	NONCO 	3610 S. Livernois 	15-33-426-006 
52 	NONCO 	861 E. Avon 	15-14-477-018 
53 	NONCO 	1841 Crooks 	15-20-428-003 
55 	NONCO 	3030 Crooks 	15-32-228-037 
56 	NONCO 	Parcel located within Rochester College 	15-15-451-009 
57 	NONCO 	1021 Harding 	15-15-327-002 
60 	NONCO 	1385 S. Adams 	15-20-151-003 
70 	NONCO 	23 Mi. & Dequindre (canal) 	15-13-426-001 
80 	NONCO 	71 N. Livernois 	15-09-476-041 
81 	NONCO 	3976 S. Livernois 	15-33-476-027 
82 	NONCO 	6841 and 6875 N. Rochester Office Buildings as described and depicted in Appendix A 	15-02-300-015 
15-02-300-004 
 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.01; Ord. No. 418, § 1(4-06.04.01), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 438, § 1(4-06.04.01), 12-16-1998; Ord. No. 527, § 1, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 560, § 1, 11-8-2010; Ord. No. 562, § 1, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 570, § 1 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 578, § 1, 6-10-2013 )  
Sec. 118-99. - The Stoney Creek Historic District. 
The Stoney Creek Historic District shall include the following described properties and the area illustrated on map 118-A included at the end of this article, which is made a part of this article: 
Ref. 
No. 	District 	Street Address 	Sidwell Number 
13 	SC 	1005 Van Hoosen 	15-11-276-003 
14 	SC 	1005 Van Hoosen 	15-02-476-001 
14 	SC 	1005 Van Hoosen 	15-02-476-003 
15 	SC 	1009 Van Hoosen 	15-02-476-004 
15 	SC 	1009 Van Hoosen 	15-02-476-005 
27 	SC 	1251 Washington 	15-01-351-004 
29 	SC 	1271 Washington 	15-01-351-002 
30 	SC 	1291 Washington 	15-01-351-003 
62 	SC 	950 & 960 E. Tienken 	15-01-477-001 
63 	SC 	972 & 978 E. Tienken 	15-01-352-001 
66 	SC 	947 E. Tienken 	15-01-351-005 
67 	SC 	1046 E. Tienken 	15-01-352-005 
68 	SC 	1050 E. Tienken 	15-01-352-006 
69 	SC 	Old Stoney Creek School 	15-01-352-006 
71 	SC 	1005 Runyon 	15-01-352-018 
74 	SC 	1081 E. Tienken 	15-01-351-020 
75 	SC 	999 E. Tienken 	15-01-351-014 
75 	SC 	999 E. Tienken 	15-01-351-015 
75 	SC 	999 E. Tienken 	15-01-351-006 
76 	SC 	947 E. Tienken 	15-01-351-005 
77 	SC 	991 Runyon 	15-01-352-028 
 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.01; Ord. No. 418, § 1(4-06.04.01), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 438, § 1(4-06.04.01), 12-16-1998)  
Sec. 118-100. - The Winkler Mill Pond Historic District. 
The Winkler Mill Pond Historic District shall include the following described properties and the area illustrated on map 118-A included at the end of this article, which is made a part of this article: 
Ref. 
No. 	District 	Street Address 	Sidwell Number 
31 	WM 	1921 Washington 	15-01-227-007 
31 	WM 	1921 Washington 	15-01-227-008 
32 	WM 	1740 Washington 	15-01-277-018 
33 	WM 	6400 Winkler Mill 	15-01-201-003 
34 	WM 	6081 Winkler Mill 	15-01-226-001 
35 	WM 	6381 Winkler Mill 	15-01-227-017 
36 	WM 	6425 Winkler Mill 	15-01-227-018 
37 	WM 	6250 Winkler Mill 	15-01-201-011 
 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.04.02; Ord. No. 418, § 1(4-06.06.02), 8-6-1997; Ord. No. 438, § 1(4-06.04.02), 12-16-1998) 
 
Map 118-A 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.0A(app. A)) 
City of Rochester Hills 
Non-Contiguous 
Historic Districts Map 
Map 118-B 
 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.0B(app. B); Ord. No. 527, § 2, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 555, § 2, 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 560, § 1, 11-8-2010; Ord. No. 570, § 1 2-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 578, § 2, 6-10-2013 )  
Secs. 118-101—118-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PROCEDURE TO ESTABLISH, MODIFY OR ELIMINATE DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Procedures to establish additional historic districts, modify existing boundaries of district and eliminate existing district, MCL 399.214. 
 
Sec. 118-126. - Authority. 
The city council may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-127. - Initiation by commission. 
The historic districts commission may initiate the modification, establishment, or elimination procedures set out in this division on its own motion and request that the study committee perform the study and reporting process set forth in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.08; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-128. - Historic districts study committee. 
The city council shall establish a historic districts study committee as a standing committee to conduct the duties and activities prescribed in this section on a continuing basis. 
(1)  Composition of study committee. The study committee shall be comprised of not less than five members. The city council shall appoint at least two historic districts commission members to the study committee. 
(2)  Member qualifications. The majority of members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. 
(3)  Term. Study committee members shall be appointed for two-year terms, except the initial appointments of some members shall be for less than two years so that the initial appointments are staggered and subsequent appointments do not recur at the same time. 
(4)  Additional members. If deemed advisable, the city council may, from time to time, appoint additional members to the study committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be relieved. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-129. - Initial determination and investigation. 
Upon receipt of a request to establish, modify or eliminate a historic district, the city council, after making a determination that there are reasonable grounds for such a request, may refer the request to the study committee to conduct an investigation in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.01; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999; Ord. No. 528, § 3, 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 118-130. - Duties of study committee. 
The study committee shall do the following: 
(1)  Photographic inventory. Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved by the bureau of history of the department of state. 
(2)  Basic research. Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic resources located within that district. 
(3)  Determine number of resources. Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the study committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the U.S. secretary of the interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60, and criteria established or approved by the Michigan Department of History, Arts and Libraries, if any. 
(4)  Preliminary report. Prepare a preliminary historic districts study committee report that addresses at a minimum all of the following: 
a.  The charge of the committee. 
b.  The composition of the committee membership. 
c.  The historic districts studied. 
d.  The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on maps. 
e.  The history of each proposed historic district. 
f.  The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
g.  The study committee's recommendation as to the establishment, modification or elimination of the historic districts. 
(5)  Transmittal of preliminary report. Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendations to the city planning commission, to the Michigan Department of History, Arts, and Libraries, to the Michigan Historical Commission, and to the state historic preservation review board. 
(6)  Availability to public. Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999; Ord. No. 528, § 3, 1-12-2009)  
Sec. 118-131. - Public hearing. 
Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the study committee shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.) which shall include: 
(1)  Notice to owners. A written notice to the owners of all properties to be included in such districts by regular mail addressed to each owner as such address appears on the city tax rolls, at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing; 
(2)  Public notice and newspaper publication. Public notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.) and shall be published at least once in a newspaper designated by the city having general circulation within the city at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.04; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-132. - Final report. 
The study committee shall prepare and submit, within one year after the date of the public hearing, a final report with its recommendations and those of the planning commission to the mayor and city council. If the study committee's recommendation is to establish, modify or eliminate an historic district, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.05; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-133. - City council action. 
(a)  Generally. After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment, modification or elimination of a historic district, the city council, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance to establish modify or eliminate a historic district. 
(b)  Record notice. If the city adopts an ordinance establishing a historic district or altering the boundaries of an existing district, the city shall record a notice with the register of deeds as set forth in section 118-97. 
(c)  Petition for historic district. The city shall not adopt an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the city tax rolls, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.06; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-134. - Elimination of district. 
If considering elimination of a historic district, the study committee shall follow the procedures set forth in this division for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing and issuing a final report, but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(1)  Lost physical characteristics. The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled establishment of the district; 
(2)  Insignificance. The historic district was not significant in a way previously defined; or 
(3)  Defective procedure. The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.06.07; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Secs. 118-135—118-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION OR MODIFICATION OF RESOURCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Permit, application, certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed, fee, MCL 399.205. 
 
Sec. 118-161. - Permission required. 
Before any work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district, the person proposing to do the work shall apply for and obtain permission from the historic districts commission. Permission is required regardless of whether a building permit is required. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.01)  
Sec. 118-162. - Procedure. 
A person seeking to perform work on a resource within a historic district shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  Information for commission. Any such person shall provide the information in this subsection to the historic districts commission at least three weeks prior to the meeting at which the matter is to be considered. All required information shall be submitted in duplicate and shall include the person's name and address. The scale used for plans and drawings shall be indicated in the lower right corner. The following information shall be included: 
a.  Site plan. A site plan drawn to an appropriate scale and describing, dimensioning and identifying all major features including property lines, main buildings, outbuildings, parking areas, drives, walkways, fences, major trees, significant variations in grade elevation, relationship to adjacent streets and structures, and the relationship of major features to property lines. A north point shall be indicated on the plan. 
b.  Plans and elevations for structure. Plans drawn to scale (minimum scale of one-quarter inch equals one foot for residential and one-eighth inch equals one foot for commercial) illustrating the entire exterior perimeter of new resources, existing resources on which work is to be done, and any proposed work, together with pertinent dimensions and depiction of major exterior features including doors, windows, bays, porches, architectural trim and elevations. Details pertaining to exterior building materials shall also be provided including types, finishes and colors, kind and size of exterior wall material, and other significant architectural information. A north point shall be indicated on all plans or drawings. 
c.  Other descriptive material. The commission may consider photographs, research material or other descriptive information provided. 
The commission may relax or waive any of the information submission requirements in this subsection if the commission deems such information is not necessary to the commission's deliberations. 
(2)  Application to building department. A person requesting to do any work on a resource within a historic district shall apply to the building department and make such application by completing a building permit application accompanied by payment of any fees required in division 1 of article V of chapter 54 of this Code. The application shall be accompanied by required plans and drawings. 
(3)  Building department review. The building department shall review the completed application to ensure the proposed work will comply with applicable setback and other planning, zoning, and environmental requirements and any other applicable ordinances. 
a.  Approval. If the proposed work complies with applicable setback and other planning, zoning, and environmental requirements, the building department shall approve, in writing, the application and forward a copy of the application to the historic districts commission along with all required supporting materials that make the application complete. 
b.  Denial. The building department shall deny or reject the application if the proposed work fails to comply with applicable setback or other planning, zoning, and environmental requirements or other applicable ordinances. The denial shall be in writing and shall detail the reason for the denial. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.02; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-163. - Limitation on building permit issuance. 
A building permit shall not be issued nor shall proposed work proceed under this division until the historic districts commission has acted by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.03)  
Sec. 118-164. - Review by commission. 
(a)  Standards. In reviewing plans submitted pursuant to this division, the historic districts commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR 67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines and are established or approved by the bureau of history of the department of state. The commission shall also consider all of the following: 
(1)  The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area; 
(2)  The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area; 
(3)  The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used; and 
(4)  Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission deems relevant to its determination under the review standards and guidelines in this subsection. 
(b)  Basis for denial. Denial of any application shall be based only on the considerations set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Interior arrangement review limitation. The historic districts commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. 
(d)  Grounds for issuing notice to proceed. In addition to approval of an application pursuant to the standards contained in subsection (a) of this section, work within a historic district shall be permitted by the historic districts commission through the issuance of a notice to proceed if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the resource's occupants; 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community, and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances; 
(3)  Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other event beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; or 
(4)  Retaining of the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.04)  
Sec. 118-165. - Filing of application decision document. 
(a)  Generally. After due consideration pursuant to this division, the historic districts commission shall notify the applicant of its decision and shall file with the city building department its certificate of appropriateness, notice to proceed, or denial of the application submitted to it for review, which shall be signed by the chairperson or secretary of the commission. The commission shall state the reasons and grounds for its action in writing and in its minutes. 
(b)  Certificate of appropriateness. After a certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed has been issued and the building or demolition permit is granted to the applicant, the building department shall take such action as is necessary to require compliance with the approved building plans. The plans and specifications approved by the historic districts commission are required to be on site for inspections. The certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed shall be effective for one year unless extended by the commission. 
(c)  Denial. A denial shall be binding upon the city building department, and no permit shall be issued in such case. The denial shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Written explanation of reasons. A denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include notification of the applicant's right of appeal to the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court. 
(2)  Changes suggested. If denial occurs, either before or after a denial, the commission shall endeavor to work out a feasible plan for preservation with the applicant and may give suggestions regarding changes in the application it deems desirable to the applicant. A written notice of changes required shall be provided to the applicant. 
(3)  Right of resubmission. The applicant may make modifications to the plans and shall have the right to resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.05)  
Sec. 118-166. - Failure to act. 
The failure of the historic districts commission to render a decision within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the commission pursuant to this division, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the commission, shall be deemed to constitute approval. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.06)  
Sec. 118-167. - Plans for preserving valuable structures. 
If an application for work is submitted under this division that will adversely affect the exterior appearance of a resource or for moving or demolition of a resource which the historic districts commission considers valuable to the city, state or nation and the commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state or nation, the commission shall endeavor to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.07)  
Sec. 118-168. - Demolition or moving of resources. 
It shall be the public policy of the historic districts commission and the city to discourage the demolition, demolition by neglect, or moving of historic resources within a historic district. Applications to demolish a resource shall include a detailed explanation of why the resource needs to be demolished, and what will occur on the site after the demolition. 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.08; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 10-20-1999)  
Sec. 118-169. - Demolition of hazardous structures. 
(a)  Commencement. If any structure within a historic district has deteriorated to the extent the building department believes the structure should be demolished, repaired, or secured under article V of chapter 18 pertaining to dangerous buildings, proceedings under such article may be commenced. 
(b)  Petition for permission. After a hearing and determination by the hearing officer that the structure should be demolished, but before ordering it demolished, the building department shall petition the historic districts commission for permission to demolish the structure. 
(c)  Written notice of hearing and petition. The property owner shall be given written notice of the petition to demolish and the hearing of the historic districts commission on the petition. 
(d)  Issuance of notice to proceed. The historic districts commission shall issue a notice to proceed with demolition of the structure if it determines that the conditions prevailing satisfy the standards contained in subsection 118-164(d). 
(Code 1976, § 4-06.07.09; Ord. No. 442, § 1, 7-21-1999; Ord. No. 528, § 4, 1-12-2009)  
Chapter 122. - LAND DIVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance approving or accepting any subdivision or plat saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(4); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; floods, ch. 114; historical preservation, ch. 118; natural resources, ch. 126; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 122-1—122-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DIVISION OR PARTITION OF LAND 
 
Sec. 122-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person who is seeking approval for a division or partition pursuant to this article. 
Buildable means having sufficient upland area outside of wetlands, and required buffer, and floodplains to meet minimum structure setback, floor area, parking, sewage disposal, and accessory building and use requirements, unless, prior to submitting the land division request, a wetland or floodplain use permit is obtained allowing construction in the wetland, or required buffer, or floodplain. 
Divide or partition means splitting or separating a parcel or tract of land into parts for purposes of sale or lease for more than one year or for building development, where the splitting and separating is not pursuant to platting procedures under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). 
Land means the surface area known as real estate. 
Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
Parcel or tract means a continuous area or acreage of land under the ownership of the same person. 
Person means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Plat means a map or chart approved for the division of land pursuant to state laws. 
Private road means an area of land used for ingress and egress to and from land which does not abut a public road, and such area is not owned or maintained by the public. 
Public road means an open and improved way for passage or travel which is publicly owned and maintained, and certified under Public Act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651 et seq., MSA 9.1097(1) et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 4-02.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 122-27. - Purpose. 
It is determined it is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the city to regulate the division and partitioning of land in the city which is not otherwise subject to platting procedures and requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 4-02.01)  
Sec. 122-28. - Division or partitioning of land. 
(a)  Pursuant to land division act. It shall be unlawful for any person to divide or partition any lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat or to divide or partition any unplatted parcel or tract of land, except in accordance with this article, unless the division or partition is approved and a part of a recorded plat pursuant to the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). 
(b)  Authorized. A lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat may be divided or partitioned into not more than four parts, and an unplatted parcel or tract of land may be partitioned or divided, if it is not in violation of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), if there is compliance with the following: 
(1)  Approval. An approval pursuant to this article shall be obtained prior to the dividing or partitioning of land. 
(2)  Minimum lot size and front width. Except as provided in this subsection, the minimum lot size in area and the minimum front lot line width of any lot, outlot, or other parcel of land shall be in compliance with the applicable requirements of the city zoning ordinance in chapter 138 of this Code, as amended, and all resulting parcels shall be buildable sites, having sufficient upland area outside of wetlands, and required buffer, and floodplains to meet minimum structure setback, floor area, parking, sewage disposal, and accessory building and use requirements, unless prior to submitting the land division request a wetland or floodplain use permit is obtained allowing construction in the wetland, or required buffer, or floodplain. 
a.  However, when the partitioning or dividing of such land is for the immediate development and use of such divided or partitioned land in conjunction with the adjoining lot, outlot, or parcel, any portion of such lot, outlot, or parcel which does not meet the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance in chapter 138 or which is not a buildable site after division and partition shall not be developed or used except in conjunction with the lot, outlot, or parcel immediately adjoining such. 
b.  The fact that a resulting parcel is a buildable site at the time that a division occurs shall not constitute an assurance that future requirements of this Code will not render such parcel unbuildable. 
(3)  Lots without utilities. If public sewer and water is not available, the resulting lot size and width of any residential lot shall not be less than the minimum requirements of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), currently 12,000-square foot lot area minimum and a 65-foot lot width minimum. 
(4)  Tax or assessment liens. Any past due and current taxes or special assessments upon the property shall be paid. 
(5)  Access. Every resultant parcel shall abut a public road, or, if there is no public road, there shall be a private road constructed and approved pursuant to section 122-31 prior to any division or partition. 
(Code 1976, § 4-02.03) 
State Law reference— Further partition or division of property in a recorded plat, MCL 560.263, MSA 26.430(263).  
Sec. 122-29. - Approval submissions. 
(a)  Application. An applicant for a division or partition regulated by this article shall submit to the city assessing department an application on the forms provided by the department setting forth the information required by this article and such other information which is determined to be necessary. 
(b)  Written instrument. There shall also be presented, for approval, a written instrument fully executed in a form legally sufficient for recording with the county register of deeds. Such instrument shall contain a legal description of all of the lots, outlots, and/or parts that will result from the partition or division of the parcel described therein. 
(c)  Affidavit. If the division or partition of the parcel will result in any lot or parcel which is not a buildable site or which will have a minimum lot size less than the requirements of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.) and/or the applicable provisions of the city zoning ordinance in chapter 138, as amended, the applicant shall submit, in addition, a fully executed affidavit in a form legally sufficient for recording with the county register of deeds and signed by all persons who have any legal or equitable interest in the parcel, acknowledging that they understand the partitioned or divided parcel may not thereafter be divided or used separately, but only may be used in conjunction with the adjoining parcels of land. Such affidavit shall be recorded as a covenant running with the land, and it shall be unlawful to use or develop such parcel except in conjunction with the adjoining parcel. 
(d)  Plan or drawing. 
(1)  Required. The applicant shall also submit a plan or drawing drawn to scale by a registered engineer or surveyor showing the subject property, including dimensions, and also adjoining property for at least 300 feet in all directions from the subject property so as to adequately portray the relationship of the subject property and the adjoining property. All existing and proposed buildings and structures and their dimensions and setbacks from proposed and existing property lines and the boundaries of any wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, wells, septic fields and any water, sewer, drainage, access, utility, or other easements located on or encumbering the land shall be shown on the plan or drawing. 
(2)  Waiver of requirement. The requirement of a registered engineer or surveyor may be waived by the assessing department if there is a division of a lot in a platted subdivision and no private road is to be used for ingress and egress. 
(e)  Additional data. The city departments, through the assessing department, or the city council may also require the applicant to furnish such additional data as will enable the city to make a determination. 
(f)  Fees. Fees shall be as provided in section 110-141. 
(Code 1976, § 4-02.04)  
Sec. 122-30. - Approval procedure. 
(a)  Generally. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the building department for the use of any parcel of land which has resulted from a division or partition, without the approvals required by this article, if the division or partition is accomplished after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(b)  Review. The assessing department shall refer the application to the various city departments for review and approval. 
(c)  Referral to city council. If it is determined by the building and/or assessing departments the division or partition of the resulting parcels would not be in accordance with the findings for approval set forth in subsection (c)(3) of this section, the building and/or assessing departments shall set forth, in writing, the findings reached that resulted in disapproval of the application. The application may be rejected or referred to the city council for review and final decision. If any of the resulting parcels do not abut a public road or a private road constructed and approved in accordance with this article, the matter must be referred to the city council for approval. 
(1)  Final decision. The city shall have the final decision as to any division or partition which is referred to it. 
(2)  Planning commission review. All matters referred to the city council for final decision under this article shall first be referred to the planning commission for review and recommendation before final decision. 
a.  Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing before making its recommendation to the city council. 
b.  Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the Clarion Eccentric one time only, at least five days before the hearing and notice shall be sent by regular mail at least ten days before the hearing to all property owners owning property within 300 feet of any lands involved in the application for a division or partition. 
(3)  Findings for approval. The city council shall find in each case, before giving its approval: 
a.  The division or partition will result in lots or parcels of land having a size and shape consistent and harmonious with that of other parcels in the immediate area. 
b.  There has been compliance with the requirements of this article and the other applicable provisions, standards, rules and regulations of this Code. 
c.  The provisions for any private road shall be in compliance with section 122-31 and shall not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare and shall be generally compatible with the surrounding land use and development. 
d.  The division or partition and the ability to develop buildable sites on resultant parcels will not unreasonably disturb wetlands, floodplains, or other natural features of the land or that any disturbance to these areas is permitted pursuant to a wetland and/or floodplain permit issued by the city. 
e.  The nature and location of vehicular ingress and egress will not unreasonably interfere with or hinder appropriate development and use of adjacent land or unreasonably impair the value thereof or cause a nuisance thereto. 
f.  The location, size, and layout of resultant parcels will not be unreasonably detrimental to nearby residences because of noise, fumes, lights, or other nuisances nor will it interfere with any adequate supply of light and air or otherwise endanger public health, welfare, and safety. 
g.  Adequate access to roads and utilities is provided for each resultant parcel which is otherwise a buildable site. 
(d)  Approval. If there is compliance with this article and the other applicable provisions, standards, rules and regulations of this Code, the assessing department may approve the division or partition and cause the instruments presented, along with a stamp of approval, to be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(e)  Appeal and review. Any applicant who is aggrieved by any denial or other action may appeal to the city council. The council shall thereafter review the decision or action of any department and may reverse, modify, or affirm such decision in whole or in part. 
(f)  Applicability of other sections. Approval of a land division under this article shall not in any way constitute a waiver of any other section of this Code regarding the requirements for the development of land, nor shall it ensure that the parcels of land created by the approved division are buildable under this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-02.05)  
Sec. 122-31. - Private road requirements. 
(a)  Any lot or parcel of land resulting from a division or partition of lands pursuant to this article which does not abut a public road shall abut a private road which shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum specifications. Minimum specifications shall be as follows: 
a.  Single-family residential development. All private roads in a single-family residential zoning district shall be a minimum of 60 feet in width and shall be designed and constructed by the applicant in accordance with at least the minimum requirements for class C roads as they are established by the county road commission as amended and supplemented by the adopted standards of the city. 
b.  Multiple-family, commercial development. All private roads in a multiple-family, office, or commercial development shall be a minimum of 60 feet in width and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with at least the minimum requirements for roads in the type of development under construction, as the requirements are established by the county road commission as amended and supplemented by the adopted standards of the city. 
c.  Industrial development. All private roads in an industrial development shall be a minimum of 70 feet in width and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with at least the minimum requirements for industrial subdivision roads as they are established by the county road commission as amended and supplemented by the adopted standards of the city. 
d.  Multiple developments. Private roads providing access to more than one type of development shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum requirements of the type of development requiring the higher standard. 
(2)  Construction prior to building. The road shall be constructed and established before the issuance of a building permit for any structure which may be constructed on any lot, outlot, or parcel which will result from the division or partition and for which ingress and egress will be via the road. 
(3)  Signs. A new private road shall be named, which name shall be approved by the city council, and an appropriate sign shall indicate the name. 
(4)  Utility easements. For any parcel of land not fronting on an established public road, an easement for construction and operation of public utilities including natural gas, electric and telephone service shall be provided. No division of land shall take place or building permit approved by the city until written evidence of the availability of adequate utility easements has been submitted and approved. 
(5)  Owners'/users' interests. 
a.  Part ownership. Whenever possible, all property owners who will be using the private road for ingress and egress purposes shall retain or have a part ownership interest in the road, as opposed to one party retaining the title and the others only having easement rights. 
b.  Maintenance agreement. All persons owning lands which use or may use the private road for ingress and egress shall enter into a maintenance agreement, which shall be presented to the city in a form suitable for recording with the county register of deeds. The maintenance agreement shall include at least the following: 
1.  Financing improvement and/or maintenance. A method of initiating and financing whatever improvements and/or maintenance which may be needed from time to time in order to keep the road in a reasonably good and usable condition. 
2.  Method of apportioning costs. A workable method of apportioning the cost of maintenance and improvements. 
3.  Public easements. Easements to the public for purposes of emergency and other public vehicles for whatever public services are necessary. 
4.  Noninterference provision. A provision that the owners of any and all of the property using the road shall refrain from prohibiting, restricting, limiting or in any manner interfering with normal ingress and egress and use by any of the other owners. Normal ingress and egress and use shall include use by family, guests, invitees, tradesmen, and others bound to or returning from any of the properties having a right to use the road. 
(b)  Waiver by city council. The city council may partially waive the requirements of this section to the extent it finds it necessary based upon a hardship or other similar circumstance, but any deviation shall only be after the council makes findings consistent with the findings as required by subsection 122-30(c). 
(Code 1976, § 4-02.06)  
Secs. 122-32—122-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 122-61. - Definitions. 
All terms as defined in the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.) shall control in this article unless specifically defined in this section. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets; between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of such and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
Buildable means having sufficient land area to meet minimum structure setback, floor area, parking, sewage disposal and accessory use requirements, outside of wetlands, and required buffer, and floodplains, unless a permit is obtained allowing construction of the structure in the wetland, required buffer, or floodplain. 
Building line or setback line means as defined in the city zoning ordinance in chapter 138, as amended. 
City planner and planner mean the staff planner or community planner employed by the city. 
City staff means the city planning and zoning coordinator, the planner, the building department, the city engineer, the department of public service, and such other departments and consultants necessarily involved in a particular review and approval. 
Commission means the city planning commission. 
Easement means a grant by the owner of land to the public, a corporation or person, for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature of use. 
Environmental effects means the impact of the physical development of the land with its proposed characteristics on the components of environmental quality (health, density, space and beauty) as they relate to the site, the adjacent land, the neighborhood and the community. 
Floodplain means as defined in article III of chapter 114 of this Code. 
Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, drainage, and other additions to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability. 
Land division act means the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). 
Master plan means the general land use plan for the city, including graphic and written proposals indicating the locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical, developments of the city, and includes any unit or part of such plan and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof accepted and/or adopted by the planning commission. 
Master right-of-way plan means that part of the traffic study and comprehensive transportation plan which sets forth the location, alignment, and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the land division act. 
Performance guarantee means any security, including performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements, which may be accepted by the city council as a guarantee that required subdivision improvements will be made by the developer. 
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land and is further defined as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration prepared in conformance with the land division act and this article. 
(2)  Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision providing conformance to the preliminary plat of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the land division act and this article, and suitable for recording by the county register of deeds and the state department of treasury. 
Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Sidewalk means a public pathway constructed of concrete for public use, five feet in width, and located on public streets. 
Street means any avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway or any road or way shown in a plat approved pursuant to law. A street, as defined, includes the land between the right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns. The term is further defined as follows: 
(1)  Major street (thoroughfare) means an arterial street of great continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and region beyond and may be designated in the master right-of-way plan as a major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. 
(2)  Collector street means a street intended to serve as a major means of access from local streets to major thoroughfares, including principal entrance streets to large scale developments. 
(3)  Local street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
(4)  Marginal access street means a local street parallel to and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)  Boulevard street means a street developed in two one-way pavements separated by a median. 
(6)  Turnaround means a short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(7)  Cul-de-sac street means a short minor street having one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
Wetland means as defined in article IV of chapter 126 of this Code. 
Zoning ordinance means the city zoning ordinance, as printed in chapter 138 of this Code, as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 560.102, MSA 26.430(102).  
Sec. 122-62. - Purpose. 
The subdivision of land shall be regulated as provided in this article to: 
(1)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants. 
(2)  Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of land. 
(3)  Secure adequate traffic circulation and lessen congestion in the streets and highways. 
(4)  Facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, recreation and other public requirements. 
(5)  Facilitate the subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(6)  Provide the best possible environment for human habitation, including the ecological balance, by the preservation of significant natural environmental attributes such as trees, woods, streams, lakes, floodplains, and natural topographical features. 
(7)  Provide for humans' need for aesthetic balance and its contribution to the general well-being. 
(8)  Encourage unique, individual, creative, and innovative concepts related to the making of plats. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.01)  
Sec. 122-63. - Conflicts with other laws. 
This article contains minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare of the city and is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing city regulations or laws nor conflict with any state statutes, except that this article shall prevail when this article imposes a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws, or regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.14)  
Sec. 122-64. - Issuance of building permits. 
(a)  Limitations. Building permits shall not be issued before the recording of the subdivision final plat, except as specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  Prior to installation of improvements. Building permits may be issued prior to the installation of improvements as follows: 
(1)  Residential plats. For residential plats, up to four building permits may be issued for residential sales models prior to the recording of a final plat and installation of public improvements upon compliance with the following: 
a.  A metes and bounds legal description for each model, including a means of access, if the plat is not recorded; 
b.  A satisfactory septic system permit if the public sanitary sewer is not available and operable; 
c.  The septic system permit required by subsection (b)(1)b of this section shall not be necessary if the city engineer has approved the design drawings for storm drainage, the water and sewer systems, and the roads, and either the improvements have been completed and accepted by the city engineer or the public improvements are in the process of being installed and a performance bond or cash in an amount sufficient to guarantee completion is posted; 
d.  The models are located generally on the perimeter of the property; and 
e.  During construction of the models, a useable road must be provided for access. 
(2)  Nonresidential plats. For nonresidential plats, building permits for any buildings shall be issued only upon compliance with all requirements for the development of property not included in a plat, the providing of metes and bounds descriptions for areas being developed, and compliance with the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as if no plat is being processed. 
(c)  After installation of improvements. After approval of the final plat, but before it is recorded, up to three building permits may be issued to any builder if the street, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, sidewalks and walkways, and all public improvements in the street adjacent to the property have been installed and accepted by the city; provided, however, that in single-family residential subdivisions, sidewalks shall not be required prior to the issuance of such building permits, but shall be required to be installed prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. Such building permits may be issued with reference to the lot number only. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.11)  
Sec. 122-65. - Construction limitations. 
(a)  Mud, dirt and debris on streets. For the purposes of this article, mud, dirt and debris on streets shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  Requirement established. During construction of a subdivision, including the installation of utilities and construction of buildings, all improved roads and streets on and off of the property being subdivided shall be kept free from mud, dirt, debris, etc., which may result from the development of the property. 
(2)  Immediate cleanup. Any person depositing or allowing the depositing of any mud, dirt, debris, etc., on an improved road or street shall clean the road or street before the end of any working day. 
(3)  Responsibility. The proprietor of a subdivision shall have responsibility for this subsection in addition to any other person involved. 
(4)  Dangerous condition. If notified during a working day by the city of a dangerous condition which requires cleaning, the matter shall be taken care of within two hours. 
(5)  Use of cash deposits. Cash deposits shall be used as follows: 
a.  Single builder. If it appears the mud, dirt, debris, etc., on an improved road or street has been caused by the builder of a building or in connection with the building of a building, the builder shall be responsible, and the city may use the cash deposit filed in order to obtain the building permit to clean the road or street. 
b.  Multiple builders. If the mud, dirt, debris, etc., appears to be caused by more than one builder or in connection with more than one building site, the cost of cleaning shall be prorated and charged against the cash deposits of the builders appearing to be responsible. 
(b)  Debris, etc., on site. Neither the proprietor of a subdivision nor any other person shall allow debris, construction materials, etc., to accumulate during construction in a manner which becomes unsightly or which might affect the health, safety and welfare of residents of homes in the vicinity. 
(c)  Signs. 
(1)  Temporary street. After paving of streets and during construction of a subdivision, the proprietor shall install and maintain temporary street signs until the county road commission installs permanent signs. The signs shall be installed according to standards and specifications adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Lot. At the time of obtaining a building permit, the proprietor shall place and maintain a sign on the proposed lot indicating the lot number and shall provide the building department a map showing the location of all lots. 
(d)  Mayor's authority. Upon it appearing to the mayor there has been a failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section, he may institute city review procedures and city inspections related to the subject property, until there has been compliance. This authority shall not limit the city's authority to issue citations for the violation of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.12)  
Secs. 122-66—122-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 122-91. - Authority established. 
The city council may authorize a variance from this article when undue hardship may result from strict compliance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.15.01)  
Sec. 122-92. - Conditions to be prescribed. 
In granting any variance to this article, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.15.02)  
Sec. 122-93. - Considerations. 
In making its findings on a variance to this article as required in section 122-94, the city council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.15.03)  
Sec. 122-94. - Findings. 
No variance to this article shall be granted unless the city council finds as follows: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated. 
(4)  The variance will further the written objectives and policies of this Code and the master use plan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.15.04)  
Sec. 122-95. - Waiver of sidewalk requirements. 
(a)  Authority established. The city council may authorize a waiver from the requirement that all single-family residential subdivisions provide sidewalks. 
(b)  Limitation. In no case shall a waiver be granted to any subdivision that contains nine or more buildable lots. 
(c)  Findings. In determining whether a waiver shall be granted, the city council shall determine that the subdivision meets either or both of the following factors and make findings based thereon: 
(1)  The proposed sidewalk would not currently connect with any established nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian pathway or sidewalk nor would it be likely to connect to any nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian pathway or sidewalk in the future. 
(2)  The proposed sidewalk would not currently connect with any established nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian pathway or sidewalk and there are identifiable conditions which may present a hazard at the unconnected end of a sidewalk. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.16)  
Secs. 122-96—122-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 122-121. - Requirement established. 
No subdivision plat within the city shall be approved unless it conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.03.01)  
Sec. 122-122. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Recorded subdivision lots. This article, as amended, shall not apply to any lot forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to January 1, 1968, except for the further dividing of lots. 
(b)  Subdivisions being platted. The requirements of this article, as amended, shall apply to a subdivision in the process of being platted, unless: 
(1)  The new or added requirement would require a revision of a plat that has received tentative or final approval of the preliminary plat, and the right to proceed to the next step in the platting procedure has been established pursuant to the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.); or 
(2)  An approval has otherwise been given which would require retroactive operation of the new or added requirement as far as the particular approval given. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.03.02)  
Sec. 122-123. - Plat background material. 
(a)  Acquisition of material; sketch plan. Prior to the preparation of a subdivision preliminary plat, the proprietor shall acquire all necessary background material, and it is suggested that the proprietor also informally submit a sketch to the planning commission prior to the submission of a preliminary plat. 
(b)  Initial investigation. The proprietor shall obtain information concerning the following: 
(1)  Availability of copies of the city zoning ordinance, master plan, subdivision regulations, engineering specifications, and other similar Code provisions or controls relative to the subdivision and improvements of land. 
(2)  The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to the adjacent land uses and to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares. 
(3)  Adequacy and standards for schools, and public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(4)  Availability, standards and adequacy of sewage disposal, water supply and drainage within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.04.01)  
Sec. 122-124. - Prepreliminary plat review. 
(a)  Submission of plat. The proprietor may submit a subdivision preliminary plat for prepreliminary plat review showing the proposed development of the subdivision in schematic form, including the area of first development. Such preliminary plat shall include the following (see subsections 122-152(3) and (4)): 
(1)  General layout of streets, sidewalks, and lots. 
(2)  Existing characteristics and conditions of the site. 
(3)  General area set aside for schools, parks and other community facilities. 
(b)  Permissive requirement. Nothing in this section, however, shall be so construed as to require approval of the prepreliminary plat. The prepreliminary plat shall serve only as a general guide for the proprietor and the city. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-01.04.02, 4-01.04.03)  
Secs. 122-125—122-150. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Preliminary Plat[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Preliminary plats, MCL 560.111 et seq., MSA 26.430(111) et seq. 
 
Sec. 122-151. - Scope. 
The preparation of a subdivision preliminary plat shall be carried out through two phases: tentative and final preliminary plat approval, all in accordance with the procedure in this subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05)  
Sec. 122-152. - Preparation for tentative approval. 
The subdivision preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with sections 111 and 112 of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.111, 560.112, MSA 26.430(111), 26.430(112)), and in accordance with the requirements of this section. The following information shall be shown on the preliminary plat or submitted with it: 
(1)  Identification and description. 
a.  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
b.  A complete legal description. 
c.  Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner and planner, landscape architect, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land. 
d.  Date, north point and scale of the plat with one inch equals 100 feet as the minimum acceptable scale. 
(2)  Existing subdivision site conditions. Existing subdivision site conditions as follows: 
a.  Site area map. An overall map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings such as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets shall be provided and shall include the following: 
1.  Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision, section or city lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions. 
2.  Property lines and zoning of contiguous tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land up to one-half mile are to be shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision including those located across abutting roads. 
3.  Location, widths, and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, public areas, sidewalks, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads. 
4.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities, within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision. 
b.  Drainage pattern sketch. Drainage patterns shall be graphically displayed on an accompanying sketch and shall include the following information: 
1.  River, stream, or open (ditch) drainageways and the direction of their flow. 
2.  The direction of surface drainage over the site. 
3.  Ridge lines or watershed boundaries, if any, on or within one-half mile of the site. 
4.  Soil drainage characteristics as follows: 
i.  Well drained. 
ii.  Subject to ponding. 
iii.  Susceptible to flooding. 
c.  Topography and slope gradient sketch. Topography drawn to contours with an interval of at least two feet in elevation. Topography shall be based on United States Geological Survey Datum. Benchmarks for the work shall be indicated on the drawing. If slope gradients of two percent or greater exist on the site, a sketch shall be presented with shadings for the first two to four percent change, the four to ten percent change, the ten to 20 percent change and the 20 percent and greater change. The topographic map and slope gradient sketch shall include the area of the proposed subdivision as well as an area at least 200 feet beyond it. 
d.  Soil sketch. Soil types and characteristics as made available by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service shall be sketched and submitted at the same scale as the subdivision site indicating the suitability of the proposed site for the proposed development. 
e.  Site vegetation map. Vegetation on the site shall be inventoried in a general manner and sketched in a general way as to type and location on a map at the same scale as the preliminary plat. In particular, existing trees of six inches in caliper or greater by type and size shall be recorded as well as the ground elevation at the base of each tree of significant size, or clusters of trees at the same general base elevation. 
(3)  Preliminary plat drawing. A refined illustration showing the following information shall be submitted as the preliminary plat drawing: 
a.  Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, existing easements, and, if the plat is for the development of a single-family residential subdivision, sidewalks. 
b.  Layout, number and dimensions of lots, including building setback lines showing dimensions. 
c.  Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use and/or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 
d.  An indication of the status of the petitioner's ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as "excepted," the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat. 
e.  Statement of intended use of the proposed plat such as residential single-family, two-family, and multiple housing; commercial; industrial; recreational; or agriculture. Also proposed sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry, and other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. Also, for any site proposed for parks, open space or common area, playgrounds, schools, or other such uses, there shall be a separate plan indicating how the area will be developed and utilized including specific details for active and/or passive recreational activities. 
f.  If the subdivision is proposed to be developed under the open space provisions of the zoning ordinance, subdivision shall meet the requirements of division 4 of this article and the appropriate sections of the zoning ordinance. 
g.  A general indication of all proposed underground utilities which shall include, but not by way of limitation, the water and sanitary sewer system, storm sewers, and electrical and gas lines, fire hydrants, and water retention basins. 
(4)  Design concept sketch. A design concept sketch at one inch equals 100 feet shall be submitted with the plat that shows the features proposed for development (i.e., lots, streets, sidewalks, drains, open space, parks, schools, etc.,) related to the site's natural characteristics (drainage, topography, slope, soil types, vegetation, trees, etc.). The reason this scheme was chosen over others shall be noted. 
(5)  Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact statement as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.01)  
Sec. 122-153. - Filing for tentative approval. 
(a)  City clerk. The proprietor shall submit ten copies of the subdivision preliminary plat and other data concerning the proposed subdivision, together with a copy of proof of ownership to the city clerk. 
(b)  Review cost deposit. The proprietor shall deposit the sum required in division 3 of article III of chapter 110 to cover costs of reviewing all engineering plans and layout. The deposit shall be made at the time the preliminary plat is submitted to the clerk. 
(c)  Marking property. The proprietor shall stake the property at each corner with a clearly visible marker so that the site of the proposed plat can be examined by city representatives. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.02)  
Sec. 122-154. - Technical review. 
(a)  Submission of copies. One copy each of the subdivision preliminary plat shall be transmitted to the appropriate city staff and consultants and governmental agencies, for their technical review and recommendation. 
(b)  Completeness. The city staff shall check the proposed plat for completeness. If any of the data required in the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), or section 122-152 of this article is omitted, the city planning and zoning coordinator or planner shall inform the planning commission of the data required and that the application will be delayed until the required data is received. If complete, the planning commission shall establish a review date as provided in section 122-155. 
(c)  Recommendations. Within 30 days of receipt of the preliminary plat, the city planning and zoning coordinator or planner shall notify the planning commission of the staff's recommendations for either approval or rejection of the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.03)  
Sec. 122-155. - Planning commission initial review. 
(a)  Review meeting. The planning commission shall hold a review meeting on the subdivision preliminary plat in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Initiating action. The clerk shall forward such data as provided in subsection 122-153(a) to the planning commission and shall request that the preliminary plat be placed on the next agenda of the planning commission. 
(2)  Time restriction. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 60 days after the first meeting of the planning commission after the proposed preliminary plat has been deposited with the city clerk. 
(3)  Finalization. The preliminary plan shall be placed on the next regular planning commission agenda after assurance of the receipt of the recommendations of the city staff. At the review meeting the proprietor shall be present. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plan as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time. 
(b)  Compliance criteria. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall be based upon compliance with the following: 
(1)  Applicable sections and regulations of this Code. 
(2)  Availability and adequacy of utilities. 
(3)  An acceptable comprehensive development plan. 
(4)  A reasonable street and lot layout and orientation. 
(5)  An environmental plan showing no substantially harmful effects. 
(c)  Recommendation alternatives. The commission shall recommend conditional approval, disapproval or approval of the preliminary plat in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Disapproval. If the commission disapproves the preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons in the minutes of the meeting. The proprietor shall be notified of the action of the commission in writing. He may request copies of the recommendation for the purpose of revision and resubmittal. A copy of this action shall also be submitted to the city council. 
(2)  Tentative approval. If the commission finds that the preliminary plat meets the requirements for tentative approval, it shall recommend tentative approval of the preliminary plat. The commission may attach conditions to its recommendation. Notation of approval and any conditions shall be indicated on each copy of the preliminary plat, and copies shall be distributed as follows: 
a.  One copy with comments shall become a matter of permanent record in the commission files. 
b.  The remaining copies shall be sent to the city council via the city clerk with recommendations for approval. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.04)  
Sec. 122-156. - City council initial review. 
(a)  Compliance and action restrictions. The city council will not review the subdivision preliminary plat before compliance with sections 122-154 and 122-155, and then shall consider the preliminary plat and shall take action thereon within 90 days of the date of filing, as defined in subsection 122-153(a). 
(b)  Approval or denial. Before granting tentative approval of the preliminary plat, the council shall be satisfied the plat meets the requirements of this article, the zoning ordinance and the other applicable sections and regulations of this Code. In denying a plat, the council shall state its reasons and shall communicate the reasons to the proprietor. 
(c)  Referral to staff. A revised plat shall be submitted and approved by the city staff in order to comply with or reflect any conditions set by the city council in granting the tentative approval, before the plat shall be marked or stamped as having received tentative approval. Copies of the plat when it is marked as receiving tentative approval shall be circulated to the city staff. 
(d)  Right conferred with tentative approval. If the city council gives tentative approval of the preliminary plat, it shall be deemed to confer upon the proprietor the right to proceed with the preparation of the preliminary plat for final approval. 
(e)  Tentative approval limitation. The approval of the preliminary plat by the city council is effective for a period of one year. If the preliminary plat in whole or in part is not submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation and approval to the city council. The one-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in writing. 
(f)  Restriction. No installation or construction of any improvements or land balancing shall be made or begun at this time. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.05)  
Sec. 122-157. - Preparation for final approval. 
(a)  Submission. Within one year after having received tentative approval of the subdivision preliminary plat as prescribed in this subdivision, the proprietor shall submit the preliminary plat for final approval. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with section 120 of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.120, MSA 26.430(120)), and in accordance with the requirements of this article. The proprietor is encouraged to work closely with the city engineer during the development of the plat through this stage of the procedures. 
(b)  Identification and description. Identification and description on the plat shall be the same as in subsection 122-152(1). 
(c)  Existing subdivision site conditions. Existing subdivision site conditions shall be the same as in subsection 122-152(2). 
(d)  Final preliminary plat drawing. The final preliminary plat drawing shall be the same as in subsections 122-152(3) and (4) and with the addition of the following: 
(1)  A detailed delineation of the required underground utilities. 
(2)  Proposed utility installations to the standards adopted by the city and appropriate county agencies and as required by the city engineer. 
(3)  A plan of any proposed water areas indicating depths, normal water levels, slopes and type of bank retention; methods of controlling insects, water growths and vegetation. 
(4)  Superimposed on the preliminary plat shall be the proposed contours or elevations at a minimum of two feet of the area including the area at least 100 feet outside of the project. 
(5)  When the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part that is proposed to be subdivided first and all subsequent phases shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development the proprietor intends to follow. The installation of improvements and each subsequent plat shall follow the same overall plan unless a deviation is approved until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided. 
(6)  Detailed evidence to demonstrate and verify compliance with minimum lot width and area requirements. 
(7)  If the subdivision is proposed to be developed under the open space provisions of the zoning ordinance, the subdivision shall meet the requirements of division 4 of this article and the city zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.06)  
Sec. 122-158. - Filing for final approval. 
(a)  City clerk. The proprietor shall submit to the city clerk 16 copies of the subdivision preliminary plat and other data concerning the proposed subdivision at the time he files copies with the authorities as required in sections 113 to 119 of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.113 et seq., MSA 26.430(113) et seq.). At this filing he shall include a certified list of all authorities to whom he has submitted preliminary plats for review. 
(b)  Final review fee. The proprietor shall deposit the sum required in division 3 of article III of chapter 110 to cover costs of reviewing the plat and layout. The deposit shall be made at the time the preliminary plat is submitted for final approval to the clerk. 
(c)  Evidence of title. The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title a policy of title insurance or a legal opinion with reference to ownership for examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper names appear on the plat. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.07)  
Sec. 122-159. - Final technical review. 
(a)  Submission of copies. One copy each of the subdivision preliminary plat shall be transmitted to the appropriate members of the city staff and consultants and governmental agencies for their technical review and recommendation. 
(b)  Completeness. The city staff shall check the proposed plat for completeness. If any of the data required in the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), or this article is omitted, the city planning and zoning coordinator or planner shall inform the planning commission of the data required and that the application will be delayed until the required data are received. 
(c)  Technical compliance. The city staff shall check all drawings and information for technical compliance with the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.) and the requirements of the appropriate sections of this Code. 
(d)  Recommendations. The city staff shall notify the planning commission of their recommendations for either approval or rejection of the preliminary plat in ample time for the planning commission to review it before the end of the 30-day review period. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.08)  
Sec. 122-160. - Planning commission final review. 
(a)  Final review meeting. The planning commission shall hold a final review meeting on the subdivision preliminary plat in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Initiation of action. The clerk shall forward the preliminary plat and all other data to the planning commission and shall request that the preliminary plat be placed on the agenda of the planning commission within 30 days of the filing date. The proprietor shall be present for the review. 
(2)  Time restriction. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after the proposed preliminary plat has been deposited with the city clerk. 
(3)  Compliance. The preliminary plat documents shall be reviewed by the planning commission as to compliance with the previous tentatively approved plat and all city ordinances, standards, regulations and requirements. 
(b)  Recommendation alternatives. Alternatives to recommendations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Approval. If the planning commission finds that the submitted plat documents are in close agreement with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and are in compliance with this Code and the city ordinances, etc., it shall recommend approval with or without conditions and notify the city council of this action in its official minutes and forward its recommendation together with all accompanying data to the city council for their action. 
(2)  Rejection. If the planning commission finds that the submitted plat documents do not conform substantially to the tentatively approved preliminary plat or to this Code or the city ordinances and requirements and that it is not acceptable, it shall record the reasons in its official minutes and forward the reasons to the city council together with all accompanying data for its review and action. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.09)  
Sec. 122-161. - City council final review. 
(a)  Compliance and action restrictions. The city council shall not review the preliminary plat until all of the requirements of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), and this article have been complied with. The city council shall consider the preliminary plat and shall take action thereon at its next meeting or within 20 days of the date that sufficient evidence that section 120(1)(c) of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.120(1)(c), MSA 26.430(120), (1)(c)), has been satisfied. 
(b)  Referral to staff. A revised plat shall be submitted and approved by the city staff in order to comply with or reflect any conditions set by the city council on granting final approval of the preliminary plat, before the plat shall be marked as having received final approval. Copies of the plat marked as receiving final approval shall be circulated to the city staff. 
(c)  Notification to proprietor. The city council shall instruct the city clerk to promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing and if rejected to give the reasons. 
(d)  Right conferred with final approval. If the city council gives approval to the preliminary plat, it shall be deemed to confer upon the proprietor the right to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. 
(e)  Final approval limitation. The approval of the preliminary plat by the city council is effective for a period of two years. If the final plat in whole or in part is not submitted for approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation and approval to the city council. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in writing. 
(f)  Restriction. No installation or construction of any improvements or land balancing shall commence before the preliminary plat has received final approval of the city council, engineering plans have been approved by the city engineer, and any deposits required under subdivision III of this division and division 3 of article III of chapter 110 have been received by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.05.10)  
Secs. 122-162—122-190. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Final Plat[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Final plats, MCL 560.131 et seq., MSA 26.430(131) et seq. 
 
Sec. 122-191. - Preparation. 
(a)  Compliance. The subdivision final plat shall comply with the provisions of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). 
(b)  Conformance limitation. The final plat shall be in conformity to the preliminary plat as approved, and it may include only that portion of the approved preliminary plat that the proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.01)  
Sec. 122-192. - Filing. 
The proprietor shall file one Mylar and six paper prints of the subdivision final plat with the clerk and shall deposit such sums of money as required in division 3 of article III of chapter 110 and/or by other sections of this Code. The other needed Mylar copies will be made by the state treasurer's office with the cost directly charged to the proprietor. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.02)  
Sec. 122-193. - Review. 
(a)  Compliance review. The subdivision final plat shall be reviewed by the city engineer and city planner as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
(b)  Recommendation of engineer and planner. The city engineer and city planner shall notify the city council of their recommendations for either approval or rejection of the final plat within ten days of its date of filing. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.03)  
Sec. 122-194. - City council action. 
The city council shall review the recommendations of the engineer and planner on the subdivision final plat and shall take appropriate action to approve or disapprove the final plat within 20 days after its date of filing. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.04)  
Sec. 122-195. - Subsequent approvals. 
Upon approval of the subdivision final plat by the city council, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). The six prints of the final plat shall be forwarded to the clerk, the planner, the building department, the city engineer, the department of public services, and the city council. The one Mylar copy shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county plat board. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.05)  
Sec. 122-196. - Waiver of monuments and markers. 
Placing of required monuments and lot corner markers in a subdivision may be waived by the city council for a period of one year from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council, provided that: 
(1)  Monuments or other markers, adequately witnessed, shall be in place in accordance with the requirements of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). 
(2)  The proprietor shall have delivered to the clerk cash or a certified check, corporate surety bond, or irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city, whichever the proprietor selects, in the amount of $25.00 for each monument and $10.00 for each corner marker to be placed. Such cash, certified check, corporate surety bond, or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. If the proprietor defaults, the city clerk shall engage a surveyor to locate the monuments and markers called for on the plat and on completion of the work shall return any unexpended balance of the deposit to the party from whom it was received. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.06)  
Sec. 122-197. - Performance deposit. 
The city clerk shall require of the proprietor, as a condition of final plat approval, a deposit in the form of cash, certified check, corporate surety bond, irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city or a surety bond for the full cost, as estimated by the proprietor's engineer and reviewed by the city engineer, of the improvement of public places, including sidewalks, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, and the installation of any required public sanitary sewer, water supply, and drainage facilities, to ensure the completion of such improvements and facilities within a length of time agreed upon from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council. The city shall rebate to the proprietor, as work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project; provided, however, that no amount shall be reimbursed until the city engineer approves the sum, and at least 25 percent shall be retained pro rata from the entire project for each payment until two years after completion of the improvements to ensure against any repairs that may be necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.07)  
Sec. 122-198. - Deed restrictions and covenants. 
Two copies of the proposed subdivision deed restrictions or protective covenants or a statement in writing that none are proposed shall be furnished to the city council to be filed with the city's copy of the subdivision final plat. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.08)  
Sec. 122-199. - Final plat drawings. 
(a)  As-built Mylars. One complete set of as-built Mylar drawings and two sets of blue line drawings shall be provided by the proprietor to the city engineer at the time of final acceptance of the public improvements in the subdivision. 
(b)  Reduction. One copy of the final plat reduced to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet shall be submitted with the final plat Mylar to the city clerk, with subdivision restrictions, if any. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.09)  
Sec. 122-200. - Notice of wetland/floodplain designation. 
(a)  Filing. The proprietor shall, as a condition for final plat approval of the subdivision and before the city releases the final plat, file with the city clerk a notice of wetland or floodplain designation, together with the necessary recording fee, for every lot, outlot, park, parcel or site shown on the final plat which includes any area designated as a wetland and required buffer or floodplain, pursuant to article III of chapter 114 and article IV of chapter 126 of this Code. 
(b)  Form with attachment. The notice shall be fully executed on a form to be provided by the city, and the proprietor shall attach to the notice a survey or diagram clearly depicting the lot, etc., and the location and dimensions of the areas designated as wetland and required buffer or floodplain. 
(c)  Recording. Upon releasing the final plat, the city clerk shall record the notice at the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.06.10)  
Sec. 122-201. - Assessor's plats. 
If it is established that conditions exist whereby an assessor's plat is necessary, the assessor's plat shall comply with sections 201 to 213 of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.201 et seq., MSA 26.430(201) et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.07)  
Secs. 122-202—122-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OPEN SPACE PLANS 
 
Sec. 122-231. - Applicability. 
The requirements in this division shall apply in addition to all other requirements of this article where a preliminary plat is filed for tentative approval under the open space plan provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09)  
Sec. 122-232. - Proposed plan of development. 
The proposed plan of development of the open space shall be submitted with the preliminary plat before tentative approval and shall include the following as a minimum: 
(1)  The proposed uses of open space and the proposed improvements that are to be constructed by the proprietor. 
(2)  A statement, with such graphics as may be available and relevant, of the subdivision without an open space plan and alternative locations and configurations of the open space to demonstrate the proposed plan is the most reasonable and best approach for the subdivision. 
(3)  Details of any water retention basins to be located anywhere within the proposed plat. 
(4)  Provisions for the installation of sidewalks adjacent to the open space when abutting an improved street within the subdivision. Walkways within open spaces may replace those required along street frontage when it is determined by the planning commission that a similar function will be served by such walkways. 
(5)  Other relevant facts related to the proposed uses. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09.01)  
Sec. 122-233. - Review and recommendations. 
(a)  Generally. Before tentative approval of the subdivision preliminary plat is granted, the open space plan shall be reviewed and granted preliminary approval. Copies of the preliminary plat, the application for the open space plan, and supporting data shall be submitted by the clerk to the city staff for review and recommendation. 
(b)  Review and recommendation of staff. The city staff shall review and render an opinion upon the proposed open space plan from the materials furnished and from visits to the site or such other information as may be deemed necessary. 
(c)  Basis for approval. Any approval of an open space plan shall be based upon the following considerations: 
(1)  The proposed open land is suitable for the purposes proposed. 
(2)  There is a need for the proposed uses in the general area. 
(3)  The location and layout of the open spaces have a beneficial relation to the lots within the subdivision. 
(4)  The plan can be suitably provided with utilities as proposed. 
(5)  The plan would not require undue changing of the natural grade. 
(6)  The plan can be physically developed, as proposed, without injuring the abutting lands as to the capacity available in existing utility services. 
(7)  Any other factor related to the development and proper design of the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09.02)  
Sec. 122-234. - Preliminary approval. 
(a)  Planning commission recommendation. If the planning commission is satisfied that the proposed open space plan meets the letter and spirit of the zoning ordinance and sections of this article and should be approved, it shall recommend such approval to the city council with the conditions upon which such approval should be based. If the commission recommends denial, it shall state its reasons and forward its reasons to the proprietor and the city council. 
(b)  City council action. Thereafter, the council shall take action upon such application in accordance with subdivisions II and III of division 3 of this article and upon being satisfied the open space plan meets the requirements of and is consistent with the standards of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09.03)  
Sec. 122-235. - Engineering plans and specifications. 
At the time engineering plans and specifications for other improvements in the subdivision are presented and approved by the city engineer in accordance with section 122-302, the proprietor shall present engineering plans and specifications for and obtain approval from the city engineer for improvements, grading, and retention and detention basins and related facilities. The engineering plans and specifications shall be substantially in conformity with the open space plan approved by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09.04)  
Sec. 122-236. - Open space agreement. 
The proprietor shall provide the city with a written open space agreement setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which agreement, after approval thereof by the council, shall be entered into between the city and the proprietor prior to the approval of any subdivision final plat. The open space agreement shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  Incorporation of homeowners' association. The incorporation of a nonprofit corporation to serve as a homeowners' association for purposes of holding title to, controlling and being responsible for the open space. 
(2)  Timely conveyance of title. A provision requiring the conveyance of title of the open space to the association before the sale of a lot in the subdivision or within 90 days of the recording of the plat, whichever occurs first. 
(3)  Regulation of the open space. Provisions for the regulation of the open space. 
(4)  Timely and guaranteed completion. A provision that all improvements within the open space shall be completed within two years of the recording of the plat and that security shall be filed as required in this division to guarantee the completion of the improvements. 
(5)  Interim responsible party. A provision placing responsibility upon a named individual or entity other than the association for maintaining the open space from the date of recording of the plat until effective control if the association is turned over to the homeowners. 
(6)  Satisfactory completion guarantee. Provisions for guaranteeing that, at the time of turning over the control of the association to the homeowners, all of the improvements are completed in a satisfactory condition including the dredging or cleaning of any detention or retention basins and related facilities so that their grades are according to grades established in the engineering plans and specifications. 
(7)  Assessments for maintenance. Provisions for assessments for maintenance of the open space and detention and retention basins and related facilities with the assessments to commence within the first year of recording of the plat. All lots in the subdivision shall be assessed regardless of who may own them. 
(8)  Evidence of compliance. A provision to require the proprietor to provide the city, evidence within 90 days of recording of the plat, that the association has been established as a nonprofit corporation and that the association has been conveyed title to the open space. 
(9)  Turn over of control. Provisions that the proprietor shall turn over control of the association to the homeowners upon 65 percent of the lots being sold to homeowners, other than builders and developers, or four years from the date of recording of the plat, whichever occurs first. No bylaws or other devices shall prevent the effective turn over of control at the time stated herein. 
(10)  Filing of a maintenance bond. A provision to require the proprietor to file a maintenance bond in an amount determined to be reasonable and necessary by the city engineer, to guarantee maintenance of the open space for a two-year period from the time that it is accepted by the city engineer as being completed. Maintenance shall include removal of soils from any detention or retention basin and reworking of drainage facilities so that they are in compliance with the engineering plans and specifications. 
(11)  Second or later phase deed provisions. Provisions, if the agreement pertains to the second or later phase of a multiphase subdivision, requiring a fully executed deed conveying the open space in the new plat to the association to be filed with the city, to be held by the city until the improvements in the open space have been completed and the open space is ready to be turned over to the association. 
a.  Filing of deed of conveyance with city. This section shall apply, except that the deed of conveyance required by subsection (b) of this section shall be filed with the city as required in this subsection. 
b.  Release of deed by city. When the open space is ready to be turned over to the association which was formed in connection with platting of the first phase of the subdivision, the city shall release the deed to the association. 
c.  Proprietor responsibility in interim. Until that time, the proprietor shall have the responsibility for improvement and maintenance of the open space and shall assess the lots in the phase covered by the agreement, as provided in this section. 
(12)  Other factors. Any other factor related to the legal or practical problems of ownership, use, and maintenance of this open space. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09.05)  
Sec. 122-237. - Final approval. 
The granting of final plat approval for the subdivision shall constitute final approval of the open space plan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09.06)  
Sec. 122-238. - Performance guarantee. 
At the time of application for final plat approval, the proprietor shall deposit cash, a certified check, an irrevocable bank letter of credit or a corporate surety bond in the amount of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements to the open space guaranteeing the completion of such improvements within a time agreed upon between the council and the proprietor. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.09.07) 
State Law reference— Agreement to construct improvements, MCL 560.188, MSA 26.430(188).  
Secs. 122-239—122-265. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 122-266. - Scope. 
The subdivision design standards set forth in this division are development guides for the assistance of the developer. All final construction plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer and department of public service. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 122-267. - Streets. 
(a)  Conformance to requirements. Subdivision streets shall conform to all minimum requirements, general specifications, typical cross sections and other requirements of the road commission for the county and this article and any other requirements of the city engineer. 
(b)  Location and arrangement. 
(1)  The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the city master plan and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such streets shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on such plan. 
(2)  The street layout shall provide for continuation of streets in the adjoining subdivisions and of the proper projections of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided. 
(3)  The street layout shall include local streets so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(4)  If a proposed subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse lot frontage with an approved screen planting contained in a dedicated nonaccess reservation along the rear property line having a minimum width of 15 feet, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. Where mature trees are present in the reservation strip they shall be preserved. 
(5)  If a proposed subdivision borders on or contains a railroad, expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land such as for parks in residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
(6)  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of this article. Wherever a dedicated or platted and recorded half street exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half shall be dedicated in the plat. 
(7)  Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to topography so as to result in desirable and usable lots and safe streets with reasonable gradients. 
(8)  Except where justified by extreme conditions, alleys and private streets will not be permitted in areas of detached single- or two-family residences. 
(c)  Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the requirements of the road commission for the county or at least the following requirements, whichever is greater: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares. In conformance with the traffic study and comprehensive transportation plan including the master right-of-way plan adopted by the planning commission. 
(2)  Collector streets: 86 feet. 
(3)  Industrial-service streets: 70 feet. 
(4)  Local and marginal access streets (single-family or multiple-family residential where platted): 60-foot curbs and gutter. 
(5)  Boulevard streets: 80 feet or more. 
(6)  Turnaround (loop or U) streets: 120 feet. 
(7)  Alleys: 20 feet. 
(8)  Cul-de-sac streets; turnarounds. 
a.  Industrial: 70 feet terminating with a 70-foot radius. 
b.  Residential and others: 60 feet or 70 feet (see subsection (c)(4) of this section) terminating with a 60-foot radius. 
(9)  Maximum length for cul-de-sac streets shall generally be 600 feet; this may be exceeded subject to the approval of the commission. 
(d)  Geometrics. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be established by resolution of the council and shall not be less restrictive than the standards of the county road commissioners. 
(e)  Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets intersecting with major thoroughfares and collector thoroughfares shall do so with a tangent section of centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major or collector thoroughfare. 
(f)  Layouts. All streets and roads shall conform to the right-of-way width designated in the approved traffic study and comprehensive transportation plan for the city including the master right-of-way plan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08.01)  
Sec. 122-268. - Blocks. 
(a)  Size. The size of subdivision blocks shall be as follows: 
(1)  Length. Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,300 feet, except where, in the opinion of the city council with the advice of the planning commission, city planner and the city engineer, conditions may justify a greater distance. 
(2)  Width. Widths of blocks shall be determined by the conditions of the layout and shall be suited to the intended design of the subdivision. 
(b)  Paths and sidewalks. Paths and sidewalks shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Requirement established. 
a.  Single-family residential sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of streets in all plats for the development of single-family residential subdivisions. 
b.  Option of planning commission. Except as otherwise provided, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks may be required by the planning commission where an improved street is not available for pedestrian use, to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation within the subdivision and on the periphery to public or private facilities. 
(2)  Nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. Eight-foot asphalt nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths shall be provided in all rights-of-way abutting the subject property which are either existing or planned rights-of-way of 120 feet in width or greater, as designated on the master right-of-way plan for the city as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  Sidewalks. Five-foot concrete sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the improved roadway in all rights-of-way abutting the subject property which are located in plats for single-family residential subdivisions or existing or planned rights-of-way less than 120 feet in width, as designated on the master right-of-way plan as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
a.  Location. In single-family residential subdivisions, sidewalks shall be constructed adjacent to retention basins, outlets, and open spaces when abutting an improved street within the subdivision, and along those sections of streets that do not abut lots within the subdivision. 
b.  Uninterrupted. All sidewalks within subdivisions shall be laid out and installed so as to be uninterrupted and continuous. 
(4)  School access easements. Where sidewalks are not required, easements for walkways shall be provided for school access routes. The walkways shall conform to the requirements for nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. 
(6)  Time of construction. 
a.  Single-family residential subdivision sidewalks. Required sidewalks adjacent to residential lots in single-family residential subdivisions shall be installed prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy, except as may be allowed by this article and article III of chapter 94 pertaining to the standards for construction, protection, and maintenance of nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
1.  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a residence prior to the installation of a sidewalk adjacent to such residential lot upon the deposit by the proprietor of a cash bond in an amount equal to 150 percent of the projected completion cost of such sidewalk. 
2.  Sidewalks along open spaces, outlots, retention basins, and all other areas adjacent to a local street, but not adjacent to a residential lot, shall be constructed before issuance of any building permit for a building within a subdivision, except for building permits issued pursuant to section 122-64. 
b.  Other paths, sidewalks and walkways. Required nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, sidewalks and walkways, except sidewalks as shown on local streets in plats for single-family residential subdivisions, shall be constructed before issuance of any building permit for a building within a subdivision, except for building permits issued pursuant to section 122-64. If a required path, sidewalk or walkway must be crossed in order to construct a building on a lot in a subdivision, the building department may allow a delay in construction of the path, sidewalk or walkway adjacent to the lot until completion of the building or the expiration of two years from the date of recording of the plat, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear, front or side lot lines as necessary for utilities. Every lot, park or public grounds shall have access to an easement. 
(2)  Recommendations on the proposed layout for telephone, gas and electric utility easements shall be obtained from the utility companies serving the city. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plans to all appropriate public utility agencies. 
(3)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Such easements shall meet the approval of the city engineer and the drain or road commission for the county. 
(4)  The city may request an easement for emergency vehicle access through properties adjacent to bodies of water. 
(5)  The city may require scenic easements to provide buffers at the edge of subdivisions to screen from major thoroughfares, nonresidential areas and other areas not part of the subdivisions. (See subsection 122-267(b)(4).) 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08.02; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 122-269. - Lots. 
Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the city zoning ordinance and the following standards: 
(1)  Sizes and shapes. Sizes and shapes shall be as follows: 
a.  The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated. 
b.  Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets and must exhibit satisfactory rear and side yard relationships to provide for privacy and drainage. 
c.  Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of not more than 3:1 shall be desirable. 
d.  Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted at least 20 feet wider than the minimum width permitted by the city zoning ordinance. 
e.  Lots intended for purposes other than single-family residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking, setbacks and other requirements in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Orientation. Orientation of lots shall be as follows: 
a.  Every lot shall front or abut on a public street except when involving a planned development for multiple dwellings, business centers or industrial tracts where such requirements would not serve the best interests of the city. 
b.  Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain shall be platted with reverse frontage lots or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets. In certain instances, such lots may be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between buildings and such trafficway, upon approval of the planning commission. 
(3)  Buildable. All lots shall be buildable. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08.03)  
Sec. 122-270. - Natural features. 
For the purposes of this article, the natural features and character of land must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers (dams, bulkheads, retaining walls, etc.), where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08.04)  
Sec. 122-271. - Planting strips. 
Planting strips in a subdivision may be required to be placed next to incompatible features such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial uses to screen the view from residential properties. Such screens or greenbelts shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide and shall not be a part of the normal roadway right-of-way or utility easement, nor counted as open space meeting the requirements of division 4 of this article. Where mature trees are present in the planting strip, they shall be preserved. In all other instances the proprietor shall furnish a satisfactory landscape plan to the planning commission. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08.05)  
Sec. 122-272. - Floodplains. 
Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek, or lake or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater shall require specific compliance with the city's wetland protection ordinance in article IV of chapter 126 of this Code; the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.); and its review by the county drain commission and the water resources commission of the department of natural resources. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08.06)  
Sec. 122-273. - Topsoil. 
Removal of topsoil from areas to be subdivided shall be prohibited except in those areas to be occupied by buildings, roads, or parking areas. A plan for storage or stockpiling of topsoil shall be submitted by the proprietor with the final plat. Such plan shall meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.08.07)  
Secs. 122-274—122-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 122-301. - Minimum acceptable standards. 
The improvements set forth under this division are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which standards are not specifically provided shall comply with all other standards set by ordinance or by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.10.01)  
Sec. 122-302. - Compliance standards. 
(a)  Approvals. Engineering plans and specifications for all improvements in a subdivision shall be approved by the city engineer and/or the department of public service prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the city. 
(b)  Compliance. All subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public streets, public alleys, rights-of-way, or public easements and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the county or city shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this article and all other related sections of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.10.02)  
Sec. 122-303. - Subdivision utility standards. 
(a)  Minimum water and storm sewer systems. When a subdivision is developed in stages and the complete water and storm sewer systems are not included in the phase being developed, a sufficient amount of the water system shall be constructed, made operable, and approved so that there will be a looped water system, and a sufficient amount of the storm sewer system shall be constructed and approved so that it is a functional storm system, even if this requires construction of a part of the water or storm sewer system off of the property or in a later phase of the development. 
(b)  Looped water system. A looped water system shall mean the looping of the water mains in such a way, either to two supply points or within the subdivision (all phases), so that the system in the phase of the subdivision being platted has two sources of supply. This shall not require connection to two supply points if both are off of the property being subdivided. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.10.03)  
Sec. 122-304. - Utility improvement standards. 
Three sets of engineering plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer showing all utility improvements in a subdivision and shall be submitted to the city clerk. The plans shall show and conform to the design standards that follow: 
(1)  Streets. All streets and utilities within street or road rights-of-way will be in compliance with current standards of the county road commission. Curb and gutter will be required whenever an adequate storm drainage outlet is available. 
(2)  Storm drainage. All storm drainage plans shall conform to the city master storm drainage plan. When portions of the drainage plan are contained within the subdivision, that portion of the plan will be installed by the developer. 
(3)  Storm sewers. All storm sewers will be designed for rainfall intensity as follows: 
i = 154 / t+22 
Where: 
i = Intensity 
t = Time 
Provisions shall be made to accommodate off-site drainage which naturally flows to the subdivision on the basis of existing zoning. Minimum velocity in storm sewers shall be 2.5 feet per second. Rear yard catchbasins will be provided whenever rear yards are drained to the rear. Sump pump connections shall be provided to a storm sewer available to each lot. Retention facilities shall be required unless adequate off-site drainage is available. Materials, catchbasins, manholes and appurtenances are shown on the city's standard sewer specifications. 
(4)  Water mains. Where municipal water is available, water mains shall be installed in each subdivision in the city and conveyed to the city upon completion. The size shall comply with the city master water plan. In areas where municipal water is not available, the plat shall indicate the water supply source for the lots. Private wells shall be approved by the county health department. The installation of private wells shall not be required during the development of the subdivision. Water mains and appurtenances shall conform to the city's water main standards and specifications. 
(5)  Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed in subdivisions in the city whenever the summation of the capital charges for all lots within the subdivision is equal to or greater than the cost of bringing sanitary sewers to the site. If sanitary sewers cannot be constructed on this basis, other on-site sanitary sewage disposal will be allowed if approved by the appropriate county agency and the state department of health. Sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall conform to city's sanitary sewer standards and specifications. 
(6)  Overall grading plan. Each subdivision shall have an overall grading plan showing grades for rear yards, sidewalks, and rear yard catchbasins. Storm sewers, house grades and direction of surface drainage flow shall be shown. 
(7)  Trees. 
a.  The proprietor shall take the necessary action to preserve the trees within a proposed subdivision. The proprietor shall inventory the trees, file specifications for the protection of the trees during development, file specifications for grading and drainage for preservation of those trees to be retained, and comply with such other requirements relating to trees as are included in the zoning ordinance, this Code and the applicable standards and specifications. 
b.  Street trees shall be planted by the city, with at least one per lot at the lot line, but within the street right-of-way, after the construction and grading of the subdivision has been completed. Prior to the release of the final plat by the city clerk, the proprietor shall pay to the clerk, in cash or by certified check payable to the city, $200.00 per lot for subdivisions located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 residential zoning districts to purchase and plant the street trees. The city shall deposit any amount paid pursuant to this subsection in an interest-bearing account and shall credit interest earned to such account. The city shall determine the kind and size of trees for each street. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.10.04; Ord. No. 435, § 1, 12-2-1998)  
Sec. 122-305. - Surface drainage. 
(a)  Limitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to impede, block, change or alter the flow of surface drainage in any manner or to maintain any such impediment or blockage in any manner, in any subdivision, without the prior written express approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  Land improvement permit. No building permit shall be issued in any subdivision in the city unless a grading plan is filed for the lot and a land improvement permit is obtained from the city engineer pursuant to article II of chapter 114 pertaining to drainage. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.10.05)  
Sec. 122-306. - Sidewalk standards. 
The city engineer shall keep on file in his office standard specifications for the construction of sidewalks in subdivisions. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with such specifications. 
(Code 1976, § 4-01.10.06)  
Secs. 122-307—122-335. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED CONDOMINIUMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 469, § 1, adopted Mar. 6, 2002, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 122-336—122-401, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 4-16.01—4-16.04, 4-16.05.01—4-16.05.03, and 4-16.06—4-16.12. 
State Law reference— Condominium Act, MCL 559.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 122-336. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buildable means having sufficient land area outside of wetlands and any required setback and floodplains to construct a structure which meets minimum structure setback, floor area, parking, sewage disposal, and accessory use requirements or, where a permit is obtained, allowing construction of the structure in the wetland, required natural feature setback, or floodplains. 
Building envelope means the condominium unit, consisting of the land area and airspace to be occupied within a building site by the principal structure and any accessory structure. 
Building site means the building envelope and the associated land area or contiguous limited common element underlying and surrounding the building envelope. 
Common elements means the portions of the one-family residential detached condominium development other than building sites; common elements include sidewalks. 
Floodplain means as defined in article III of chapter 114 of this Code. 
Limited common element means the contiguous land area underlying and surrounding the building envelope which is limited to the exclusive use of the condominium unit owner. 
One-family residential detached condominium development means the development of land to create separate and detached one-family residential buildings and building sites under the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
Subdivisions ordinance means article III of this chapter pertaining to subdivisions. 
Wetland means as defined in article IV of chapter 126 of this Code. 
Zoning ordinance means zoning Ordinance No. 200, as amended, as printed in chapter 138 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, §1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 559.102 et seq.  
Sec. 122-337. - Purpose. 
(a)  Alternative method of development. The city council recognizes that state law authorizes a method of developing land to create separate and detached one-family residential buildings and building sites, under the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as an alternative to the more traditional method of development under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(b)  Compatibility with other developments. The purpose of this article is to provide regulations, standards and review procedures for one-family residential detached condominium developments to promote consistency and compatibility with developments in the city which have been or are being developed under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-338. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall apply to all one-family residential detached condominium developments in the city, except for those receiving site plan approval on or before October 3, 1994, provided such site plan remains in effect and in good standing. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-339. - Relational intent for acts and ordinances. 
(a)  Generally. The terms and provisions of this article are defined and used both in the context of the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), and in a manner intended to make comparison possible among the terms used in this article and those used in the zoning ordinance, subdivisions ordinance, and other applicable sections of this Code. 
(b)  Compliance with city ordinances. Compliance shall be as follows: 
(1)  Schedule of regulations. One-family residential detached condominium developments shall comply with all applicable sections of this Code, specifically including but without limitation the zoning ordinance's schedule of regulations. 
(2)  Synonymous terms. For purposes of this article, certain terms used in the zoning ordinance, subdivisions ordinance, and other application sections of this Code shall be considered synonymous with terms defined and used in this article. Specifically, in other sections of this Code, reference to the term: 
a.  "Lot" shall be synonymous with the term "building site"; 
b.  "Building" or "structure" shall be synonymous with the term "building envelope"; 
c.  "Preliminary plat" or "plat" shall be synonymous with the term "one-family residential detached condominium plan"; 
d.  "Subdivision" or "single-family residential subdivision" shall be shall be synonymous with the term "one-family residential detached condominium plan"; and 
e.  "Proprietor" shall be synonymous with the term "developer." 
(c)  Plan review objective and intent . With respect to the review of one-family residential detached condominium plans under this article, the city council recognizes that it may not always be practical or feasible to precisely apply traditional definitions and measures applicable to developments regulated under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and the subdivisions ordinance. Nevertheless, one-family residential detached condominium plan review under this article shall be accomplished, aside from procedural differences, with the objective and intent of achieving the same results as if the development were being developed under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and the subdivisions ordinance, except that nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring a one-family residential detached condominium development to obtain plat approval. 
(d)  Lot size variations. The provisions for average lot sizes and subdivision open space plan option contained in division 4 of article III of this chapter pertaining to subdivision control and section 138-1112 of the zoning ordinance shall also apply to one-family residential detached condominium developments, provided that the condominium plan is laid out to make it reasonably possible to compute lot size and open space. 
(e)  Buildable sites All building sites in a one-family residential detached condominium development shall be buildable. 
(f)  Variances. The city council may authorize variances and sidewalk waivers in the manner and to the extent described in section 122-91 through 122-95 of the subdivisions ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-340. - Fees. 
Review fees, charges, and insurance under this article shall be in accordance with division 4 of article III of chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Secs. 122-341—122-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 122-366. - Required. 
Review and approval of a one-family residential detached condominium plan under this division is prerequisite to construction or expansion of a one-family residential detached condominium development in the city. Review and approval shall occur in two stages: preliminary plan approval and final plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-367. - Preliminary plan. 
(a)  Contents. The preliminary plan for one-family residential detached condominiums shall include the plans, survey, sketches, drawings, statements and additional information and documentation containing all the information required in the subdivisions ordinance for tentative approval of a preliminary subdivision plat. The preliminary plan shall assign a number to each building envelope and shall describe the nature, location, and size of common elements. 
(b)  Review and approval. The preliminary plan shall conform to and be governed by the preparation, filing, technical review, and planning commission and city council initial review and approval requirements and procedures applicable to tentative approval of a preliminary subdivision plat under sections 122-152 through 122-156 of the subdivisions ordinance. 
(c)  Rights conferred with approval . Preliminary plan approval by the city council shall confer upon the developer, for one year, the right to submit a final plan. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-368. - Final plan. 
(a)  Contents. The final plan for one-family residential detached condominiums shall include all the information required in the approved preliminary plan and shall also include the following: 
(1)  Any additional information required in the subdivisions ordinance for final approval of a preliminary subdivision plat; and 
(2)  Evidence that all necessary state and county agency approvals have been obtained with respect to any aspect of the proposed one-family residential detached condominium development, including, without limitation, utilities, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, wetlands, and roads. 
(b)  Master deed. The developer shall also submit, for review and approval by the city staff and city attorney, five copies of a proposed master deed, bylaws and restrictive covenants, if any, containing provisions governing the maintenance and control of common areas and stormwater retention and detention facilities and conforming with all applicable sections of this Code. 
(c)  Review and approval. The final plan shall conform to and be governed by the preparation, filing and final technical review requirements and procedures applicable to final approval of a preliminary subdivision plat under sections 122-157 through 122-159 of the subdivisions ordinance. Following final technical review and recommendations by city staff for either approval or disapproval of the final plat, the final plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council, which shall thereafter review the final plan and shall: 
(1)  Approve. Approve the final plan if it conforms with the approved preliminary plan and all requirements of this article and other applicable sections of this Code; 
(2)  Disapprove. Disapprove the final plan if it fails to conform with the approved preliminary plan and all requirements of this article or other applicable sections of this Code; or 
(3)  Approve with conditions. As an alternative to disapproval of the final plan, the city council may approve the final plan with conditions intended to correct any deficiencies in the final plan. 
(d)  Notice of wetland/floodplain designation. Upon approval of a final plan by the city council but before a final plan is stamped "approved," the developer shall present to the city a fully executed notice of wetland or floodplain designation, in a recordable form satisfactory to the city, for every building envelope, building site, and common element which includes any area designated as wetland or floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Secs. 122-369—122-395. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 122-396. - Commencement of construction. 
Construction of utilities, street, sidewalks, and other improvements may commence only after final approval of the one-family residential detached condominium plan by the city council and approval of engineering plans by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-397. - Monuments. 
(a)  Placement required. All one-family residential detached developments shall be marked with monuments acceptable to the city and located at all one-family residential detached condominium development boundary angles; street intersection line; intersections of street and alley lines with one-family residential detached condominium development boundaries; points of curvature, compound curvature, reverse curvature, tangency and angles in street and alley lines; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line and at the intersection of limited common elements and common elements. 
(b)  Waiver. The city council may, in the manner prescribed in section 122-196 of the subdivisions ordinance, waive the requirements of subsection (a) of this section for up to one year after final plan approval; however, the city shall not issue building permits for buildings or structures being constructed on building sites until all required monuments and markers are in place. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-398. - Design and improvement standards. 
One-family residential detached condominium developments shall conform to the subdivision design standards and subdivision and project improvements standards set forth in divisions 5 and 6 of article III, respectively, of the subdivisions ordinance in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-399. - Building permits. 
(a)  Requirements. Except for building permits for up to four sales models, which shall be subject to the requirements of subsection 122-64(b)(1) of the subdivisions ordinance, the city shall not issue any building permits for buildings or structures being constructed on building sites for one-family residential detached condominiums until: 
(1)  Installation of required improvements. All utilities, streets, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, sidewalks and other required improvements have been installed and completed; 
(2)  Warranty deeds and easements. The city has received warranty deeds and easement documents, in recordable form, for all rights-of-way and easements being dedicated to the public; 
(3)  Maintenance agreement. The city has received and approved an agreement providing for adequate maintenance of any stormwater retention or detention facility, and further providing that if the facility is not adequately maintained, the city may perform the maintenance and charge the cost thereof to the condominium association; and 
(4)  Maintenance bond. The city has received a maintenance bond in an amount determined to be reasonable and necessary by the city engineer, to guarantee maintenance of the common elements for a two-year period after completion. Maintenance shall include removal of soils from any detention or retention basin and rework of drainage facilities so that they are in compliance with the approved engineering plans and specifications. 
(b)  Before completion of improvements. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the city may issue building permits for building sites before installation and completion of all utilities, streets, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, sidewalks, and other required improvements upon the developer's deposit with the city of an amount, in the form of cash, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or corporate surety bond acceptable to the city, sufficient to guarantee installation and completion of utilities, streets, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, sidewalks, and other required improvements. As work progresses, the city shall refund or release amounts to the developer in proportion to the work completed. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-400. - Improvements prior to occupancy. 
(a)  Required. No building or structure constructed on a building site for one-family residential detached condominiums shall be occupied other than as a model nor shall the city issue a final certificate of occupancy until all utilities, streets, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, sidewalks, and other required improvements are installed and completed in accordance with city standards. 
(b)  Issuance of temporary certificates . The city may issue temporary certificates of occupancy, provided utilities, streets, nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths, sidewalks, and other required utilities are substantially installed and completed and sufficient financial guarantees for completion of improvements before expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy have been provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002)  
Sec. 122-401. - Construction limitations. 
The construction limitations set forth in section 122-165 of the subdivisions ordinance shall apply to one-family residential detached condominium developments. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
State Law reference— Condominium Act, MCL 559.101 et seq.  
Chapter 126. - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; floods, ch. 114; land division, ch. 122; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq., MSA 13A.101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 126-1—126-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EXCAVATION AND LANDFILL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, MCL 324.9101 et seq., MSA 13A.9101 et seq.; ordinances, contents, applicability, enforcement, MCL 324.9106, MSA 13A.9106; soil conservation districts, MCL 324.9301 et seq., MSA 13A.9301 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 126-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible materials. 
Board of appeals means the city zoning board of appeals. 
Bulky wastes means large items of refuse, including but not limited to appliances, vehicles, furniture, large auto parts, tires, trees and branches, stumps and flotage. 
Cell means compacted refuse completely enveloped by cover material. 
Facility means any solid waste disposal site, system or process, the operation thereof including but not limited to personnel, equipment and buildings. 
Garbage means any putrescible solid and semisolid animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the production, handling, preparation, cooling, serving or consumption of food or food materials. 
Groundwater means any water found under the surface of the earth. 
Hazardous waste means any material including but not limited to explosives, pathological wastes, pesticides and chemicals, including empty containers previously used for such material, which, when discharged on land, into the air, or into or upon surface waters or groundwaters, presents an imminent and substantial danger to public health or welfare or to elements of the human environment, including but not limited to aquatic organisms, fish, shellfish, terrestrial life, birds and other wildlife. 
Impermeable means a hydraulic conductivity of no greater than 1 × (10)-7 centimeters per second as determined by field and/or laboratory tests made according to standard test methods. A medium has a hydraulic conductivity of unit length per unit time if it will transmit in unit time a unit volume of groundwater at the prevailing viscosity through a cross section of unit area, measured at right angles to the direction of flow, under a hydraulic gradient of unit change in head through unit length of flow. 
Industrial solid waste means any waste substance or a combination thereof resulting from the operation of or from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the development of any agricultural or natural resources. 
Inert solid wastes means wastes, including but not limited to glass, crockery, brick, plastics, rubber or other materials, which are shown through analytical testing to have minimum potential for environmental degradation and leachate production. 
Landfill means any disposal area or tract of land, building, unit or appurtenance or combination thereof that is used to collect, store, handle, dispose of, bury, cover over, or otherwise accept or retain refuse as defined in this section. 
Leachate means fluid that has percolated through solid waste and which contains contaminants consisting of dissolved or suspended materials, chemicals and microbial waste products from the solid waste. 
Lift means a layer of refuse cells which raises the ground elevation to an approximately common level. 
Other wastes means garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime cinders, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids, chemicals and all discarded materials other than sewage or industrial wastes. 
Refuse means any putrescible or nonputrescible solid waste, except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, offal and solid agricultural, commercial, industrial, hazardous and institutional wastes and construction wastes resulting from the operation of a contractor. 
Roads on site means roads designated on approved plans and such other areas used by vehicles and/or equipment for travel on a regular basis, other than for travel on an infrequent basis, necessitated by the operation of the landfill such as trucks and/or equipment going to and from a regular course of travel to the area which is currently being filled. 
Rubbish means any nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, such as cardboard, paper, plastic, metal or glass food containers, rags, waste metal, yard clippings, small pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, crockery, and other similar materials. 
Sewage means water-carried human or animal wastes from septic tanks; water closets; residences; building, industrial and municipal establishments; or other places, together with such groundwater infiltration, subsurface water, mixtures of industrial wastes or other wastes as may be present. 
Site means a parcel or unit of land. 
Sludge means a semiliquid sediment resulting from industrial or municipal establishments, or other places, together with such groundwater infiltration, subsurface water, mixtures of industrial wastes or other wastes as may be present. 
Soil excavation means the excavation or removal of any kind or nature from a site of gravel, clay, sand, soil or other similar materials. 
Solid waste means any garbage, refuse, rubbish, special solid waste, other waste, or any combination thereof with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. 
Special solid waste means hazardous wastes, radioactive wastes, agricultural wastes, industrial wastes or sludges, and sewage residues. 
Surface water means water occurring generally on the surface of the earth. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 126-27. - Purpose. 
The removal of topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel and other materials and the filling of land with refuse result in the emission of noise, dirt, dust, and odors, and such operations effect permanent changes in the topographical and geological characteristics of land; further, because of such changes, the operations create dangers and hazards by virtue of shifting earth, standing water, filtration into the underground water systems and other like considerations. In recognition of the fact that the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and the preservation of the city resources and the prevention of nuisances and hazards require reasonable control of these operations, it is deemed necessary that the operations be regulated and that standards be established wherein procedures permitting the operations are established, operating requirements are set forth, the administration of such standards are provided for, and penalties are provided. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.01)  
Sec. 126-28. - Administration. 
The zoning board of appeals is granted authority under this article as a city board to entertain applications, hold public hearings, grant permits and do all other acts authorized in this article and in the city zoning ordinance in chapter 138 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.03)  
Sec. 126-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. This article shall be enforced by the building department and any ordinance enforcement officer appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Inspections. By accepting a permit issued under this article, and/or the zoning ordinance in chapter 138, the owner and/or operator of any operation shall be presumed to have consented to regular and routine inspections of the property. The consent shall be authority to go on to any property under permit for purposes of any inspection. 
(c)  Authority to issue appearance tickets. The building inspector and enforcement officers shall have the authority to issue appearance tickets for a violation of this article pursuant to sections 9a through 9g of Public Act No. 147 of 1968 (MCL 764.9a et seq., MSA 28.868(1) et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.04)  
Sec. 126-30. - Effective date for existing landfills. 
All of the sections of this article, as amended, shall apply to new and existing landfills on June 5, 1976, the effective date of amendment, except the added requirements for bonds as contained in subsection 126-71(b)(1) and the requirements and/or standards added to subdivision III of division 3 of this article by the amendment which became effective on June 5, 1976, which require a revision of approved plans, shall not apply to existing landfills for a period of six months after the effective date. After the six-month period, all requirements and/or standards shall be effective as to existing landfills, except requirements and/or standards requiring a revision of approved plans shall not apply to those areas of existing landfills which are actually being physically prepared for or being filled at the end of the six-month period. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.12)  
Sec. 126-31. - Exclusions. 
Under this article, no permit shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Building construction excavations. Excavations for the construction of buildings and structures for which a building permit has been issued. 
(2)  Landscaping. The moving, grading or leveling of earth or rock materials by a property owner solely upon his property and not remove to other noncontiguous property. 
(3)  Filling of low land. The filling of land for purposes of construction where the land is low and in need of fill so long as the fill does not contain any refuse, it is not a commercial operation, and not more than five acres are involved on any given site. 
(4)  Minimal soil removal. The removal of soil, etc., when no more than 20 cubic yards are removed in any calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.03)  
Secs. 126-32—126-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 126-61. - Required. 
From and after May 29, 1975, no person shall operate a soil excavation site or a landfill in the city except in accordance with a permit issued by the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to the authority of this article and the city zoning ordinance in chapter 138. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.01)  
Sec. 126-62. - Application. 
An applicant for a permit required by this division shall submit to the board of appeals an application containing the following information: 
(1)  Full names and addresses of all parties of interest in the premises, setting forth their legal interest. Proof of the legal interest shall be provided. 
(2)  A detailed and full legal description of the premises wherein the operations are proposed shall be provided. 
(3)  Topographical survey map at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing existing and proposed grades on a two-foot contour interval. The grades shall be prepared and sealed by a civil engineer or land surveyor, registered as such by the state. 
(4)  A statement by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor as to the cubic yards of the material to be removed and/or the fill, and a detailed statement as to how the filling and/or materials removal is to be accomplished. 
(5)  A detailed statement as to all types of materials to be removed and/or filled, an indication of specific places on the property where each of the materials or fill are to be removed or placed, a detailed statement as to the methods of operation, the type of machinery or equipment to be used, and the estimated period of time that such operations shall cover. 
(6)  Details of similar operations carried on by the applicant. 
(7)  The type and daily number of vehicles to be used in the proposed operations. 
(8)  Identification of access roads, on-site roads, grades for proper drainage and any special draining devices if necessary, fencing, any structures on site existing or proposed, existing and proposed utilities, and any explanation of any on-site testing or other reliable survey data, including soil surveys, water tables and subsurface characteristics. 
(9)  Presentation of an environmental impact statement and a statement concerning trees and/or other vegetation as required by section 138-142 of the city zoning ordinance. 
(10)  A statement which specifies in detail the proposed use of the land after the excavation or filling. The final grades presented shall be consistent with the purposes for the property after completion of operations. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.02(A))  
Sec. 126-63. - Application attachments. 
Applications for a permit to operate a solid waste processing or disposal facility or areas shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  Design plans. Design plans prepared by and bearing the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in the state. 
(2)  Background data. Background data, including the following: 
a.  Present and estimated future contributory populations of the life of the system. 
b.  Estimated per capita daily domestic waste quantities in weight and volume. 
c.  Anticipated weight and volume of other wastes, including but not limited to industrial, agricultural and demolition wastes and street cleanings. 
d.  Ratio of the maximum daily volume anticipated to the average daily volume anticipated. 
(3)  Maps. Maps, in the number prescribed by the city, drawn to the scale of 100 feet equals one inch or larger and with two-foot contour intervals. Maps shall include as a minimum the following information: 
a.  Property boundaries and boundaries of areas to be filled. 
b.  Access road location. 
c.  Proposed traffic patterns. 
d.  Location of fencing. 
e.  Location of weighing facilities, if applicable. 
f.  Location of existing and proposed utilities. 
g.  Indication of use of adjoining land. 
h.  Borrow and soil storage areas. 
i.  Location of public and private water supplies, wells, springs, streams, swamps or other bodies of water within one-fourth of a mile of the proposed landfill site property lines. 
j.  Location of gas and oil wells. 
k.  Location of high-tension power line rights-of-way. 
l.  Location of fuel transmission pipeline rights-of-way. 
m.  Location of mining operations within one-fourth of one mile of property lines of the proposed landfill. 
(4)  Plan of operation. 
a.  A plan of operation shall be written and submitted which is specific as to areas to be filled, schedule of filling, site preparations, source and types of materials to be used as cover. 
b.  The plan should include details relative to the following: 
1.  Compaction of solid wastes. 
2.  Application of daily cover material. 
3.  Elevation and grade of final cover. 
4.  Liner construction. 
5.  Leachate collection treatment and recirculation or disposal. 
6.  Management of groundwater. 
7.  Management of surface water. 
8.  Erosion control. 
9.  Revegetation procedures to be used. 
10.  Typical cross sections of lifts, dimensions and elevations of the base lifts. 
11.  Grades required for proper drainage of lifts. 
12.  Decomposition gas control measures. 
(5)  Hydrogeologic investigation and report. A soils, geologic and groundwater report of the characteristics of the proposed site, prepared by a competent hydrogeologist, shall be based on a geological investigation showing a sufficient number of boring and wells drilled to a depth necessary to determine the soil, geology and seasonal groundwater flow conditions. These may be supplemented by excavations where appropriate. 
a.  Borings and wells shall be drilled five feet into the groundwater or 20 feet below the base of the proposed landfill, whichever is deeper. 
b.  One well shall be drilled near the point of highest ground surface elevation, ten feet into the groundwater. 
c.  A minimum of one groundwater elevation and quality monitoring well shall be drilled in each dominant direction of groundwater movement, down-gradient of refuse placement. One monitoring well shall be installed up-gradient of refuse placement. Groundwater monitoring well screens shall be set so that the top of the screen is five feet below the yearly low groundwater table elevation in unconfined aquifers. 
d.  All useable aquifers underlying the proposed landfill site and within one-quarter mile of the site shall be delineated. 
(6)  Other information. Such other information and material as the board shall require. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.02(B))  
Sec. 126-64. - Fees and/or costs. 
An applicant for a permit required by this division shall deposit such fees and/or costs as provided in section 110-256. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.02(C))  
Sec. 126-65. - Hearing/referral to planning commission. 
Before granting a permit for any property or additional area of property not previously under a permit issued under this division, the board of appeals shall hold a public hearing and shall, either before or after the public hearing, refer the application to the city planning commission for findings and recommendations as to whether the granting of the permit, as proposed, would: 
(1)  Permanently impair the intended land use potential of the property in question; 
(2)  Detrimentally affect the adjoining properties; and 
(3)  Be consistent with the planning and zoning of the area where the proposed operation is to be located. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.02(D))  
Sec. 126-66. - Basis for issuance. 
The board of appeals shall authorize the issuance of a permit under this division only if it finds that the granting of the permit: 
(1)  Will not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents; 
(2)  There has been compliance with all the requirements and standards of this article, and the other applicable sections, standards and regulations of this Code; 
(3)  The proposed operation will not create an unreasonable hazard, annoyance or inconvenience to the owners or occupants of nearby property; 
(4)  Will not significantly change the character of the neighborhood or unreasonably reduce the value of nearby property; and 
(5)  Will not create any significant obstacle to the implementation of the zoning plan as evidenced by this article and the master plan of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.02(E))  
Sec. 126-67. - Duration, expiration and renewal. 
After referral to the planning commission, either before or after the public hearing, and after considering all the available facts and details, the board of appeals may issue a permit pursuant to this division for a period of up to one year, expiring on May 15 of each year, and renewable annually for a year or less by the board of appeals without further public hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.02(F))  
Sec. 126-68. - Conditions. 
(a)  Necessity. The board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of the permit under this division that it may find necessary to ensure that the intent and purpose of this article is in all respects observed. 
(b)  Violation. Any violation of a condition included in the permit shall be construed as a violation of this article and shall give rise to the penalties provided in this article and shall be grounds for revoking the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.02(G))  
Sec. 126-69. - Revocation. 
(a)  Notice of violation. The board of appeals may, in its discretion, notify the owner and/or operator of any violation of the permit issued under this division and/or this article. 
(b)  Failure to abate violation. Upon failure of the owner and/or operator to abate the violation within five days after mailing or delivery of the notice, the operation site may be summarily closed, and the permit therefor suspended or revoked and resort had to the bond for restoration. 
(c)  Hearing request. Any owner and/or operator aggrieved of any notice sent pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the board of appeals, if the request is in writing and delivered to the city. The request should set forth why the operation site should not be summarily closed, the permit suspended or revoked, and resort had to the bond. 
(d)  Action pending hearing. In any case, if the board of appeals determines the operation of the landfill would be detrimental to the health and/or safety of persons and/or property, the board may summarily, and without five days' notice, suspend or revoke the permit, but shall grant a hearing upon request as provided in this section. 
(e)  Hearing. If a request for a hearing is received, the board of appeals shall hold a hearing within seven days and may, after the hearing, continue the suspension or revocation of the permit or take such other action as appears appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.04)  
Sec. 126-70. - Changes. 
The person issued a permit under this division shall submit a written request to the board of appeals for approval of changes to the original plans, specifications, reports and methods of operation submitted with a permit application. No such change shall be initiated until the written approval of the board of appeals has been obtained. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.05.05)  
Sec. 126-71. - Surety bond. 
(a)  Required. The applicant for a permit required under this division shall post a surety bond or some other equitable security satisfactory to the board of appeals naming the city as the beneficiary thereof in an amount determined by the board of appeals to be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Conditions. Conditions of the bond shall be as follows: 
(1)  Guarantee of compliance. Bonds shall guarantee compliance with this article, the permit requirements and conditions, and that the operation will be carried out according to the approved plans and specifications. 
(2)  Guarantee of landfill work performance. For a landfill, it shall further guarantee the performance of whatever work or rework that needs to be done to avoid harmful movement of gases or contamination to the groundwater or surface water and/or environment during operations and for five years after the completion of the landfill. 
(3)  Forfeiture of bond. Upon the lack of timely compliance with the requirements for which the bond guarantees, the city may use the bond proceeds to the extent necessary. 
(c)  Noncompliance enforcement. By filing an application, every applicant shall be deemed to have granted a license to the city and its agents and contractors to go onto a property under permit to use the bond proceeds for the purposes allowed by the bond, for which there has been noncompliance. 
(d)  Establishing amount. The amount of the bond shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Considerations. In fixing the amount of the bond, the board of appeals shall take into account the following: 
a.  The size and scope of the proposed operation. 
b.  Current prevailing cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator. 
c.  Other such conditions and factors as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in light of all facts and circumstances surrounding each application. 
(2)  Minimum amount. In no case will the sum of the surety bond be less than $500.00 for each acre or fraction thereof of land to be covered by the permit. 
(e)  Notice of lapse. The applicant shall notify the bonding company and provide proof thereof that the city be notified of any lapse in the effectiveness of the bond. 
(f)  Reduction of bond. For each acre restored and reclaimed in accordance with this article or otherwise, the bond may be reduced pro rata as determined by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.06)  
Secs. 126-72—126-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 126-101. - Hours of operation. 
Under this article, hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified by the board of appeals. No operation shall be permitted on Sundays and legal holidays. In emergency situations this time period may be modified by the building department, provided such emergency order shall not be effective for more than 72 hours. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.08)  
Sec. 126-102. - Compliance required. 
With a permit or without a permit, if one is not required, the carrying on of any alterations, modifications or changes in geographical or geological structures, which shall include all soil excavation for removal and filling of land or the creation or alteration of waterways, canals, etc., for either immediate use or for filling or removal to other places, the performance standards for sound, vibration, etc., shall be complied with as provided in this subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07)  
Sec. 126-103. - Atmospheric discharge. 
Under this article, it shall be unlawful to discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever any air contaminator for a period aggregating more than four minutes in any one-half hour which is as follows: 
(1)  Smoke. As dark or darker in shade as that designated as no. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is made a part of this article. However, the umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringelmann Chart. A Ringelmann Chart shall be on file in the office of the building department. 
(2)  Other airborne solids. Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the smoke described in subsection (1) of this section, except when the emission consists only of water vapor. The quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.01)  
Sec. 126-104. - Debris on public roads. 
(a)  Responsibility. The owner and/or permit holder of any site where there is soil removal and/or any filling shall take whatever steps are necessary to avoid any motor vehicle carrying or tracking onto any public right-of-way from the site any mud, dirt, clay, refuse, etc. 
(b)  Obligation to clean. If mud, dirt, clay, refuse, etc., is carried or tracked onto a public right-of-way and it does or might constitute a nuisance or hazard to public safety, the owner and/or permit holder shall clean the right-of-way when and as often as is necessary, presuming weather conditions permit. In any case, an owner and/or permit holder shall not leave any such debris on a public right-of-way after the end of any working day. 
(c)  Notice from city. If notified during a working day by the city of a condition which requires cleaning, the matter shall be taken care of within one hour, weather permitting. 
(d)  Violations. If a nuisance or hazardous condition is left after a working day or is not cleaned up within the one hour after receiving a request from the city, and weather does not prevent the cleanup, the city may issue a citation for the violation of this section due to the allowance of the condition to remain on the highway and/or may clean the right-of-way and charge the owner and/or permit holder with the cost thereof, which may be collected in any court having general jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.02)  
Sec. 126-105. - Drainage. 
(a)  Generally. Under this article, natural drainage shall not be blocked or diverted or altered in such a manner as to cause the natural water flow to back up onto adjacent property or to flow in a different course or rate of flow upon leaving the property upon which the blocking, diversion, or alteration occurs, unless an application is made and a permit is issued by the building department pursuant to plans which provide for a drainage flow that will not be detrimental to surrounding properties. 
(b)  Retention areas. No area designated for and/or used as a drainage retention area shall be altered, filled in, abandoned or used for other purposes, unless it is done pursuant to a permit issued under this section. 
(c)  Permit. A permit shall be required under this section, notwithstanding a permit is not otherwise required by this article. Permit requirements and procedures shall be as adopted by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.03)  
Sec. 126-106. - Drifting and blown material. 
Under this article, the drifting or airborne transmission beyond the property line of dust, particles or debris from any open stockpile, working areas or unplanted areas shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.04)  
Sec. 126-107. - Electromagnetic radiation. 
Applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission in regard to propagation of electromagnetic radiation are made a part of this article and shall be on file in the office of the building department. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.05)  
Sec. 126-108. - Floodplains, watercourses and wetlands. 
There shall be no excavation, soil removal, filling or depositing of materials in any floodplain, watercourse and/or wetlands, the terms being defined in chapter 114 pertaining to floodplains and in article IV of this chapter pertaining to watercourse and wetland protection, without a permit as provided in chapter 114 and in article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.06)  
Sec. 126-109. - Gases. 
Under this article, the escape of or emission of any gas in concentrations so as to be injurious, destructive or explosive shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.07)  
Sec. 126-110. - Glare or heat. 
Any operation pursuant to this article that produces intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view from any point along the lot line, except during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.08)  
Sec. 126-111. - Light. 
Under this article, exterior lighting shall be so installed that the surface of the source of light shall not be visible from any bedroom window and shall be so arranged as far as practical to reflect light away from any residential use, and in no case shall more than one footcandle power of light cross a lot line five feet above the ground in a residential district. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.09)  
Sec. 126-112. - Odors. 
The emission of noxious, odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines, when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of clean air, or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.10)  
Sec. 126-113. - Radioactive materials. 
Under this article, radioactive materials shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.11)  
Sec. 126-114. - Sound. 
(a)  Under this article, the pressure level of sounds shall not exceed the following decibel levels when adjacent to the following types of uses and when measured at the common property line: 
Sound Level 	 Adjacent Use 
75 dBA 	Residential 
85 dBA 	Commercial 
90 dBA 	Industrial and other 
 
(b)  The sound levels shall be measured using a weighted decibel measurement (referenced to 20 micropascals) and with a type of audio output meter approved by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. Objectionable noises due to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.12)  
Sec. 126-115. - Vibration. 
Under this article, all machinery shall be so mounted and operated as to prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of 0.003 of one inch measured at any property line of its source. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.13)  
Sec. 126-116. - Roads. 
Roads on landfill and soil excavation sites shall be designed and constructed so that traffic will flow smoothly and will not be interrupted by inclement weather. Nonpaved roads between the site and the nearest paved roads, paved roads off the site within one-fourth mile of the site entrance which are used by vehicles and/or equipment traveling to or from the site, and all roads on site shall not be used unless they are treated by sufficient oil, water and/or chemical substance, whichever would be appropriate for the surface, and frequent enough so that they are dustfree whenever used by vehicles and/or equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.14)  
Sec. 126-117. - Soil erosion. 
If a soil erosion permit is required by part 91 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq., MSA 13A.9101 et seq.), no operation shall take place until a permit has been obtained. There shall be compliance at all times with the requirements of the soil erosion permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.07.15)  
Secs. 126-118—126-145. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Soil Excavation 
 
Sec. 126-146. - Limits on perimeter. 
No cut or excavation shall be closer than 100 feet from the nearest street, highway, or alley right-of-way line or from the nearest perimeter property line. However, the board of appeals may prescribe more strict requirements in order to give sublateral support to surrounding property where swell or geographic conditions warrant it. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.01)  
Sec. 126-147. - Surface water drainage. 
Under this article, the premises shall at all times be graded so that surface water drainage is not interfered with. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.02)  
Sec. 126-148. - Standing water. 
Under this article, no soil, sand, clay, gravel or other similar material shall be removed in such a manner as to cause water to stand or accumulate or to result in a place of danger or a menace to the public health or safety. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.03)  
Sec. 126-149. - Slopes. 
The slopes of the banks of the excavation shall not exceed a minimum ratio of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, and where ponded water results from the operation, the slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of five feet. Suitable vegetation shall be planted on all finished slopes to deter erosion. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.04)  
Sec. 126-150. - Fence. 
Where there is an excavation in excess of five feet, the permit holder shall erect a fence of at least six feet in height, of wire mesh or such other suitable materials as shall be approved by the board of appeals to afford protection to persons and property. Any gates required shall be kept locked when operations are not carried on. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.05)  
Sec. 126-151. - Signs. 
Where soil removal or grading operations result in a body of water forming, the owner or operator of the quarry shall erect signs stating "Keep Out—Danger" on the required fence around the excavation not more than 200 feet apart or as otherwise required by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.06)  
Sec. 126-152. - Topsoil. 
(a)  Stockpiling. Whenever topsoil exists, suitable for growing turf or for other land use, at the time the operations begin, a sufficient quantity of the existing topsoil shall be stockpiled on the site so that the entire site, when soil stripping or removal operations are completed, may be recovered with a minimum of four inches of topsoil. 
(b)  Replacement. The replacement of the topsoil shall be in a manner suitable for growing turf. 
(1)  Immediately after termination. The replacement of such topsoil shall be made immediately following the termination of the stripping or removal operation. 
(2)  Progressive. If, however, such stripping or removal operations continue over a period of time greater than 30 days, the operator shall replace the stored topsoil over the stripped area as he progresses. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.08)  
Sec. 126-153. - Processing of materials. 
Processing of materials mined from any property shall be permitted only in an I-2 industrial zoned district. Processing shall mean altering the material. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.09.09)  
Secs. 126-154—126-180. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Landfills 
 
Sec. 126-181. - Permitted. 
Landfills consistent with this article shall be permitted in the city so as to provide an engineered method of disposing of solid wastes on land, without creating unreasonable environmental hazards. Methods used to dispose of solid wastes shall include spreading in thin layers, confining to the smallest practical area, compacting to the smallest practical volume, and covering with suitable material at least once a day before the end of each operating day. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.01)  
Sec. 126-182. - Facilities design and operation planning. 
(a)  Generally. Planning, design and operation of landfill facilities shall be based on empirically derived data and state of technology. 
(b)  Liners, collection and treatment systems. Landfill liners and leachate collection and treatment systems shall be incorporated in the design and operation of landfill facilities unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board of appeals the natural hydrogeologic environment at the site is protective of the surface water and groundwater resource. 
(c)  Hydrogeologic environments. Demonstration of naturally protective hydrogeologic environments shall be based on the following: 
(1)  The hydrogeologic investigation requirements as specified in this article. 
(2)  Testing of the hydraulic conductivities of the natural soils below and contiguous to refuse placement. 
(3)  Testing of cation exchange capacities and overall attenuation capabilities of the natural soils below and contiguous to the refuse place. Chemical and physical soil testing shall be undertaken on undisturbed natural soils or on disturbed natural soils which are restored to field bulk density and moisture content levels. Contaminant attenuation capacity testing shall be performed with representative municipal refuse leachate or with solutions specifically approved by the city. 
(4)  Mineralogical evaluations. 
(5)  Soils testing by competent soils scientists and/or hydrogeologists. 
(d)  Decomposition gas control and monitoring. Design plans shall include provisions for control of decomposition gases. Monitoring of decomposition gases may be required. 
(e)  Environment and pollution. Sanitary landfills shall be operated so as to create an environment as aesthetically desirable as reasonably possible and to preclude pollution of land, air, surface and subsurface waters. 
(f)  Land use specified. A land use for the completed disposal site shall be specified, and design and operations shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.02)  
Sec. 126-183. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Operation. The operation of a sanitary landfill shall be conducted in a manner which prohibits insect and rodent breeding, odor problems, dust problems and fires. 
(b)  Hazardous wastes. Hazardous wastes shall be disposed of separately and immediately in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Concealment. The site shall be maintained in such condition as to reasonably conceal all evidence of solid waste disposal. 
(d)  Accidents and diseases. Employees at the site shall have knowledge of the types of accidents and diseases that are prevalent among sanitation workers. An emergency plan for handling accident victims shall be established. 
(e)  Authorized access. Access to the site shall be limited to landfill employees and those persons specifically authorized access to the site. This subsection shall not be construed to limit the right of entry by the mayor. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.03)  
Sec. 126-184. - Zoning. 
(a)  Refuse. The filling of land with refuse, except inert solid wastes and noncombustible rubbish, shall be prohibited in any zoned district other than an I industrial zone district, unless waived by the city council after receipt of findings and a granting of a variance by the board of appeals of a similar provision in the city zoning ordinance, and it appears the waiver would not detrimentally affect surrounding properties. 
(b)  Inert solid wastes and quarry materials. The filling of land with inert solid wastes and noncombustible rubbish, sand, gravel, earth, rock, concrete, or other similar materials, excluding combustible rubbish, garbage, ashes, and other similar waste materials, may be permitted in any district by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.04)  
Sec. 126-185. - Limits on perimeter. 
(a)  Refuse. There shall be no filling or depositing of refuse at a landfill, except inert solid waste and noncombustible rubbish, within 500 feet of any adjacent residentially zoned district unless written consent is secured from all landowners of property within 500 feet of where such filling is to take place. Once consent is given and filed with the city, it may not be revoked so long as filling activities continue without unreasonable delays or until an abandonment of the project. 
(b)  Any material. There shall be no filling or depositing of any material within 100 feet of any existing dwelling or residentially zoned districts. 
(c)  Waiver. This section may be waived by the city council after receipt of findings and a granting of a variance by the board of appeals of a similar provision in the city zoning ordinance, and it appears the waiver would not detrimentally affect surrounding properties. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.05)  
Sec. 126-186. - Groundwater and surface water protection. 
(a)  Removal of pollutants. Unless it is demonstrated there is compliance with the standards and the rules and regulations for the protection of surface and groundwater adopted by the city council, all leachate from a landfill shall be collected and treated so as to provide for the removal of pollutants reflecting the application of a practicable level of technology. 
(b)  Impermeable liner. As provided in subsection (a) of this section, all refuse disposal areas and leachate collection ditches and ponds shall be lined with an impermeable liner. An artificial impermeable liner shall be installed unless the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the city that a natural soil liner is impermeable. 
(c)  Disposal of treated leachate. All treated leachate shall be recirculated into the fill area or disposed of in a manner which will adequately protect the public health and safety, as determined by the board of appeals. It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that groundwaters and surface waters resulting from refuse disposal and/or disposal of treated leachate will be compatible with existing or potential uses of the standards and rules and regulations for the protection of and quality of groundwater and surface water. The technology is ever changing and the board may consider various systems for collecting, treating and recycling leachate as technology develops. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.06)  
Sec. 126-187. - Fences. 
A fence or some other suitable substitute as shall be approved by the board of appeals shall enclose the filling operation of the landfill to prevent the scattering of rubbish, garbage of other fill materials; to obscure the landfill from public sight; and to prevent access by unauthorized persons. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.07)  
Sec. 126-188. - Unloading supervision. 
Unloading the refuse shall be continuously supervised in accordance with the landfill design and planned progress of the site. Unloading of refuse and access to the site shall be limited to those times when a responsible supervisor with authority is on duty. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.10)  
Sec. 126-189. - Spreading and compacting of waste. 
At a landfill, solid waste shall be spread and compacted in shallow layers not exceeding a depth of two feet of compacted material. Compaction of solid waste shall be made to the maximum extent practicable. Individual cells in sanitary landfills shall be of a width and depth commensurate with good design practice considering the type of equipment to be utilized. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.11)  
Sec. 126-190. - Special solid and hazardous wastes. 
Special solid wastes shall not be deposited at any landfill or disposed of without first submitting a plan and obtaining the city's approval for such disposal. Whenever hazardous waste, including but not limited to radioactive wastes and those materials listed in the state water resources commission's list of critical materials, is proposed for disposal, a separate environmental impact assessment may be required by the city. The assessment shall consider past operation of the existing landfill and shall be of a scope consistent with the degree of hazard associated with the waste. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.13)  
Sec. 126-191. - Bulky waste. 
Adequate provision shall be made for the handling and compaction of bulky solid wastes when such wastes are not excluded from the landfill site. Tires, as a general operational procedure, should be excluded from the site. When tires are accepted they shall be spread evenly over the bottom of the refuse cell or shredded prior to disposal. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.14)  
Sec. 126-192. - Malodorous solid waste. 
Unusually malodorous solid wastes shall be covered immediately after disposal at the landfill. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.15)  
Sec. 126-193. - Gases. 
Decomposition gases generated within the sanitary landfill shall be controlled on site. Decomposition gases shall not be allowed to migrate laterally from the sanitary landfill. Gases shall be vented into the atmosphere through cutoff trenches, forced ventilation systems, or other suitable methods in such a way that they do not become concentrated in explosive or hazardous quantities. The ventilation system shall be maintained during operation and for a period of five years after completion or longer if deemed necessary by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.16)  
Sec. 126-194. - Salvage. 
Salvage operation shall not be permitted at a landfill unless special provisions are approved by the board of appeals to ensure that separation of material and disposition are undertaken in a suitable manner. No salvage operation shall create unsightliness, nuisances, health hazards, or potential health or safety hazards. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.17)  
Sec. 126-195. - Burning. 
Burning of rubbish and/or garbage at the site of any landfill is prohibited. All precautions shall be taken to avert spontaneous combustion. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.18)  
Sec. 126-196. - Blowing paper. 
Measures shall be provided to control paper blowing from a landfill. Fences and the entire area shall be policed regularly, on a continuing basis. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.19)  
Sec. 126-197. - Cover. 
(a)  Generally. Daily and final depth of cover requirements for a landfill may be increased when suitable cover material is not being utilized. Three feet of clearance shall be maintained between trenches when the trench method is used. Operations shall be planned and conducted so that the minimum possible amount of solid waste is exposed at any one time. 
(b)  Material. The soil used as the daily and final cover material shall be of such character that it: 
(1)  Can be compacted to minimize percolation of water through the cover, unless suitable leachate containment, collection, treatment, and disposal and/or recirculation procedures are utilized; 
(2)  Does not crack excessively when dry; 
(3)  Is free of putrescible materials and large objects; and 
(4)  Is capable of growing and supporting vegetation. 
(c)  Daily covering. A layer of suitable cover material shall be placed over all solid waste as soon as possible after deposit and, at least, by the end of each working day. This layer shall be of such depth that when compacted it produces a cover layer of at least six inches in depth. The required minimum of six inches of cover shall be maintained at all times. Any disposal area receiving daily cover, which will not be filled with additional solid waste for a period greater than one year, shall be covered with a total of two feet of suitable cover material. 
(d)  Final cover. Final cover of suitable material, compacted to a minimum thickness of two feet, shall be placed over all completed areas or cells by the end of the working day on which the area or cell was completed. Areas receiving final cover shall be seeded to provide vegetation to stabilize the cover and prevent soil erosion and dust. 
(e)  Completed sections. The permittee shall inspect the entire surface or completed sections of the landfill at least quarterly following placement of the final two feet of cover material. All cracked, eroded, and uneven areas shall be promptly repaired. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.20)  
Sec. 126-198. - Insect and rodent control. 
At a landfill, spraying exposed solid waste with insecticides and deodorizers and supplemental rodent control measures may be required when cover cannot be accomplished immediately or whenever such measures are necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.21)  
Sec. 126-199. - Equipment. 
Adequate numbers and type of equipment commensurate with the size of the operation shall be available at the site to ensure operation of the landfill in accordance with this article. Provisions shall be made for the routine operational maintenance of equipment at the landfill site. Substitute equipment shall be obtained when maintenance or breakdown renders normal operating equipment inoperative for a period in excess of 24 hours. Provided the temperature is above freezing, refuse moving equipment shall be washed down each day such equipment is utilized. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.22)  
Sec. 126-200. - Personnel. 
Sufficient numbers and types of personnel shall be available at the landfill site to ensure capability for operation in accordance with this article. Competent supervision of these personnel shall be provided. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.23)  
Sec. 126-201. - Personnel facilities. 
Telephone or radio communication equipment, suitable shelter, and sanitary services shall be provided for personnel at the landfill site. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.24)  
Sec. 126-202. - Completion of landfill. 
(a)  Suspension of disposal operations. When the permittee decides to temporarily or permanently suspend disposal operations at a particular landfill site, the permittee shall within 20 days so notify the city. The permittee shall not remove equipment from the site prior to approval by the city. 
(b)  Corrective work. The city shall direct the permittee to perform corrective work at the site when such work is required in order to fulfill the requirements of this article. The corrective work, if required, shall be completed before the landfill operation is suspended or accepted as completed. 
(c)  Cover maintenance. The permittee shall repair all cracked, eroded, and uneven areas in the final cover which occur during a two-year period following completion of the landfill. During this period, the cover surface shall be reseeded if insufficient vegetation exists to stabilize the surface. 
(d)  Performance bond. A suitable bond may be required by the city to guarantee such completion and maintenance. 
(e)  Insect and rodent control program. An insect and rodent control program may be required as part of the completion work. 
(f)  Monitoring and analysis program. A program for monitoring and analysis shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Groundwater and surface water. The program for monitoring and analysis of groundwater and surface water shall be as follows: 
a.  Initial sampling. A sample of groundwater shall be collected from each and every monitor well, points of discharge of intercepted groundwater (springs) and surface water bodies prior to the beginning of any landfill operations. These samples shall be analyzed for iron, chloride, hardness as CaCO 3 , sulfate, nitrates, chemical oxygen demand (COD), total dissolved solids (TDS), and pH. These initial samples will serve as background data against which future samples can be compared. 
b.  Monitoring samples. All monitoring points shall be sampled and tested for the required parameters every three months and/or more or less frequently if the need is demonstrated. The depth to the water table from a point of known elevation shall be measured and recorded in all monitor wells prior to the collection of each water quality sample. Wells shall be pumped for five minutes prior to sampling. The permittee shall submit the results of all analyses to the city not later than 30 days after sample collection. Additional guidelines for monitoring well installation and sampling may be promulgated by the city council. 
c.  Additional sampling, wells and analyses. If any sample appears to have been influenced by the landfill operation, additional sampling, monitoring points and wells, and analyses may be required. 
d.  Duration. The monitoring and analyses program shall be continued for at least five years following completion of the landfill or a longer period if required by the city. Additional monitoring wells may be required when the initial monitoring wells indicate a change in the groundwater flow system and/or the quality of the water. 
(2)  Decomposition gases. When monitoring points for decomposition gases are required in the landfill, the permittee shall maintain them for at least five years or for a longer period if required by the city. The permittee shall submit quarterly gas composition data to the city. The city may require quarterly gas generation rate data. 
(3)  Leachate. The permittee shall maintain and operate the leachate collection and treatment system at the completed landfill for at least five years or for a longer period if required by the city. The permittee shall submit leachate quantity and quality data to the city for those parameters and at such frequencies as specified by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.25)  
Sec. 126-203. - Animals. 
Scavenging and animal feeding on the landfill site shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.26)  
Sec. 126-204. - Operational reports and records. 
(a)  Estimates of waste processed. Provisions shall be made for estimating the weight and daily volume and type of solid waste being processed at a landfill. The weight and volume figure obtained shall be related to the various types of solid waste. 
(b)  Records. The following records shall be required: 
(1)  Solid wastes. The permittee shall maintain written records of the estimated volume and weight of solid wastes accepted at the landfill. 
(2)  Refuse lift or trench. In addition to subsection (b)(1) of this section, the permittee shall maintain records of the location and completion date of each refuse lift or trench. 
(3)  Hazardous wastes. Separate records of the same type shall be compiled for hazardous wastes. 
(4)  Leachate discharge. Separate records of the quantity and discharge quality of all leachate shall also be maintained for those parameters and at such frequencies as specified by the city. All submitted records shall be signed by the landfill supervisor. 
(c)  Quarterly reports. The permittee shall submit quarterly reports to the city. These reports shall include the following information: 
(1)  Monthly data on quantities of waste (weight and volumes) or each distinguishable type of waste, including those that require separate disposal. Mixed municipal refuse may be considered as a single type of waste. 
(2)  A schedule of charges for use of the sanitary landfill. 
(3)  Estimated volume of the landfill used during the quarter and the landfill's projected life. 
(4)  Identification and number of lifts or trenches completed and dates completed. 
(5)  During the year following final cover (completion) of areas of the landfill, the quarterly report shall include a description of the repairs effected which includes location and extent. 
(6)  The accuracy of the reports shall be verified by signature of the permit holder of the landfill or his authorized representative. 
(d)  Construction certification. Construction certification shall include the following: 
(1)  As-built drawings. As-built drawings detailing the location, material and method of construction of landfill liners; leachate collection, treatment and disposal systems; groundwater and surface water control measures; monitoring points; and other constructed features required by this article shall be prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer including certification that construction of landfill facilities conforms to submitted plans and specifications and the specific conditions attached to the landfill permit by the board of appeals. 
(2)  Hydraulic conductivity tests. In addition to subsection (d)(1) of this section, testing, according to standard methods, shall be made to determine the hydraulic conductivity of installed liners. Such testing shall be performed and certified by a qualified testing laboratory or a registered professional engineer at a frequency to be specified by the city, depending on the nature of the liner materials. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.27)  
Sec. 126-205. - Reuse of partial or completed landfills. 
Any person owning or controlling the reuse of any partially completed or fully completed landfill shall obtain the approval of the city prior to such reuse. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.10.28)  
Secs. 126-206—126-230. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Restoration 
 
Sec. 126-231. - Required. 
All areas within any landfill or excavation site operating under a single permit shall be restored progressively. Restoration shall be in accordance with the plan approved by the board of appeals. Restoration shall be to a condition which blends with the general surrounding terrain so as to appear reasonably natural. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.11.01)  
Sec. 126-232. - Inspections. 
The building department shall conduct inspections under this subdivision and shall notify the owner and/or operator by regular mail of any portions of the site that it deems abandoned and/or ready for restoration. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.11.02)  
Sec. 126-233. - Completion dates. 
Upon receipt of notification as provided in section 126-232, the owner and/or operator shall have the areas restored within 30 days or within the 30 days shall supply the board of appeals with a written reply indicating the dates of anticipated restoration. The board of appeals may accept or reject the dates. If the dates are accepted, they shall be binding on both parties. If rejected, the board of appeals shall set new dates, which shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.11.03)  
Sec. 126-234. - Release of surety bond. 
(a)  Completion. Upon completion of the restoration required under this subdivision or upon completion of a part thereof, the person posting the bond may make application to the building department for refund or reduction of the bond or its pro rata share. Upon examination by the building department and upon its notice in writing to the board of appeals that the restoration is in keeping with the plan requirement or agreement as set forth by the board of appeals and that the restoration is in keeping with the general surrounding terrain so as to appear reasonably natural, the board of appeals shall refund or reduce the bond pro rata. 
(b)  Failure to comply. The following actions may be taken for failure to comply: 
(1)  Claim against bond. If the restoration does not comply with the requirements in subsection (a) of this section or if the restoration is not complete within 60 days after expiration of all permits issued pursuant to this article or after the days as set pursuant to section 126-233, the city may utilize the bond proceeds to restore the site and affected areas to comply with the approved plan and perform whatever work needs to be done to avoid harmful movement of gases or contamination to the groundwater or surface water and/or environment for five years after completion or expiration of permits. 
(2)  Additional remedies. If the cost of the restoration exceeds the amount of the bond, the permittee shall pay the city the amount of each excess. 
(Code 1976, § 4-04.11.04)  
Secs. 126-235—126-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TREE CONSERVATION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 106. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 126-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agriculture means the use of land for the primary purpose of deriving income from growing plants or trees on land, including but not limited to land used principally for fruit or timber production, but not including land used principally for another use and only incidentally for growing trees or plants for income. 
Commercial nursery or tree farm means a licensed plant or tree nursery or farm in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee, which are planted and grown for sale to the general public in the ordinary course of the licensee's business. 
Diameter at breast height (dbh) means a tree's diameter in inches measured by diameter tape at 4½ feet above the ground. On multistem trees, the largest diameter stem shall be measured. 
Drip line means an imaginary vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
Regulated tree means a tree having six inches or greater diameter at breast height, which is not otherwise exempt from regulation under this article. 
Remove or removal means the act of removing or destroying a tree by digging up or cutting down, or the effective removal or destruction through damage, poison, or other means. 
Transplant means the relocation of a tree from one place to another on the same property. 
Tree means any living, self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally grows to an overall height of 15 feet or more. 
Undeveloped means a parcel of land which is unplatted and substantially unimproved. With respect to land that is partially improved by virtue of a building or other improvement located on a portion of the land, the portion of the land that does not contain the building or improvement shall be considered undeveloped. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.03) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 126-262. - Findings. 
Rapid growth, the spread of development, and increasing demands upon natural resources have the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, or eliminating many of the trees and other forms of vegetation and natural resources and processes associated therewith, which, if preserved and maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitute important physical, aesthetic, recreation and economic assets to current and future residents of the city. Specifically, the city council finds that: 
(1)  Public health protected. Tree and woodland growth protects public health through the absorption of air pollutants and contamination, through the reduction of excessive noise and mental and physical damage related to noise pollution, and through its cooling effect in the summer months; 
(2)  Public safety enhanced. Trees and woodlands enhance public safety through the prevention of erosion, siltation, and flooding; and 
(3)  Essential component of general welfare. Trees and woodland areas are an essential component of the general welfare of the city, providing play and recreational areas, natural beauty, and an irreplaceable heritage for current and future city residents. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.01)  
Sec. 126-263. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use of trees and woodlands located in this city in order to minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion and siltation, a loss of wildlife and vegetation, and/or from the destruction of the natural habitat. 
(2)  Protect the woodlands, including trees and other forms of vegetation, of this city for their economic support of local property values when allowed to remain uncleared and/or unharvested and for their natural beauty, wilderness character, and their geological, ecological, or historical significance. 
(3)  Provide for the paramount public concern for these natural resources in the interest of health, safety and general welfare of the residents of this city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.02)  
Sec. 126-264. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  Undeveloped land. This article shall apply to all land in the city which was undeveloped on August 3, 1988. 
(b)  Approved site plans and plats. This article shall apply to all land included within a site plan, preliminary subdivision plat, or condominium plan submitted to the city for approval, except this article shall not apply to land included within a site plan which received final approval or a preliminary subdivision plat which received tentative approval prior to August 3, 1988, provided the site plan or plat approval remains in effect and in good standing under article III of chapter 122 or under chapter 138 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.04)  
Sec. 126-265. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
Compliance with this article shall be enforced by the mayor, the county sheriff's department, the building department director and ordinance enforcement officers, and other enforcement officers as the mayor may designate. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.17.05)  
Sec. 126-266. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Municipal civil infraction. Any person who violates any section of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to a fine as provided in section 66-37, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(b)  Injunctive relief. Any activity conducted in violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the city may commence a civil suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the violation. 
(c)  Fee for illegally removed trees. In addition to any civil fine or sanction provided for a determination of responsibility for violation of this article, and notwithstanding whether or not the city has commenced a civil suit for injunctive relief: 
(1)  Payment to city tree fund. Any person who removes or causes any tree to be removed except in accordance with this article shall forfeit and pay to the city a civil fee equal to the total value of trees illegally removed or damaged, as computed from the International Society of Arboriculture Shade Tree Evaluation Guide or The Michigan Shade Tree Evaluation Guide. The fee shall accrue to the city, and, if necessary, the city may file a civil action to recover the fee. The city shall place any sum collected in the city tree fund. 
(2)  Tree replacement. Alternatively the city may require replacement of illegally removed or damaged trees as restitution in lieu of the fee. Replacement will be on an inch-for-inch basis computed by adding the total diameter measured at the diameter at breast height in inches of the illegally removed or damaged trees, unless an alternative basis of replacement or restitution is approved by the city. The city may use other reasonable means to estimate the tree loss if destruction of the illegally removed or damaged trees prevents exact measurement. 
(3)  Fee payment and tree replacement. The city may also require a combination of fee payment and tree replacement. 
(d)  Stop work order. The city may also issue a stop work order or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until the sections of this article, including any conditions attached to a tree removal permit, have been fully met. Failure to obey a stop work order shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.17)  
Sec. 126-267. - Exceptions to tree removal permit requirement. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of subdivisions I and II of division 3 of this article, the following activities are allowed without a tree removal permit, unless otherwise prohibited by statute or ordinance: 
(1)  Agriculture, nursery business, tree farm. Tree removal or transplanting occurring during use of land for agriculture or the operation of a commercial nursery or tree farm, but only in regard to trees planted for commercial nursery or tree farm purposes, and not in regard to naturally occurring trees. 
(2)  Emergencies. Actions made necessary by an emergency, such as tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect infestation or disease, or other disaster, in order to prevent injury or damage to persons or property or to restore order. 
(3)  Road right-of-way. Tree removal or transplanting performed by or on behalf of the city, the county road commission or the state department of transportation within a road right-of-way, where the trees pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threaten to disrupt public utility services or where necessary for road improvement or maintenance, provided that all feasible and prudent efforts have been made to prevent or minimize tree damage or loss and, further provided, that prior written notice is given to the department of parks, forestry, and facilities. 
(4)  Utilities. Tree removal by the city or public or private utility companies which is necessary in connection with the installation, repair or maintenance of utilities, provided that all feasible and prudent efforts have been made to prevent or minimize tree damage or loss and, further provided, that prior written notice is given to the department of parks, forestry, and facilities. For purposes of this subsection, utilities shall include water, sewer and stormwater drainage systems and facilities, as well as electric, gas, telephone, telecommunications, and cable television lines. 
(5)  Dead, diseased or damaged trees. Removal of dead, diseased, or damaged trees, where the damage resulted from an accident or nonhuman cause and where the department of parks, forestry, and facilities concurs the nature or extent of the disease or damage warrants removal. 
(6)  Nominal activity. Where the activity involves the removal or transplanting of three or fewer regulated trees within a six-month period and is not related to the development of a parcel or construction of a building or structure. This subsection shall not apply to trees designated as historic or landmark trees pursuant to division 4 of this article. 
(7)  Residential (small parcels). Removal or transplanting of trees growing on occupied one-family residential parcels of less than one acre. This subsection shall not apply to trees located in the public right-of-way or to trees designated as historic or landmark trees pursuant to division 4 of this article. 
(8)  Residential (large parcels). On occupied one-family residential parcels of one acre or more, the removal or transplanting of trees due to construction of appurtenances or structures accessory to existing structures. This subsection shall not apply to trees located in the public right-of-way or to trees designated as historic or landmark trees pursuant to division 4 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.06)  
Secs. 126-268—126-295. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VARIANCE 
 
Sec. 126-296. - Authority. 
The city council may grant a variance from this article when undue hardship may result from strict compliance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.16.01)  
Sec. 126-297. - Notice. 
(a)  Adjoining property owners. The city shall send notice of a request for a variance from this article by regular mail to the owners, according to the city's tax roll, of all property immediately adjoining the property for which the variance is requested, including property directly across public rights-of-way and easements. 
(b)  Timing and content. The notice shall be sent at least seven days before the meeting at which the city council will consider the variance request and shall include a statement that interested persons may examine the application for a variance at the planning department. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.16.02)  
Sec. 126-298. - Conditions. 
In granting any variance from this article, the city council may prescribe conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.16.03)  
Sec. 126-299. - Findings. 
No variance from this article shall be granted unless the city council finds as follows: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner. 
(3)  The variance will further the objectives and policies of this article, this Code, the zoning ordinance in chapter 138, and the master land use plan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.16.04)  
Secs. 126-300—126-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TREE REMOVAL  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 126-326. - Plat or site plan approval. 
A regulated tree that is to be removed as part of land clearing, construction or development activity which requires site plan or subdivision plat approval may be removed only after final approval of the site plan or preliminary subdivision plat. Such final approval must precede issuance of the tree removal permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.05.02)  
Sec. 126-327. - One-family residential developments. 
In addition to other requirements of this article, there shall be compliance with the following requirements in all one-family residential developments which, as proposed, will result in two or more lots or building sites through land division, subdivision, or condominiums: 
(1)  Building envelopes. The developer shall designate building envelopes for all structures as follows: 
a.  One-family residential developments. The building envelope for lots and building sites in one-family residential subdivisions, site condominiums, and other one-family residential developments which, as proposed, will result in two or more lots or building sites shall be the buildable area remaining on a lot or building site after satisfying the setback requirements in chapter 138. 
b.  Activities within building envelope. Once building envelopes have been designated in accordance with subsection (1)a of this section and a tree removal permit has been approved for the development, it shall not be necessary to obtain a tree removal permit for the subsequent construction of structures or improvements or for other activities occurring within a building envelope. 
c.  Activities outside building envelope. Subject to the exceptions enumerated in section 126-267, a separate, additional tree removal permit shall be required for construction or development activities conducted by the developer or builder outside of the building envelope designated in accordance with subsection (1)a of this section. 
(2)  Minimum preservation percentage. For one-family residential developments which, as proposed, will result in two or more lots or building sites through land division, subdivision, or condominiums, the developer shall preserve and leave standing and undamaged a minimum of 37 percent of the total number of regulated trees which exist within the land area being developed, prior to development. However, trees contained within the designated building envelopes shall not count toward the required minimum preservation percentage. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.05.03)  
Sec. 126-328. - Inspections. 
Under this article, the permit applicant or permit holder shall allow city inspectors to enter and inspect the premises at any reasonable time during the application process and land clearing, construction, development, and tree removal activities to verify compliance with this article. Failure to allow inspection shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.13)  
Secs. 126-329—126-355. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permits 
 
Sec. 126-356. - Required. 
Subject to the exceptions enumerated in section 126-267, and further subject to section 126-327 relative to forest management permits, no person shall remove, cause to be removed, transplant, damage, or destroy, on any land in the city to which this article applies, any regulated tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit. In addition, a tree removal permit shall be required for the construction of any structure, land clearing, grubbing, trenching, grading, excavating, filling, or placement within the drip line of any regulated tree of any material which may cause harm to the tree. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.05.01)  
Sec. 126-357. - Forest management permit. 
(a)  Required. Where the proposed tree removal is not related to land clearing, development of a parcel, or construction of a structure or other improvement, but rather is for the purpose of maintaining and enhancing a wooded area in accordance with professional forestry management methods, the director of the department of parks, forestry, and facilities may grant a forest management permit in lieu of a tree removal permit. 
(b)  Application. An application for a forest management permit must be accompanied by the fee prescribed in division 3 of article IV of chapter 110 and a forest management plan prepared by a registered or certified professional forester. The forest management plan shall, at a minimum, include a description of the management program, a schedule for the work to be performed, reasons for the proposed tree removal, and an explanation of benefits to be obtained through the proposed tree removal. 
(c)  Minimum duration. The area under a forest management permit must remain under forest management for a minimum of five years. 
(d)  Supervision. The forest management permit holder shall retain a registered or certified professional forester to supervise and direct all work under a forest management permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.05.04)  
Sec. 126-358. - Application and fee. 
(a)  Required. A person seeking a tree removal permit must submit a written application to the department of planning when the permit is requested in connection with a development requiring site plan, plat, or condominium plan review or to the department of parks, forestry, and facilities for any other requests. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application/permit fee in accordance with division 3 of article IV of chapter 110. 
(b)  Time of application. Application for a tree removal permit shall be made before commencement of the activity for which the tree removal permit is required. Where the site is proposed for development or other activity necessitating a building permit or site plan or plat review, application for a tree removal permit shall be made prior to or concurrent with building permit application or site plan or plat submittal.  
Sec. 126-359. - Tree survey. 
The permit applicant shall provide four copies (ten copies when accompanying a plat, site plan, or condominium plan) of a tree survey at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet and containing the following additional information: 
(1)  Property dimensions. The shape and dimensions of the property, and the location of any existing and proposed structure or improvement. The location of proposed structures or improvements must also be staked at the site; 
(2)  Location of trees. The Location of all existing regulated trees identified by their diameter at breast height and their common and botanical name. Trees proposed to remain, to be transplanted, or to be removed shall be so designated on the tree survey, and all regulated trees must be numbered and marked in the field; 
(3)  Tree protection. A description and depiction on the tree survey of how regulated trees intended to remain or to be relocated will be protected during construction or development activity, and the location of protective barriers; 
(4)  Easements and setbacks. Location and dimension of existing and proposed easements, as well as all setbacks required by chapter 138; 
(5)  Grade changes. Designation of existing topography and any grade changes proposed for the property, and an explanation of how proposed grade changes may affect regulated trees intended to remain or to be located, including a topographic elevation at the base of all trees to be saved within 20 feet of any proposed construction or development activity; 
(6)  Replacement. A landscape plan and cost estimate for the proposed tree replacement program with a detailed explanation including the number, size and species; and 
(7)  Tree identification. A statement that all trees being retained will be identified by painting, flagging, or some other approved method and, where protective barriers are necessary, that they will be erected before work starts. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.07.01)  
Sec. 126-360. - Large tracts. 
For construction or development activities necessitating plat, site plan, or condominium plan approval or for any tracts of ten acres or larger, the applicant for a tree removal permit shall provide copies of the following additional information: 
(1)  The required tree survey which must be prepared by a registered engineer, registered landscape architect, or registered land surveyor; and 
(2)  All regulated trees shall be numbered and marked in the field. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.07.04)  
Sec. 126-361. - Departmental review. 
(a)  Generally. The department of planning shall review the submitted tree removal permit application to verify the applicant has provided all required information. 
(b)  Referral to appropriate departments. Completed applications shall be referred by the planning department to other appropriate city departments and consultants for review and comment. 
(c)  Field inspection or review meeting. The city may conduct a field inspection or review meeting. 
(d)  Results forwarded to reviewing authority. City departments involved in the review shall submit their report and recommendations to the director of the department of planning who shall forward them to the appropriate reviewing authority. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.08.01)  
Sec. 126-362. - Decision to approve or deny. 
(a)  Standards. The decision to approve or deny a tree removal permit shall be governed by the review standards enumerated in section 126-368. 
(b)  Site plans. Where the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan, subdivision plat, or condominium plan review by the planning commission, the planning commission shall be responsible for approving or denying the application for a tree removal permit. 
(c)  Other. Where neither site plan, subdivision plat, nor condominium plan review is required by city ordinance, the director of the department of parks, forestry, and facilities shall be responsible for approving or denying the application for a tree removal permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.08.02)  
Sec. 126-363. - Notice. 
Before the reviewing authority makes a decision on a tree removal permit application, notice of the tree removal permit application shall be sent by regular mail to the owners, according to the city's tax roll, of all property immediately adjoining the property for which the tree removal permit is requested, including property directly across public rights-of-way and easements. The notice shall be sent at least seven days before the reviewing authority is to make its decision and shall include a statement that interested persons may examine the application at the planning department or parks, forestry, and facilities department. Where the planning commission's recommendation is required pursuant to section 126-362, notice to adjoining property owners shall be required before the planning commission meeting only. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.08.03)  
Sec. 126-364. - Denial. 
Whenever an application for a tree removal permit is denied, the permit applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.08.04)  
Sec. 126-365. - Approval. 
Whenever an application for a tree removal permit is approved, the reviewing authority shall: 
(1)  Conditions. Attach to the approval of the permit any reasonable conditions considered necessary by the reviewing authority to ensure the intent of this article will be fulfilled and to minimize damage to, encroachment upon, or interference with natural resources and processes within wooded areas; and 
(2)  Performance guarantee. Require the permit grantee to file with the city a cash or corporate surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount, if any, necessary to guarantee compliance with tree removal permit conditions and this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.08.05)  
Sec. 126-366. - Site plans, condominium plans and plats. 
With respect to land which is the subject of a site plan, condominium plan, subdivision plat, or land division submitted to the city for approval, a tree removal permit shall not be effective nor shall the permit holder remove, cause to be removed, transplant, or damage any regulated tree until after both final approval of the site plan, condominium plan, preliminary subdivision plat, or land division and approval by the city engineer of construction and engineering plans for the proposed construction or development activity have occurred. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.08.06)  
Sec. 126-367. - Duration. 
Tree removal permits shall remain in effect for one year or the duration of the approved site plan, preliminary subdivision plat, or condominium plan, if any, they relate to, whichever period is less. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.08.07)  
Sec. 126-368. - Application review standards. 
The following standards shall govern the approval or denial of an application for a tree removal permit: 
(1)  Preservation and conservation. No application shall be denied solely because some trees grow on the site. Nevertheless, tree preservation and conservation, especially with respect to trees designated as historic or landmark trees pursuant to division 4 of this article, shall be of paramount concern and importance. 
(2)  Developmental alternatives. Preservation and conservation of wooded areas, trees, similar woody vegetation, wildlife and related natural resources and processes shall have priority over development when there are feasible and prudent location alternatives on site for proposed buildings, structures, or other site improvements. 
(3)  Diversity of species. Diversity of tree species shall be maintained where essential to preserving a wooded area. 
(4)  Quality of trees. Quality trees shall be preserved whenever it is feasible to do so. In evaluating quality of trees, the reviewing authority shall consider the following: 
a.  Soil and habitat quality; 
b.  Tree species; 
c.  Tree size and density; 
d.  Health and vigor; 
e.  Understory size, density, quality, and type; 
f.  Wildlife presence; and 
g.  Other factors such as function as wind block, noise buffer, cooling or heating effect, and scenic value. 
(5)  Land clearing. Where the proposed activity consists of land clearing, it shall be limited to designated street rights-of-way, drainage and utility areas, and areas necessary for the construction of buildings, structures, or other site improvements. 
(6)  Residential development. Where the proposed activity involves residential development, residential units shall, to the extent reasonably feasible, be designed and constructed to blend into the natural setting of the landscape. 
(7)  Compliance with statutes and ordinances. The proposed activity shall comply with all applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(8)  Relocation or replacement. The proposed activity shall include necessary provisions for tree relocation or replacement, in accordance with subdivision III of this division and tree protection, in accordance with subdivision IV of this division. 
(9)  Limitation. Tree removal or transplanting shall be limited to instances where: 
a.  Necessary for construction. Removal or transplanting is necessary for the construction of a building, structure or other site improvement, and the permit applicant has shown there is no feasible and prudent location alternative on site for a proposed building, structure or other site improvement; or 
b.  Disease, damage, etc. The tree is diseased, damaged or in danger of falling; is located too close to existing or proposed buildings or structures; interferes with existing utility service or drainage; creates unsafe vision clearance; or does not conform to other city ordinances or regulations. 
(10)  Historic and landmark trees. The removal of trees designated under this article as historic or landmark trees shall not be permitted where there is a reasonable alternative that would allow preservation of the trees. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.09)  
Sec. 126-369. - Issuance; appeal of denial. 
(a)  Waiting period before issuing permit. The city shall not issue a tree removal permit approved by the planning commission or director of the department of parks, forestry, and facilities until ten calendar days following the approval. There shall be no waiting period relative to permits approved by the city council. 
(b)  Right of appeal. Relative to the decision of the planning commission or the director of the park, forestry, and facilities department to approve or deny a tree removal permit, any person denied a tree removal permit or any aggrieved owner of property contiguous to property for which a tree removal permit has been approved, including property directly across public rights-of-way and easements, may appeal such decision to the city council as follows: 
(1)  Time to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the city clerk, in writing, within the ten-calendar-day period following the approval or denial being appealed. 
(2)  Issuance of permit suspended. The timely filing of an appeal shall have the effect of suspending the issuance of a permit pending the city council's decision on appeal. The city council, upon review, may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision rendered by the planning commission or director of the department of parks, forestry, and facilities. 
(c)  City council decisions. A decision of the city council to approve or deny a tree removal permit is not appealable to the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.12)  
Secs. 126-370—126-395. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Tree Relocation or Replacement 
 
Sec. 126-396. - Required. 
A tree removal permit holder shall replace or relocate each regulated tree removed pursuant to a tree removal permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.10.01)  
Sec. 126-397. - Basis for relocation or replacement credit. 
The permit holder shall relocate or replace trees removed pursuant to a tree removal permit on a one-for-one basis, subject to the following: 
(1)  Deciduous trees. All deciduous replacement trees must measure two inches in diameter or greater, measured at six inches above ground. However, for every additional one-half inch increment a replacement tree exceeds two inches in diameter, the city shall credit the permit holder with having replaced an additional one-half of a tree. 
a.  Example. For example, if the permit holder uses replacement trees measuring 2½ inches in diameter, for each replacement tree measuring 2½ inches in diameter the city shall credit the permit holder as having replaced 1½ trees. 
b.  Trees greater than three inches in diameter. If the permit holder uses replacement trees measuring three inches in diameter or greater, for each replacement tree measuring three inches in diameter or greater the city shall credit the permit holder as having replaced two trees. 
(2)  Coniferous trees. All coniferous replacement trees must measure eight feet in height or greater. However, for every additional one-foot increment a replacement tree exceeds eight feet in height, the city shall credit the permit holder with having replaced an additional one-half of a tree. 
a.  Example. For example, if the permit holder uses replacement trees measuring nine feet in height, for each replacement tree measuring nine feet in height the city shall credit the permit holder as having replaced 1½ trees. 
b.  Trees greater than ten feet in height. If the permit holder uses replacement trees measuring ten feet in height or greater, for each replacement tree measuring ten feet in height or greater the city shall credit the permit holder as having replaced two trees. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.10.02)  
Sec. 126-398. - Replacement tree requirements. 
(a)  Quality. Trees replaced under this subdivision shall have shade potential and other characteristics comparable to the removed trees, shall conform to the guidelines established in the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-1990), and must be approved by the city prior to planting. 
(b)  Planting and guarantee. Replacement and relocated trees must be staked, fertilized, and mulched and shall be guaranteed by the tree removal permit holder to exhibit a normal growth cycle for at least one year following planting. 
(c)  Suggested tree species. A list of suggested replacement tree species shall be kept on file in the department of parks, forestry, and facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.10.03)  
Sec. 126-399. - Replacement tree location. 
(a)  City approval required. The city shall approve tree relocation or replacement locations in order to provide optimum enhancement, preservation, and protection of wooded areas. To the extent feasible and desirable, trees shall be relocated or replaced on site and within the same general area as trees removed, but such trees shall not be relocated or replaced in the building envelope of a one-family residential lot or building site, nor shall such trees count towards landscape screening and buffer requirements of division 5 of article VIII of chapter 138. 
(b)  Relocation or replacement off site. Where it is not feasible and desirable to relocate or replace trees on site, relocation or replacement may be made at another approved location in the city. 
(c)  City tree fund. Where it is not feasible and desirable to relocate or replace trees on site or at another approved location in the city, the tree removal permit holder shall pay into the city tree fund, which fund is hereby created, an amount of money approximating the current market value of the replacement trees that would otherwise be required. The city shall use the city tree fund for the purpose of maintaining and preserving wooded areas and for planting and maintaining trees within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.10.04)  
Sec. 126-400. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Unplatted residential parcel. For any unplatted residential parcel, trees located within the area of the footprint of only one proposed principal dwelling or any additions thereto and within 30 feet around the dwelling or addition are not required to be relocated or replaced. Furthermore, trees located within any proposed driveway, utility or other site improvement necessary to support the principal dwelling or addition and the area within ten feet of any such improvement are also not required to be relocated or replaced. 
(b)  Effect of other requirements. The exception in subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed to waive or supersede any other requirement of this article, and the applicant must still obtain a tree removal permit. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1, 11-5-1997)  
Secs. 126-401—126-425. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Tree Protection During Construction 
 
Sec. 126-426. - Placing materials near tree. 
No person may conduct any construction or development activity within the drip line of any regulated tree not approved for removal, including but not limited to land clearing, grubbing, trenching, grading, or filling, nor shall any person place solvents, building material, construction equipment, soil deposits, or other harmful materials within the drip line unless authorized by the department of parks, forestry, and facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.11.01)  
Sec. 126-427. - Attachments to trees. 
During construction or development activity, no person shall attach any device or wire to any regulated tree not approved for removal. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.11.02)  
Sec. 126-428. - Identification and protective barrier. 
Before development, land clearing, filling, or any other land alteration or activity for which a tree removal permit is required, the permit holder shall clearly mark by painting, flagging, or other approved method all trees to be removed and shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to protect remaining trees. Protective barriers must be inspected and approved by the city before the work begins. Protective barriers shall remain in place until the city authorizes their removal or issues a final certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. Wood, metal, or other approved material shall be utilized in the construction of barriers. Barriers are required for all trees not approved for removal, except for the following: 
(1)  Rights-of-way and easements. Street rights-of-way and utility easements may be cordoned by placing stakes a minimum of 50 feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope, etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of areas to be cleared. 
(2)  Large, separate areas. Large property areas separate from the construction or land clearing area onto which no equipment will venture may also be cordoned off as described in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.11.03)  
Sec. 126-429. - Protective barrier when no permit required. 
With respect to construction or development activity for which no tree removal permit is required under this article but which, in the city's judgment, may adversely affect regulated trees located on or off site, the person conducting such activity shall erect and maintain a suitable protective barrier for such trees. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.11.04)  
Secs. 126-430—126-455. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - HISTORIC AND LANDMARK TREES 
 
Sec. 126-456. - Nomination for historic trees. 
Any person may nominate a tree within the city for designation as an historic tree based upon its age, type, size, or historical or cultural significance. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.14.01)  
Sec. 126-457. - Review of nomination for historic trees by historic districts commission. 
(a)  Generally. Nominations for designation of an historic tree shall be considered by the historic districts commission. A copy of the nomination, which shall include supporting documentation, shall be referred to the historic districts commission for review. 
(b)  Nominee other than owner. Where the nomination is made by someone other than the owner of the property where the tree is located, the owner shall be notified in writing, by certified mail, at least seven days in advance of the time, date, and place that the historic districts commission will consider the designation. 
(c)  Notice. The notice shall notify the owner that the designation of the tree as an historic tree will make it unlawful to remove or damage the tree absent the granting of a tree removal permit by the city. The notice shall further advise the owner that his agreement is necessary in order for the tree to be designated as an historic tree. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.14.02)  
Sec. 126-458. - Designation of historic tree. 
Provided the owner agrees with the designation of an historic tree, the historic districts commission may designate a tree as a historic tree upon determining that, because of one or more of the following unique characteristics, the tree should be preserved as an historic tree because the tree is: 
(1)  Associated with a notable person or historic figure; 
(2)  Associated with the history or development of the nation, the state, or the city; 
(3)  Associated with an eminent educator or education institution; 
(4)  Associated with art, literature, law, music, science, or cultural life; 
(5)  Associated with early forestry or conservation; 
(6)  Associated with native American history, legend, or lore; or 
(7)  Has notable historic interest in the city because of its age, type, size, or historic association. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.14.03)  
Sec. 126-459. - Effects of historic tree designation. 
Upon designation of a tree as an historic tree, it shall be unlawful, subject to the exceptions in section 126-267, for any person to remove or damage the tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.14.04)  
Sec. 126-460. - Record of designation of historic trees; recorded notice. 
The department of planning shall maintain a record of historic tree designations, and for every designation, the city shall record a notice with the register of deeds identifying the land and advising that the land contains a designated historic tree which is regulated under this division and which may not be removed without a tree removal permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.14.05)  
Sec. 126-461. - Criteria for landmark trees. 
All trees listed in the American Forestry Association's National Registry of Big Trees, the Michigan Botanist's Champion Trees of Michigan, or in the city's Big Tree Registry are considered landmark trees. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.15.01)  
Sec. 126-462. - Removal of landmark trees. 
Subject to the exceptions in section 126-267, a landmark tree shall not be removed without a tree removal permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.15.02)  
Sec. 126-463. - Replacement of landmark trees. 
When landmark trees are permitted to be removed, replacement trees shall be provided to a minimum of 50 percent of the diameter at breast height of the tree to be removed. Replacement trees shall be provided either individually or on an accumulative basis to meet the 50 percent diameter-at-breast-height requirement. 
(Code 1976, § 4-12.15.03)  
Secs. 126-464—126-490. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WETLAND AND WATERCOURSE PROTECTION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 114. 
State Law reference— Wetlands protection, MCL 324.30301 et seq., MSA 13A.30301 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 126-491. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Activity means any use, operation, development, or action involving a humanmade change to land, including but not limited to constructing, operating, or maintaining any use or development; erecting or installing buildings or other structures, improvements, or utilities; depositing or removing material; dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting water; grading; paving; removal or clearing of wetland vegetation; or excavation, mining, or drilling operations. 
Contiguous means any of the following: 
(1)  A permanent surface water connection or other direct physical contact with a watercourse; 
(2)  A seasonal or intermittent direct surface water connection to a watercourse; 
(3)  A wetland which is partially or entirely located within 500 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a watercourse, unless the city determines there is no surface water or groundwater connection to the watercourse; or 
(4)  Two or more areas of wetland separated only by barriers, such as dikes, roads, berms or similar features, but with any of the wetland areas contiguous under the criteria described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Material means soil, rocks, minerals, sand, gravel, clay, peat, waste of any kind, or any other material that displaces soil or water or reduces water retention potential. 
Minor project means an activity that will contribute no more than ten (10) cubic yards of fill material in a wetland or watercourse. 
Ordinary high water mark means the line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil, and the vegetation. 
(1)  On an inland lake which has a level established by law, it means the high established level. 
(2)  Where water returns to its natural level as the result of the permanent removal of or abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary high water mark. 
Reviewing authority means either the city engineer or the city council, depending on whom in each particular case is responsible to decide whether a use permit will be issued or denied. 
Structure means any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the land or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings, plants, storage tanks, bulkheads, piers, docks, rafts, landings, dams or waterway obstructions. 
Watercourse means any waterway, river, stream, inland lake or pond or other body of water having definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. The term "watercourse" does not include lakes or ponds constructed by excavating or diking dry land and maintained for the sole purpose of cooling or storing water, and does not include lagoons used for treating polluted water. 
Watershed means a region or area bounded peripherally by a water divide and draining ultimately to a particular watercourse. 
Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal conditions does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh and which is any of the following: 
(1)  Contiguous to an inland lake or pond or to a river or stream; 
(2)  Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond or a river or stream and is two acres or more in size; or 
(3)  Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond or to a river or stream, and less than two acres in size, if the reviewing authority determines that protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the city from pollution, impairment, or destruction. In making this determination, the city must find one or more of the following functions applies to the particular wetland and provide these findings, in writing, to the permit applicant stating the reasons for this determination: 
a.  The wetland supports state or federal endangered or threatened plants, fish, or wildlife appearing on a list specified in MCL § 324.36501, as amended; 
b.  The wetland represents what the reviewing authority has identified as a locally rare or unique ecosystem; 
c.  The wetland supports plants or animals of an identified local importance; 
d.  The wetland provides groundwater recharge documented by a public agency; 
e.  The wetland provides flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage capacity of the wetland; 
f.  The wetland provides wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting, or feeding grounds or cover for forms of wildlife, waterfowl, including migratory waterfowl, and rare, threatened, or endangered wildlife species. 
g.  The wetland provides protection of a subsurface water resource, a valuable watershed, or a groundwater recharge area; 
h.  The wetland provides pollution treatment by serving as a biological and chemical oxidation basin; 
i.  The wetland provides erosion control by serving as a sedimentation area and filtering basin, absorbing silt and organic matter; or 
j.  The wetland provides sources of nutrients in water food cycles and nursery grounds and sanctuaries for fish. 
Wetland vegetation means plants that exhibit adaptations to allow, under normal conditions, germination or propagation and to allow growth with at least their root systems in water or saturated soil. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.02; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 4-24-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 126-492. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. The city council has made the following findings on wetlands and watercourses: 
(1)  Beneficial functions. The city council finds the city's wetlands and watercourses are indispensable but sensitive natural resources which serve numerous, beneficial functions by providing the following: 
a.  Breeding, nesting and feeding grounds and habitat and refuge for diverse and endangered fish, wildlife and plant species; 
b.  Maintenance of water quality through nutrient retention, sediment removal and groundwater recharge and discharge; 
c.  Flood and storm control through the hydrologic absorption and storage capacity of wetlands; 
d.  Pollution treatment by serving as a biological and chemical oxidation basin; 
e.  Erosion control; 
f.  Open space; 
g.  Outdoor recreation areas; and 
h.  Aesthetics. 
(2)  Increasing demands. The city council also finds increasing demands placed upon natural resources have: 
a.  Increased the potential for the loss of wetlands in the city; 
b.  The effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, polluting, jeopardizing or eliminating watercourses and wetlands within the city; and 
c.  Otherwise adversely affected desirable natural resources and processes. 
(b)  Purpose. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to provide for: 
(1)  Protection, preservation, proper maintenance, and use of watercourses and wetlands in the city in order to minimize disturbance to them and prevent damage from erosion, turbidity, or siltation and to prevent the loss of fish or other beneficial aquatic organisms, loss of wildlife and vegetation, or destruction of the natural habitat thereof; 
(2)  Protection of the city's potable fresh water supplies from drought, overdraft, pollution, or mismanagement; 
(3)  Enforcement of this article and coordination of the enforcement of related city, county, state and federal regulations with the appropriate county, state or federal agency; 
(4)  Granting of use permits; 
(5)  Procedures for appealing decisions and requesting variances; and 
(6)  Penalties for violating this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.01)  
Sec. 126-493. - Construction of article. 
This article shall be construed liberally in favor of protecting and preserving natural resources in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.01.03)  
Sec. 126-494. - Notification to state. 
The city shall notify the state department of environmental quality upon the adoption or amendment of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.15; Ord. No. 471, § 2, 4-24-2002)  
Sec. 126-495. - Conflict with floodplain regulations. 
If a conflict or disparity occurs between any sections and regulations of this article and those contained in article III of chapter 114 pertaining to floodplain use and regulation, with respect to a proposed activity which is regulated under both articles, the more stringent section or regulation shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.16)  
Sec. 126-496. - Wetland inventory. 
(a)  Preparation of map. The city shall prepare an inventory map of all wetlands within the city. The city shall make a draft of the inventory map available to the public, shall provide an opportunity for public notice and comment prior to finalizing the inventory map, and shall respond in writing to written comments received by the city regarding the contents of the inventory. 
(b)  Notification of property owner. Upon the completion of an inventory map or upon a subsequent amendment of an inventory map, the city shall notify each recorded owner of property on the city's property tax roll that the inventory map exists or has been amended, where the map may be reviewed, that the owner's property may be designated as a wetland on the inventory map, and the city has Code sections regulating wetlands. The notice shall also inform the property owner that the inventory map does not necessarily include all of the wetlands within the city that may be subject to this article. The notice may be given by including the required information with the annual notice of the property owner's property tax assessment. 
(c)  Presumption. A wetland inventory map does not create any legally enforceable presumptions regarding whether property that is or is not included on the inventory map is or is not in fact a wetland. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.18)  
Sec. 126-497. - Variance for hardship. 
(a)  Authority established. Upon application, the city council may grant a variance from this article when undue hardship may result from strict compliance. 
(b)  Conditions. In granting any variance, the city council may prescribe conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to carry out, as much as possible, the requirements and objectives of this article. 
(c)  Contingent findings. No variance shall be granted unless the city council finds as follows: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of this article would result in undue hardship to the property owner; 
(2)  A variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the property owner; 
(3)  The variance will not result in substantially increased flood heights, additional risk to public safety, or extraordinary public expense due to increased flooding or other stormwater problems if the variance is granted or will not create a nuisance; 
(4)  The granting of the variance shall be generally consistent with the objectives and policies of this article, this Code, the zoning ordinance in chapter 138 of this Code, and the master land use plan; and 
(5)  The variance will not be contrary to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.13)  
Sec. 126-498. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
Compliance with this article shall be enforced by the mayor, the city engineer, the county sheriff's department and other enforcement officers as the mayor may designate. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.14.06)  
Sec. 126-499. - Violations. 
(a)  Municipal civil infraction. Any person who violates any section of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided in section 66-37. 
(b)  Separate offenses. Each act of violation and every day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Restoration of illegal alterations. For a violation involving illegal alteration of a watercourse or wetland protected under this article, the city engineer shall have the power to order complete restoration of the watercourse or wetland area by the person or agent responsible for the violation. Requirements and specifications for wetland restorations ordered by the city shall be coordinated with state and/or federal agency requirements and specifications for wetland restoration, if any. 
(d)  Injunctive relief. Any activity conducted in violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the city may commence a civil suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the violation, and/or requiring restoration of the wetland or watercourse as nearly as possible to its condition before the violation. 
(e)  Stop work order. The city may also issue a stop work order or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until the sections of this article, including any conditions attached to a use permit, have been fully met. Failure to obey a stop work order shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-13.14.01—4-13.14.05; Ord. No. 425, § 1, 11-19-1997)  
Sec. 126-500. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  All watercourses and wetlands. This article shall apply to all areas in the city defined as watercourses or wetlands. 
(b)  Exclude parcels approved before January 17, 1990. Subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding, this article shall not apply to a parcel of property for which a site plan or condominium plan has been approved or for which a preliminary subdivision plat has received tentative approval or any later subsequent approvals prior to January 17, 1990; provided the site plan, condominium plan or plat remains in effect and in good standing. 
(1)  Requests for extension. Furthermore, neither the adoption of this article nor nonconformance with it shall be a basis for denying a request for extension of site plan, condominium plan or plat approval for site plans, condominium plans and plats approved prior to January 17, 1990, provided the request for extension is applied for prior to the expiration of the plan or plat. 
(2)  Applicability of exemption. The exemption contained in this subsection shall only apply to the construction authorized and only for the period authorized under a site plan, condominium plan or plat approval or any extension thereof. 
(3)  Subsequent activities requiring use permit. A use permit shall be required for any subsequent activity conducted within an area covered by a site plan, condominium plan or subdivision plat after completion of the development or subdivision, unless the use permit issued which authorized the construction of the development or subdivision also authorized the subsequent activity. 
(4)  Single-family home use permit exclusions. A use permit shall not be required to construct a single-family home to be located in a recorded single-family residential subdivision or condominium development if the subdivision plat or condominium plan received tentative approval or any later approvals prior to January 17, 1990. 
(5)  Equitable property use for like zoning. The owners and occupants of any property located in a recorded single-family residential subdivision or condominium development which received tentative approval prior to January 17, 1990 and which had a building constructed on it after January 17, 1990 shall be entitled to use the property and conduct the same activity on it without obtaining a use permit, unless a site plan approval is necessary, on the same basis as any owner or occupant of property within the same zoning district. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.03)  
Sec. 126-501. - Nonconforming activity. 
An ongoing activity which was lawful before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives but which does not conform with the requirements of this article may be continued without a use permit, provided it is not: 
(1)  Increased. Expanded, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformance with this article; 
(2)  Reestablished. Reestablished after having been discontinued for one year or longer with the intent to abandon; or 
(3)  Rebuilt. Rebuilt or repaired after complete or partial destruction, when the cost of rebuilding or repair exceeds 50 percent of the replacement value immediately prior to damage. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.05.02)  
Sec. 126-502. - Activities not requiring use permit. 
Notwithstanding the requirement of section 125-561, the following activities are allowed within a watercourse or wetland without a use permit, unless otherwise prohibited by city ordinance or state or federal laws or regulations: 
(1)  Existing right-of-way; public easements. Construction, maintenance, and improvement of public streets, highways, roads, or pedestrian-bicycle pathways within an existing right-of-way or a public easement, in such a manner as to minimize adverse effect on a wetland or watercourse; provided, except in emergencies, that: 
a.  Prior written notice is given to the city engineer and written consent is obtained from the city engineer prior to commencement of work; 
b.  The work is conducted using good management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of wetlands are not impaired; and 
c.  Any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(2)  Utilities, systems and facilities. Installation, maintenance, repair, or operation of utilities, including water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage systems and facilities, and electric, gas, telephone, and cable television lines, in such a manner as to minimize adverse effects on a watercourse or wetland; provided, except in emergencies, that: 
a.  Prior written notice is given to the city engineer and written consent is obtained from the mayor prior to commencement of work; 
b.  The work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of wetlands are not impaired; and 
c.  Any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(3)  Drainage. Maintenance, repair, cleaning, and upgrading of any natural and humanmade drainage course, watercourse, drain, pipe, ditch, stream, creek, swale, detention and retention basins and ponds which serve to transport or hold stormwater runoff; provided, except in emergencies, that: 
a.  Prior written notice is given to the city engineer and written consent is obtained from the city engineer prior to commencement of work; 
b.  The work is conducted using good management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of wetlands are not impaired; and 
c.  Any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(4)  Activities authorized by state law. Activities that are authorized in state-regulated wetlands without a state permit under MCL § 324.30305, as amended, are specifically authorized without a permit in city-regulated wetlands. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.06; Ord. No. 471, § 3, 4-24-2002)  
Sec. 126-503. - Fees. 
The applicant for a wetland and watercourse determination, use permit, appeal, or variance shall pay the fee required in division 4 of article IV of chapter 110. Unless otherwise specified, all fees are due at the time of application. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.12; Ord. No. 471, § 4, 4-24-2002)  
Secs. 126-504—126-530. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WETLAND AND WATERCOURSE DETERMINATIONS 
 
Sec. 126-531. - Prior to use permit application. 
Prior to applying for a use permit pursuant to section 126-562, the owner or developer of property where a wetland or watercourse is located or thought to be located shall request the city to inspect the property, and the city shall make a written wetland and watercourse boundary determination within 30 days after the request, which shall advise the owner or developer whether a use permit is necessary. All requests for boundary determinations shall be made through application to the planning department and payment of an application fee. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.04.01)  
Sec. 126-532. - Data used. 
In investigating or determining the location, boundaries, and features of watercourses and wetlands, the city shall utilize available maps, studies, and other data prepared or compiled by the city or county, state or federal agencies, including but not limited to county soil surveys, United States Geological Survey data and topography maps, national wetland inventory maps, Michigan Resource Information System (MRIS) maps, and aerial photographs. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.04.02)  
Sec. 126-533. - Additional investigation. 
Additionally, the city may, at the owner's or developer's expense, request further information or retain necessary consultants and undertake any reasonable investigation, inspection, or survey the city deems necessary to determine watercourse or wetland boundaries in relation to the proposed activity. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.04.03)  
Sec. 126-534. - Criteria and evidence. 
In making wetland determinations, the city shall utilize criteria consistent with the definition of the term "wetland" in section 126-491 and shall rely upon visible evidence, including wetland vegetation and aquatic life, that the normal seasonal frequency and duration of water is above, at, or near the surface of the area to verify the existence of a wetland. Where there is a predominance of wetland vegetation and no direct visible evidence water is or has been at or above the surface, the city shall use the following characteristics of the soils or substrate to verify the existence of a wetland: 
(1)  Soil with anaerobic conditions. Presence of a soil that is, on a recurrent basis, saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil that favor the growth and regeneration of wetland vegetation: or 
(2)  Recurrent soil column saturation. Physical or chemical characteristics of a soil column which provide evidence of the current and recent degree of saturation or inundation which results on a recurrent basis. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.04.04)  
Sec. 126-535. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 471, § 5, adopted April 24, 2002, repealed § 126-535, in its entirety. Former pertained to functions applicable to site and derived from Code 1976, § 4-13.02.10.  
Secs. 126-536—126-560. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - USE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 126-561. - Required. 
Subject to the exceptions enumerated in sections 126-501 and 126-502, no person may conduct or cause to be conducted any activity within a watercourse or wetland without first obtaining a use permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.05.01)  
Sec. 126-562. - Application. 
(a)  Application conditions. A person seeking a use permit shall, after requesting and obtaining a written wetland and watercourse boundary determination in accordance with division 2 of this article, submit a written application to the planning department before conducting any activity within a watercourse or wetland. 
(1)  With site plan or plat submittal. Where the site is proposed for development or activity necessitating site plan or plat review under other sections of this Code, application for a use permit shall be made at the time of site plan or plat submittal. 
(2)  Concurrent with state or federal permits. Whenever a permit shall also be required from the state and/or federal government, the applications shall be filed concurrently. See subsection 126-564(f). 
(b)  Form and information required. The use permit application shall be made on the form required by the state department of environmental quality. An applicant shall also provide two copies of the following: 
(1)  Description and purpose. A detailed description and purpose of the proposed activity. 
(2)  Listing of material. A listing of the amount and type of material to be removed from or deposited on the site. 
(3)  Plan. A dimensioned plan showing the legal description; zoning classification, including the zoning of adjacent parcels; existing structures; existing watercourse and wetland areas; location and nature of any existing easements; and the size and location of all aspects of the proposed activity. 
(4)  Field survey. A field survey of watercourses and wetlands existing on site. 
(5)  Topographic map. An accurate topographical map prepared and sealed by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor, drawn to the same scale as the plan and field survey required in subsections (b)(3) and (4) of this section, and containing the following: 
a.  Name and address of the property owner and that of the applicant, if different from the owner; 
b.  Location and dimensions of all boundary lines for the property and adjoining properties; 
c.  North arrow and date; 
d.  Existing and proposed contour data for the property with a vertical contour interval of not more than two feet, and vertical contour data at an interval of not more than one foot for all areas to be disturbed by the proposed activity, extending for a distance of at least 200 feet beyond the limits of such areas. Indicated elevations shall be based on United States Geological Survey data; 
e.  Specification of the extent of all areas to be disturbed, the depth to which removal or deposit activity is proposed, and the angle of repose of all slopes of deposited materials and sides of channels or excavations resulting from removal activity; and 
f.  An area map showing property lines; the ordinary high water mark and elevation; proposed changes in location and extent of any existing floodplain, floodway, watercourse, wetland and drainage course; and existing and proposed structures. 
(6)  Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact statement, including but not limited to the effect the proposed activity may have upon water quality, flow and levels, and wildlife, fish and vegetation. 
(7)  Other. Such other information and technical data as the city may request. 
(c)  Waiver of certain information. When certain of the required information is not needed or would not serve any useful purpose in determining to issue a use permit, the planning department may waive the necessity of filing the unnecessary information. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-13.07.01—4-13.07.03; Ord. No. 471, § 6, 4-24-2002)  
Sec. 126-563. - Marking of watercourse and wetland. 
At the time of filing an application, a person seeking a use permit shall have the boundary lines of the watercourses, wetlands, and any required setbacks located on the property marked with flags or surveyor tape and shall maintain the flags or tape in order to assist the city staff in locating the watercourse and wetland. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.07.04)  
Sec. 126-564. - Application review procedure. 
(a)  Department review. The city planning department shall review the submitted use permit application to verify the applicant has provided all required information. Following verification, the planning department shall request and the applicant shall provide 15 additional copies of the information required in subsection 126-562(b). 
(1)  Referral to other departments and department of environmental quality. Completed applications shall be referred to other city departments, as appropriate, and a copy shall be sent to the state department of environmental quality. 
(2)  Field inspection or review meeting. Upon request of either the applicant or the city, the city shall conduct a field inspection or review meeting. 
(3)  Recommendations to reviewing authority. Any city departments involved in the review shall submit their report and recommendations to the planning department, which shall forward them to the appropriate reviewing authority. 
(4)  Applicant election of process procedure. The applicant shall, at the time of submitting the use permit application, elect to have the application processed under one of the following procedures: 
a.  The use permit application shall be reviewed immediately, either prior to or concurrent with the review of the site plan, plat, condominium plan or other proposed land use submitted by the applicant, with the understanding that the land use review may not be completed at the time a decision is rendered on the use permit application. Election of this alternative may later necessitate a reopening of the use permit application if the land use approval is inconsistent with the use permit approval; or 
b.  The use permit application shall be reviewed and acted upon concurrently with the review of the site plan, plat, or condominium plan or other proposed land use submitted by the applicant, and the 90-day review period limitation specified in subsection (b) of this section shall be extended accordingly. 
(b)  Reviewing authority decision and timing. The decision to grant or deny a use permit shall be based on findings made by the reviewing authority utilizing the review criteria enumerated in section 126-565 and shall be made before or at the time of approval of a site plan or tentative approval of a preliminary plat. In other cases, the decision shall be made within 90 days after the city's receipt of the completed application and required information. 
(1)  Site plans. Where the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan review and approval by the city planning commission, the city council shall be responsible for granting or denying the application for a use permit. 
(2)  Plats and condominium plans. Where the site is proposed for development necessitating subdivision plat or condominium plan review, the city planning commission shall consider the application for a use permit and make a recommendation to the city council. The city council shall be responsible for granting or denying the application for a use permit. 
(3)  Other. For minor projects, or where plan, subdivision plat, or condominium plan review is not required by this Code, the city engineer shall be responsible for granting or denying the application for a use permit. 
(c)  Notice. Before the reviewing authority makes a decision on a use permit application, notice of the use permit application shall be sent by regular mail to the owners of all property within 300 feet of the property where the wetland or watercourse is located, including property directly across public rights-of-way and easements. 
(1)  Subdivision associations notified. If the property where the wetland or watercourse is located is in a recorded subdivision or within 300 feet of a subdivision and there is an association for the subdivision which has registered with the city to receive notices, notice shall be sent to the association. 
(2)  Timing and content. The notice shall be sent at least ten days before the reviewing authority makes its decision and shall indicate where and when the application may be examined. 
(3)  Minor projects. For minor projects, or where site plan, subdivision plat, or condominium plan review is not required by this Code, the notice shall be sent to owners of all property immediately adjacent to the property for which a use permit is requested, including property directly across public rights-of-way and easements. 
(d)  Denial of use permit. Whenever an application for a use permit is denied, the permit applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the reasons for denial, which shall be based upon the standards listed in this article. The failure to supply complete information with a use permit application may be reason for denial of a use permit. 
(e)  Granting of use permit. Whenever an application for a use permit is granted, the reviewing authority may: 
(1)  Conditions. Attach to the granting of the use permit any reasonable conditions considered necessary by the reviewing authority to ensure the intent of this article will be fulfilled; to minimize damage or impairment to, encroachment in, or interference with natural resources and processes within the watercourse or wetland; or to otherwise improve or maintain the quality of the watercourse or wetland; 
(2)  Completion of operations. Fix a reasonable time to complete the proposed activity; and 
(3)  Performance guarantee. Require the permit grantee to file with the city a cash or corporate surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city in an amount, if any, determined necessary by the reviewing authority to guarantee performance of and compliance with use permit conditions and this article. 
(f)  State and federal permit requirements. Whenever a person requesting a city use permit is also subject to state and federal permit requirements, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Approvals under this article shall not relieve a person of the need to obtain a permit from the department of environmental quality and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if required. 
(2)  Issuance of a permit by the state department of environmental quality and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall not relieve a person of the need to obtain approval under this article, if applicable. 
(3)  If requirements of federal, state, and local officials vary, the most stringent requirements shall be followed. 
(4)  The city may withhold issuance of a use permit until after required permits from the state department of environmental quality and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have been obtained. 
(g)  Change in size or scope of operation. Any change which increases the size or scope of operation with respect to the proposed development or activity shall be considered to be a new activity and shall require the filing of a new use permit application, unless the city engineer determines the change is insubstantial or will have no substantial impact on the watercourse or wetland. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.08; Ord. No. 471, § 7, 4-24-2002)  
Sec. 126-565. - Review and approval criteria. 
(a)  Approval decision criteria. In reviewing any application for a use permit under section 126-564, the reviewing authority shall not approve a use permit unless the reviewing authority determines the issuance of a permit is in the public interest, the permit is necessary to realize the benefits to be derived from the proposed activity, and the proposed activity is otherwise lawful. 
(1)  Public interest determination. In determining whether a proposed activity is in the public interest, the reviewing authority shall balance the benefits which may reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposed activity against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity. 
(2)  Concern for protection of natural resources. The decision shall take into account the paramount public concern for the protection of natural resources from pollution, impairment, and destruction. 
(b)  General review criteria. In addition to subsection (a) of this section, the reviewing authority shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The relative extent of the public or private need for the proposed activity; 
(2)  Availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity; 
(3)  Compatibility with existing and proposed development and land uses in the area; 
(4)  Probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic, ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or fish or wildlife; 
(5)  Extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and private uses to which the area is suited, including the benefits the watercourse or wetland provides; 
(6)  The probable impact of the proposed activity in relation to the cumulative effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the watershed; 
(7)  The size of the affected watercourse or wetland; 
(8)  The amount of remaining wetlands in the general area; 
(9)  Proximity of the wetland to a watercourse; 
(10)  Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land change to the general area; 
(11)  The relationship of the proposed activity to the health, safety, and general welfare; and 
(12)  Such other factors as may be relevant to the proposed activity and the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Additional requirements. A use permit shall not be issued unless the applicant shows an unacceptable disruption will not result to the wetland or watercourse. In determining whether a disruption is unacceptable, the reviewing authority shall consider the criteria in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. In addition, a use permit shall not be issued unless the applicant also shows either of the following: 
(1)  The proposed activity is primarily dependent upon being located in the location where the wetland presently exists; or 
(2)  A feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.09)  
Sec. 126-566. - Appeal of denial. 
(a)  Right of appeal. Any person denied a use permit by the city engineer may appeal to the city council in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Timely filing mandatory. An appeal must be filed with the city council, in writing, within ten days after the date the decision was made. 
(2)  Issuance suspended. Timely filing of an appeal shall have the effect of suspending the issuance of a permit pending the outcome of the city council's decision on the appeal. 
(b)  Final determination by council. The city council, upon review, shall determine, with findings, whether or not there has been compliance with the requirements and standards of this article and, based upon its findings, may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision rendered by the city engineer. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.10)  
Sec. 126-567. - Assessment revaluation if denied. 
(a)  Property owner's request. A property owner may request a revaluation of the affected property for assessment purposes to determine its fair market value under the wetland use restriction if a use permit is denied by the city for a proposed wetland use. 
(b)  Appeal by aggrieved landowner. A landowner who is aggrieved by a determination, action, or inaction regarding his assessment under this section may protest and appeal that determination, action, or inaction pursuant to the general property tax act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.17)  
Sec. 126-568. - Conditions. 
(a)  Duration. A use permit issued under this division shall remain effective for as long as the site plan, plat, condominium plan, building permit, landfill permit, or land improvement permit or any extension of approval thereof remains effective or until the permitted activity is completed, whichever occurs sooner. 
(b)  Display. The use permit grantee shall conspicuously display the use permit on site. The permit grantee shall display the permit continuously while activities authorized under the permit are conducted and for ten days following completion. 
(c)  Inspections allowed. The permit grantee shall allow city inspectors to enter and inspect the premises at any reasonable time, and failure to allow inspection shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-13.11)  
Chapter 130 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; floods, ch. 114; historical preservation, ch. 118; land division, ch. 122; natural resources, ch. 126; signs, ch. 134; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 130-1—130-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 564, § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 2011, repealed Ch. 130, Art. II, §§ 130-26—130-33, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior this amendment, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq. 
 
Sec. 130-26. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city council under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq., and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101, et seq., to establish a planning commission with the powers, duties and limitations provided by those acts and subject to the terms and conditions of this article and any future amendments to this article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide that the Rochester Hills City Council hereby confirms the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq., of the City of Rochester Hills Planning Commission formerly established under the Municipal Planning Act, Public Act 285 of 1931, MCL 125.31, et seq. to establish the appointments, terms, and membership of the planning commission; to identify the officers and the minimum number of meetings per year of the planning commission; and to prescribe the authority, powers and duties of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-27. - Establishment. 
The city council hereby confirms the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq., of the City of Rochester Hills Planning Commission formerly established under the Municipal Planning Act, Public Act 285 of 1931, MCL 125.31, et seq. The planning commission shall have nine members. Members of the planning commission as of the effective date of this article shall, except for an ex officio member whose remaining term on the planning commission shall be limited to that member's term on the city council, continue to serve for the remainder of their existing terms so long as they continue to meet all of the eligibility requirements for planning commission membership set forth within the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-28. - Appointment and term. 
(a)  Generally . The mayor, with the approval of the city council by a majority vote of the members elected and serving, shall appoint all planning commission members, except for the ex officio member. 
(b)  Term length . The planning commission members, other than the ex officio member, shall serve for terms of three years. 
(c)  Vacancy . A planning commission member shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(d)  Membership criteria . Planning commission members shall be qualified electors of the city, except that one planning commission member may be an individual who is not a qualified elector of the city. The membership of the planning commission shall be representative of important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the city, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the city to the extent practicable. 
(e)  Ex officio member . One member of the city council shall be appointed by the city council to the planning commission as an ex officio member with full voting right. The ex officio member's term on the planning commission shall expire with his or her term on the city council, and otherwise shall be for the length of time established in the resolution of appointment. 
(f)  Ineligibility of other city officers and employees . No other elected officer or employee of the city is eligible to be a member of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-29. - Removal of members. 
The city council may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-30. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  Disclosure . Before casting a vote on a matter on which a planning commission member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the planning commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this ordinance constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(b)  Bylaws . For the purposes of this section, the planning commission shall define conflict of interest in its bylaws. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-31. - Compensation. 
The planning commission members may be compensated for their services as provided by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-32. - Officers and committees. 
(a)  Election of officers . The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and a secretary from its members, and may create and fill other offices as it considers advisable. The ex officio member of the planning commission is not eligible to serve as chairperson. The term of each office shall be one year, with opportunity for reelection as specified in the planning commission bylaws. 
(b)  Advisory committees . The planning commission may also appoint advisory committees whose members are not members of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-33. - Bylaws, meetings and records. 
(a)  Bylaws . The planning commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business. 
(b)  Meetings . The planning commission shall hold at least 4 regular meetings each year, and shall by resolution determine the time and place of the meetings. 
(c)  Special meetings . Unless otherwise provided in the planning commission's bylaws, a special meeting of the planning commission may be called by the chairperson or by two other members, upon written request to the secretary. Unless the bylaws otherwise provide, the secretary shall send written notice of a special meeting to planning commission members at least 48 hours before the meeting. 
(d)  Open meetings . The business that the planning commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, MCL 15.261, et seq, as amended. 
(e)  Public records . The planning commission shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a planning commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, MCL 15.231, et seq, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-34 - Annual report. 
The planning commission shall make an annual written report to the city council concerning its operations and the status of the planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the city council related to planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-35. - Master plan. 
(a)  Preparation . Under the authority of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq., and other applicable planning statutes, the planning commission shall make a master plan as a guide for development within the city's planning jurisdiction. 
(b)  Approval . Final authority to approve a master plan or any amendments thereto shall rest with the planning commission unless the city council passes a resolution asserting the right to approve or reject the master plan. 
(c)  Existing plan . Unless rescinded by the city, any plan adopted or amended under the Municipal Planning Act, Public Act 285 of 1931, MCL 125.31, et seq. need not be readopted under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-36. - Zoning powers. 
(a)  Transfer of zoning commission powers . The city council hereby confirms the transfer of all powers, duties, and responsibilities provided for zoning boards or zoning commissions by the former City and Village Zoning Act, Public Act 207 of 1921, MCL 125.281, et seq.; the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101, et seq.; or other applicable zoning statutes to the City of Rochester Hills Planning Commission formerly established under the Municipal Planning Act, Public Act 285 of 1931, MCL 125.31, et seq. 
(b)  Existing ordinance . Any existing zoning ordinance shall remain in full force and effect except as otherwise amended or repealed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-37. - Capital improvements program. 
To further the desirable future development of the city under the master plan, the planning commission, after the master plan is adopted, shall annually prepare a capital improvements program of public structures and improvements, showing those structures and improvements in general order of their priority, for the following six-year period. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Sec. 130-38. - Subdivision and land division recommendations. 
(a)  Ordinance or rule . The planning commission may recommend to the city council provisions of an ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land. Before recommending such an ordinance or rule, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance or rule. The planning commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(b)  Plat review . The planning commission shall review and make recommendation on a proposed plat before action thereon by the city council under the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, MCL 560.101, et seq., as amended. Before making its recommendation, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed plat. A plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of the proprietor or other person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent. Not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be sent to that person at that address by mail and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed platted land. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 8-8-2011)  
Secs. 130-39—130-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNPLATTED LAND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 130-61. - Purpose. 
The development of unplatted property not under the jurisdiction of article III of chapter 122 and article IV of chapter 122 shall be provided to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.01)  
Sec. 130-62. - Application of article. 
No person shall start building or construction of anything for which a site plan approval is required by the city zoning ordinance in chapter 138 and which is not under the jurisdiction of article III of chapter 122 and Article IV of chapter 122 of this Code until there has been compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.02)  
Sec. 130-63. - Site plan requirements. 
The site plan for unplatted land development shall include the following: 
(1)  Letter of intent. The proposed land use, residential or otherwise, with complete data in a letter outlining plans for grading, including proposals for both temporary and permanent erosion control; storm drainage; sanitary sewers; water supply; parking; easements; ingress; egress; and all roads existing or proposed. 
(2)  Topographic contour map. A topographic map, with contours (on USGS datum) to be extended 50 feet outside the subject parcel. The scale shall be no less than one inch equals 50 feet, and the contour interval shall be no more than two feet. 
(3)  Finish grading plan. The proposed finish grading plan, superimposed on a copy of the topographic map. The scale shall be no less than one inch equals 50 feet, and the contour interval shall be no more than two feet. 
(4)  Graphic layout of surface drainage. 
a.  Internal. A graphic layout, superimposed on the topographic map, clearly defining and delineating the area proposed to contribute surface drainage to each stormwater structure where surface water is proposed to enter the drainage system. 
b.  External. If drainage from areas outside the limits of the proposed development is to be accommodated, such areas shall be described and/or delineated and dimensioned in sufficient detail to provide for the location of the limits of such areas on a property line map of the area involved. 
(5)  Drainage map with computations. The topographic map relating to drainage facilities proposed to be utilized shall be accompanied by computations used in determining the adequacy of both existing and proposed drainage facilities, including an analysis of the adequacy of off-site outlet facilities proposed to be used. 
(6)  Location map. A map showing the relationship of the subject parcel to surrounding area with the scale to be one inch equals 200 feet. 
(7)  Street and utility map. A map showing existing streets rights-of-way and all existing utilities and existing and/or proposed surface drainage. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.03)  
Sec. 130-64. - Site plan specifications. 
All site plans for unplatted land development shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Internal road systems. All internal road systems shall be dedicated to the body having jurisdiction over the road rights-of-way in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development and shall conform to current standards and regulations established by such body. 
(2)  Rights-of-way. That portion of the proposed development situated within the limits of the proposed right-of-way lines as set forth in the master right-of-way plan shall be dedicated by the owner to the body which has or is to have jurisdiction over the rights-of-way. 
(3)  Building setbacks. Setbacks for all buildings shall be measured from the rights-of-way determined by the master right-of-way requirement plan width. 
(4)  Grading. 
a.  Elevations adjacent to roads. Areas adjacent to roads shall be graded to an elevation at the property line which is not lower than two feet below the centerline of the road, unless otherwise authorized by the city council. 
b.  Slope away from roads. The grading from the property line away from the road shall generally not exceed five percent, which equals one foot in 20 feet. 
c.  Drainage considerations. Drainage considerations shall be as follows: 
1.  Minimum slope. A minimum slope of two percent shall be provided to ensure drainage. 
2.  Natural drainage courses. Natural drainage courses shall not be diverted to cause damage to adjacent property. They shall not be filled unless provision is made to accommodate the surface drainage with proper ditch sections or enclosures approved by the city. 
d.  Future road improvement considerations. Grading of properties abutting unimproved roads (roads without concrete or asphalt surfacing) shall indicate consideration of future vertical realignment of such roads. 
e.  Meeting adjacent elevations. Proposed grades shall meet elevations of adjacent properties. 
f.  Erosion control. A minimum depth of three inches of topsoil shall be replaced on all graded areas and shall then be seeded with grass to control erosion. 
(5)  Stormwater retention and/or conveyance. Each acreage development shall be responsible to provide stormwater retention on site and/or proper conveyance by ditch or enclosure to natural drains or county facilities capable of receiving stormwaters. The off-site discharge of stormwater in excess of the capacity of existing downstream facilities will not be permitted. 
(6)  Vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
a.  Nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. Eight-foot asphalt nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths shall be provided in all rights-of-way abutting the subject property which are either existing or planned rights-of-way of 120 feet in width or greater, as designated on the master right-of-way plan of the city adopted by resolution of the city council. 
b.  School access easements. Easements for walkways shall be provided for school access routes. 
(7)  Improvement standards. All improvements shall conform to the current city's Standard Specifications for Design and Construction, copies of which are on file and by reference made a part hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.04; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 9-1-1999)  
Sec. 130-65. - Building permit prerequisites. 
(a)  Installation of improvements. Before the issuance of any building permits for unplatted land development, all of the utilities and improvements required by this article, including proper drainage, grading, roads, water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, and sidewalks where required, shall be installed and completed. 
(b)  Compliance with certain requirements. In lieu of the requirement of subsection (a) of this section, building permits shall be issued upon complying with all of the following: 
(1)  Final approvals and permits. The obtaining of final approvals and construction permits from all governmental units having jurisdiction of all utility plans, roads and other public improvements for all areas included in the site plan for the total area to be developed as defined by the site plan approval. 
(2)  Performance fee. Depositing with the city clerk, in the form of cash, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or a surety bond acceptable to the city, in an amount sufficient to ensure performance and completion of the obligation of the owner of the property to construct and install the utilities and improvements required by this article and referred to in subsection (a) of this section for such areas as building permits and/or land improvement permits are requested according to a plan of stages of development, provided that the city will rebate or release to the owner as the work progresses such amounts of any cash deposit or bond, etc., equal to the ratio of the work completed and approved for the entire project, included for the bond, cash, deposit, etc. No amount shall be reimbursed until the city engineer approves the sum, and at least 25 percent shall be retained pro rata from the entire project for each payment until two years after completion of the improvements to ensure against any repairs that may be necessary. The stage-development plan, the time for the completion of the work covered by the cash, bonds, etc., and the amount of the bonds, etc., shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Easements to the public. Presenting, in recordable form and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney and in conformity with the city design standards and specifications, the following: 
a.  Internal, undedicated roads or driveways. Easements to the public on all internal, undedicated roads or driveways being used in common by the residents of the development for vehicular traffic, for access of emergency vehicles and other public services. 
b.  Portions of utility systems. Easements to the public for such parts of the utility systems as shall be under public jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.05)  
Sec. 130-66. - Issuance of building permits. 
Upon the compliance with the requirements stated in section 130-65, building permits may be issued for the units included in the areas where the required bonds, etc., have been posted to guarantee the installation of the utilities and improvements. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.06)  
Sec. 130-67. - Fee schedules. 
Fees shall be deposited by the applicant at the time application is made for plot plan approval under this article. Plan and construction review fees shall be in accordance with the schedule set forth in division 2 of article V of chapter 110. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.07)  
Sec. 130-68. - Issuance of occupancy permits. 
As a condition for the issuance of an occupancy permit for any structure for any use, other than a model being used as a model, under this article, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Completion of utilities and improvements. Completion of the installation of all utilities and improvements required by this article for that structure for which an occupancy permit has been requested. 
(2)  Restrictive covenants. Presenting, in recordable form and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, such instruments as may be necessary to guarantee the maintenance and common control of areas to be used in common by the residents of the development. 
(3)  Dedication of road rights-of-way. Dedication of all road rights-of-way as are indicated on the site plan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.08)  
Sec. 130-69. - Disputes or deviations. 
Any disputes or need for deviation from the requirements of this article may be submitted to the city council, which may make such deviations from the requirements of this article or make such decisions as appear necessary in order to protect the public and, also, facilitate the development of the project. 
(Code 1976, § 4-03.09)  
Chapter 134 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 600 , § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2018, amended ch. 134 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 134, §§ 134-1—134-182, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 412, § 1, adopted Apr. 16, 1997; Ord. No. 472, § 1, adopted Apr. 24, 2002; Ord. No. 491, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2004; Ord. No. 485, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2003; Ord. No. 502, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2005 Ord. No. 545, §§ 1—10, adopted Dec. 14, 2009; and Ord. No. 558, § 1, adopted July 26, 2010. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 130; zoning, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Highway Advertising Act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE, INTENT, AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 134-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The City of Rochester Hills has determined that: 
(1)  Regulation of the number, size, location, placement and other features of signs is necessary to: 
a.  Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without difficulty and confusion; 
b.  Prevent wasteful use of natural resources by businesses competing for attention; 
c.  Prevent hazards to life and property; and 
d.  Ensure the continued attractiveness of the community and protection of property values. 
(2)  The number and sizes of signs in the city is excessive, which distracts motorists and pedestrians, creating traffic hazards, and reduces the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. 
(3)  The appearance of the city is adversely affected by excessive signs. 
(4)  The number, size and placement of signs shall be reduced whenever possible to offset such effects. Signs of least value are those which carry commercial messages unrelated to advertisement of a product, service, event, person, institution or business located on a premises where the sign is located or the sale or rental of such premises. 
(5)  The regulations contained in this chapter are minimum regulations necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of city residents, businesses and users of city streets. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 134-2. - Conflict with other laws. 
When a section of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, housing, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. When a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 134-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alter. To enlarge, change the message of, add to or remove any component of a sign or structure. 
Awning and canopy signs. A sign that is printed on, painted on, or attached to an awning or canopy above a business door or window. Such signs are generally oriented toward pedestrians on the opposite side of the street. 
Building department. The building department of the city and its officials, inspectors and employees. 
Changeable sign. A sign with manually changeable content or message. 
Electronic message sign. An electrically activated sign whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed and does not change less than every 30 seconds. 
Facade. The vertical plane of the exterior surface of a building, including all visible architectural, decorative and structural features, window openings, door openings and the outside surface of a parapet wall. 
Facade, primary. The façade of a building that incorporates the main pedestrian entrance is the primary facade. There is only one primary façade per building. An alternate building façade may be identified as the primary facade, subject to staff determination. 
Figure 134-3: Primary Facade  
Flagpole sign. A fabric sign, movable by wind. 
Hanging signs. A hanging sign is similar to a projecting sign, except that it is suspended below a marquee, awning or canopy. 
Hospital. A building, structure or institution in which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical treatment and operating under license by the health department and the state, and that is used for primarily inpatient services, and including such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
Monument base. Any part of a monument sign structure that is not defined as sign area. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign attached to a permanent foundation or decorative base located on the ground either horizontally or on a plane parallel to the horizon which supports the sign and is not attached to or dependent on freestanding vertical support from any building, exposed pole, or uprights for support. 
On-premises sign. A sign advertising only goods, services, facilities, events or attractions located on the premises, or identifying the owner or occupant; or directing traffic on the premises. 
Owner. A person, firm, partnership, association or corporation and/or its legal successors. 
Premises. Contiguous real property under common ownership developed or being developed within a site plan or plat. 
Projecting signs. A sign that is affixed to the face of a building or structure that projects in a perpendicular manner from the wall surface of the building. 
Recreational, institutional, public and quasi-public premises. Premises with public and private recreation; municipal buildings and uses; public, private, and parochial schools; churches; cemeteries; nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care facilities; funeral homes; colleges; universities; institutions of higher learning; housing for the elderly; and other similar premises. 
Roof sign. A sign attached to a building, which projects above or beyond the roof or parapet line. 
Sign. A name, identification, image, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or ground, and which directs attention to an object, project, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, issue, institution, organization or business and which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public property. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material without lettering placed behind a store window are not signs or parts of signs. 
Sign area. The entire area within a rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed, unless the supports are used for writing, representation or display or any emblem or figure of a similar character. 
Sign erector. Any person engaged in the business of erecting, altering or removing signs on the premises of another person. 
Story. That part of a building, other than a mezzanine, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. 
Strip lighting. A device or devices installed that attract attention to a non-residential use wherein a source or sources of light are arranged to be visible from the exterior of a building or structure including, but not limited to, strips of LED lights or neon tubes placed along the perimeter of building windows, along building edges, and other locations that serve to attract attention. This definition shall not include any device or devices classified as a sign by the definitions and regulations in the zoning ordinance. Temporary lights otherwise regulated by this chapter are also excluded from this definition. 
Temporary sign. A sign which is not permanently installed and which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, including freestanding and hand-held portable signs and sandwich boards, signs for the sale, lease, rental or development of the premises. 
Wall sign. An on-premises sign attached to, painted on, or placed against the exterior wall, facade or surface of a building, no portion of which projects more than 12 inches from the wall or surface and which does not project above the roof or parapet line. 
Window sign. A sign located inside an enclosed building and visible through a window or a sign affixed to either the interior or exterior window face. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 134-4. - General standards. 
General sign standards as follows: 
(1)  Sign permits. 
a.  Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs shall not require a permit: 
1.  Addressing numbers. A sign as required by the City of Rochester Hills in article VII, chapter 18, Street Addresses, attached to any building wall or any freestanding sign 
2.  Flags. Flags shall be attached to freestanding flagpoles. Placement of flagpoles shall not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Flags may not project beyond the property lines, and flags shall not project into the existing or proposed right-of-way. All flags shall be maintained in good repair free of tearing, fraying or other deterioration. 
3.  Official signs. Signs posted by duly constituted public authorities in pursuance of their public duties. 
4.  Decorative banners. Decorative banners placed on street light poles by public agencies or private non-profit, community and civic organizations. 
5.  Temporary signs less than 12 square feet. 
b.  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, alter, relocate, display, or continue to display any sign, except for those signs exempted under subsection 134-4(1)a., unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the building department and a permit fee paid in accordance with the schedule set forth in article VI of chapter 110. 
c.  Application for permit. Application for sign permits shall be made only by the premises owner or authorized representative or a registered sign erector on forms provided by the building department and shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  Name. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the owner if different from the applicant. 
2.  Location. Location of the building, structure, or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
3.  Consent to erect. It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign on any property, public or private, without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
4.  Position of sign. Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, and property lines. 
5.  Plans for sign. Two copies of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground. 
6.  Stress sheets. Copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure in accordance with the regulations adopted by the city. 
7.  Sign erector. The name and address of the sign erector. 
8.  Insurance. The insurance policy as required in this article. 
9.  Other information. Such other information as the building department may require to show full compliance with this chapter and other applicable sections of this Code and state laws. 
10.  Certificate or seal. When the public safety so requires, as determined by the building department, the application shall, in addition, bear the certificate or seal of a registered structural or civil engineer as a condition to the issuance of a permit. 
11.  Identification. On any sign requiring a permit within the city it shall clearly identify the permit holder on the sign. 
d.  Granting and issuance of permit. No sign for which a permit has been issued hereunder shall thereafter be moved to another location within the city nor shall it be structurally altered in any way without the approval of the official or board which granted the original permit. An additional fee shall be paid at the time of application for permission to move or alter each such sign. 
e.  Inspection. All signs shall be inspected and approved by the building department. Failure to schedule an inspection and gain approval shall be considered a municipal civil infraction. 
(2)  Prohibited signs. 
a.  Roof signs. 
b.  Signs that confuse traffic. Signs that simulate or imitate the size, color, lettering, or design of any traffic sign or signal or other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic are prohibited. 
c.  Animated and moving signs. 
1.  Signs that move or have any moving or animated parts or image, whether movement is caused by machinery, electronics, wind or otherwise. 
2.  Signs where a light source moves or is not of constant intensity and color or where any light bulb can shine directly into the eyes of any occupant of any vehicle traveling upon any highway, driveway or parking area or into any window of any residence within 200 feet or where the illumination interferes with the visibility or readability of any traffic sign or device. 
d.  Open flames. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for display purposes unless specifically approved by the building department. 
e.  Signs in public rights-of-way. Signs shall not be placed within any public right-of-way within the city, except signs authorized by the county road commission, the state department of transportation or the city with jurisdiction over the right-of-way. The mayor is authorized to cause the removal of any signs posted or placed in any public right-of-way, provided any such signs are kept available for a period of ten days for pickup by any person who might claim them. 
f.  Any sign not expressly permitted by this chapter shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Locational requirements. 
a.  Corner clearance. No sign shall be placed within the triangular area at the corner of the intersection of two street right-of-way lines for a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection as designated by the city's master right-of-way plan. Also, no sign shall be placed within the triangular area at the corner of the intersection of a street right-of-way line and the edge of a private driveway for a distance along each line of 15 feet from their point of intersection. Compliance with engineering standards adopted by the City of Rochester Hills is also required. 
b.  Proximity to electrical conductors. No sign shall be erected so that any part, including cables, guys, etc., will be within six feet of any electrical conductor, electric light pole, streetlamp, traffic light, or other public utility pole or standard. 
(4)  Measurement of sign area and height. 
Figure 134-4: Sign Area and Height  
a.  Sign height shall be the vertical distance measured from the point of ground immediately beneath the sign to the highest point of the sign, including decorative embellishments, supporting structures, and backgrounds. Where the ground elevation beneath a sign varies, the average grade of the ground within a five-foot radius of the sign structure shall be used. The average grade shall be the highest point within said radius plus the lowest point within said radius, divided by two. Any filling, berming, mounding or excavating primarily for the purpose of locating the sign shall not be included in the calculation of average grade. 
b.  Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than three feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
(5)  Illumination. 
a.  Illuminated signs shall not be of the flashing or intermittent type. 
b.  The source of illumination may be internal or external. The source of the light shall not be exposed. 
c.  External sources of illumination shall be shielded and directed to prevent glare onto public right-of-way or neighboring properties. 
d.  Direct light sources shall not be visible from any street or adjacent residential property unless the direct source is obscured or softened in appearance by use of a diffusing material. 
e.  The use of exposed neon, or similar gas, tubing in conjunction with other types of materials within a sign is permitted; however, strip lighting or any other use of neon, similar gas, or LED outline tubing around windows and buildings is prohibited. 
f.  When permitted, electronic message signs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Multi-colored messages may be used where the words, letters or pictures are not in motion. 
2.  Electronic display areas shall automatically dim. The brightness of such display areas shall be limited to 0.3 footcandles above ambient light conditions, as measured from the distances in the following table: 
Size of display area 	Measuring distance 
15 square feet or less 	40 feet 
Greater than 15 and up to 30 square feet 	48 feet 
Greater than 30 and up to 60 square feet 	66 feet 
Greater than 60 and up to 90 square feet 	86 feet 
Greater than 90 and up to 120 square feet 	102 feet 
Greater than 120 and up to 150 square feet 	116 feet 
Greater than 150 and up to 180 square feet 	128 feet 
Greater than 180 square feet 	140 feet 
 
Illuminance shall be measured with the sign turned off and again with the electronic sign illumination displaying a white image for a full color capable electronic sign and a solid message for a single-color illuminated electronic sign. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the sign at the distance determined by the total square footage of the illuminated sign as set forth in the above table. 
3.  Signs shall be programmed to go dark in the event of a malfunction. 
4.  The content of the electronic display area shall not feature motion or animation. Any and all portions of the message shall remain static for a minimum of 30 seconds. The change from message to message shall be instantaneous. 
5.  Electronic displays shall not mimic traffic controls. 
(6)  Design standards. Signs should be professionally constructed using high-quality materials such as metal, stone, hard wood, and brass. Exterior materials, finishes, and colors should be the same or similar to those used on the principal building. 
(7)  Substitution clause. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit non-commercial messages on signs that are otherwise allowed herein. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 605 , § 2, 6-18-2018)  
ARTICLE III. - SIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 134-5. - Monument signs. 
Momument sign standards as follows: 
(1)  Monument signs—Maximum height and area. The following table provides for the maximum height and area for monument signs by use type: 
Use 	Maximum Height in Feet 	Maximum Area in Square Feet of all Monument Signs* 	Setback/locational requirements 
Residential Development 
Single-family dwellings 	Not permitted 	Not permitted 	N/A 
Multi-family and subdivision complexes 	7 	20 	1 sign within 100 ft. of each entrance; signs shall be located outside of the road right-of-way, unless placed within an entrance island as permitted by the appropriate road agency 
Housing for elderly 	7 	20 	10 ft. setbacks 
Recreational, church, institutional, public and quasi-public uses 
Public & private recreation uses 	7 	48 	10 ft. setbacks 
Municipal buildings and uses, including cemeteries 			
Schools, child care facilities 			
Places of worship, funeral homes 			
Civic organizations 			
Uses similar to the above 			
Hospitals 	7 	150 sf when placed in front of the hospital from which it is addressed; 1 additional sign with a maximum area of 20 sf is permitted per major road frontage 	10 ft. setbacks 
Office, professional and research uses 
Medical offices 	7 	Total maximum size of 100 sf with no single sign exceeding 48 sf 	1 sign per vehicular entrance, separated by a minimum of 300 ft.; 10 ft. setbacks 
Professional offices 			
Research facilities 			
Commercial, retail and industrial uses 
General commercial, retail, restaurant uses 	7 	1 sf per each five ft. of linear street frontage, up to a maximum of 200 sf 	10 ft. front setback; side and rear setbacks as required for buildings* 
Gasoline stations and other auto-related uses 	7 		1 monument sign is permitted for each frontage abutting a street; a second sign shall be allowed for each frontage more than 300 ft. with more than one entrance onto a road right-of-way 
Industrial uses 	7 	1 sf per each 5 ft. of linear street frontage, up to a maximum of 100 sf 	
* In the case of nonconforming buildings located within 15 ft. of the proposed right-of-way, signs may be placed up to 5 feet from the building, provided they are not in the existing right-of-way. The proposed right-of-way for Rochester Road is 150 ft. 
 
(2)  Specific standards: Monument signs. 
a.  Monument signs shall only be permitted on a parcel that contains a building that is occupied and possesses a valid certificate of use, with the exception of public or private parks. 
b.  Monument signs are not permitted in the road right-of-way unless otherwise specified. 
c.  Monument signs shall be placed out of the required corner clearance area as provided in subsection 134-4(3). 
d.  Where a monument sign is placed on a wall approved in conjunction with a planned development, the wall is excluded from the maximum monument sign height. 
e.  All monument signs for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected by the building department and, if found to have been properly constructed and installed in accordance with this chapter, final approval shall be granted. 
f.  Monument signs for subdivision entrances shall not be internally illuminated. 
g.  Monument signs may incorporate electronic message signs, provided that such signs do not exceed two-thirds of the sign area. See subsection 134-4(5) for additional standards. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 605 , § 3, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 134-6. - Wall signs. 
Wall sign standards as follows: 
(1)  Wall signs—Maximum area. The following table provides for the maximum area for wall signs by use type: 
Use 	Maximum Area in Square Feet of all Wall Signs 
Residential Development 
Single-family dwellings 	Not Permitted 
Multi-family and subdivision complexes 	20 
Housing for elderly 	20 
Recreational, church, institutional, public, and quasi-public uses 
Public & private recreation uses 	20 
Municipal buildings and uses, including cemeteries 	
Schools, child care facilities 	
Places of worship, funeral homes 	
Civic organizations 	
Uses similar to the above 	
Hospitals 	100 sf per sign, up to 300 sf total sign area 
Office, professional, and research uses 
Medical offices 	20 sf per tenant, up to a maximum of 100 sf per building; 
Professional offices 	Buildings with 2 major street frontages: 1 additional sign up to 20 sf. 
Research offices 	Buildings with freeway frontage; 2 additional sign areas are permitted, up to a maximum of 100 sf each. 
Commercial, retail, and industrial uses 
General commercial, retail, restaurant uses 	10% of primary building or tenant façade with no single sign being more than 100 sf; For premises with a front setback of 250 ft. or more from the proposed right-of-way and having a usable floor area of 50,000 sf or more, the maximum area for 1 sign is 200 sf, provided such sign is placed on the elevation facing the proposed right-of-way from which the setback distance is taken. 
Gasoline stations and other auto-related uses 	10% of primary building or tenant façade with no single sign being more than 100 sf 
Freeway service business 	10% of primary building or tenant façade with no single sign being more than 100 sf 
 
(2)  Specific standards—Wall signs. 
a.  Wall signs shall not project beyond the roof or parapet of any building. 
b.  Wall signs shall not face a residential district unless separated by a major street. 
c.  When a building is located at the property line, a wall sign may project up to 12 inches beyond the building, but in no case shall a wall sign extend into the existing right-of-way. 
d.  For general commercial, retail, and restaurant uses, wall signs shall be located on the upper portion of the storefront, and shall not exceed the 80 percent of the width of the storefront bay. 
e.  Wall signs shall be placed in a clear signable area, which is an architecturally continuous area uninterrupted by doors, windows, or architectural details such as grillework, piers, pilasters, or other ornamental features. 
f.  Multiple story buildings. Signs are permitted at the storefront level only, below the expression line separating the ground floor from upper floors. 
g.  Additional area provisions based on building setback. The maximum sign area may be increased based on the following table: 
Building Setback
in Feet from the
Proposed Right-of-Way 	Factor 
100—249 ft. 	1.5 
250 ft. or more 	2.00 
 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 605 , § 3, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 134-7. - Specific standards for other sign types. 
(a)  Awning signs. 
(1)  Signs shall comprise no more than 30 percent of the total exterior surface of an awning or canopy. 
(2)  Awnings or canopies with back-lit graphics or other kinds of interior illumination are prohibited. 
(3)  Two signs, not exceeding 20 square feet each, are permitted to be attached to or be a part of gasoline pump canopies. 
(b)  Projecting signs. 
(1)  Projecting signs shall be mounted below the second-floor window sill in multi-story buildings. 
(2)  Projecting signs shall be small in scale and provide a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet between the lowest point of the sign and the sidewalk. 
(3)  The maximum sign area for projecting signs is five square feet. 
(4)  Mounting hardware shall be attractive and an integral part of the sign design. 
(c)  Hanging signs. 
(1)  The maximum sign area for hanging signs is four square feet (excluding supporting rods, chains, or similar hangers). 
(2)  Hanging signs shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet between the lowest point of the sign and the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 605 , § 4, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 134-8. - Permanent and temporary window signs. 
(a)  Window signs shall be permitted in all non-residential zoning districts. 
(b)  Window signs shall be permitted to occupy up to 25 percent of the total window glazed area of any given façade regardless of whether they are temporary or permanent. 
(c)  Etched or applied lettering or designs that are within the lower eight inches of any ground floor window shall be permitted and shall not be considered part of the total area of window signs provided they do not exceed 80 percent of the width of any window to or on which they are placed. 
(d)  Window signs shall contain a static message and shall not flash, scroll or otherwise give the appearance of movement or intermittent change. 
(e)  Upper story tenants may display window signs. Such window signs may not exceed 20 percent of the total window area appurtenant to the tenant's floor space. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 134-9. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Temporary signs shall be permitted as follows: 
Table 134-9 A. Maximum Size, Maximum Height, and Permitted Type of Temporary Signs 
Use 	Permitted Types 	Maximum Area of All Temporary Signs 	Maximum Area of Any Individual Sign 	Maximum Height (Freestanding) 
Single-Family Residential 	Freestanding 	10 square feet 	6 square feet 	7 feet 
	Wall 	4 square feet 	2 square feet 	
Multiple Family Residential 	Freestanding 	32 square feet 	16 square feet 	7 feet 
	Wall 	4 square feet 	2 square feet 	
Non-Residential Uses in Residential districts 	Freestanding 	40 square feet 	20 square feet 	7 feet 
	Wall 	20 square feet 	20 square feet 	
Non-Residential Uses in all other districts 	Freestanding 	64 square feet 	20 square feet 	7 feet 
	Wall 	64 square feet 	32 square feet 	
Per subsection 134-4(1)a.5, signs under 12 square feet do not require a permit. 
 
(b)  Temporary signs under 12 square feet shall be limited to one per address. Temporary signs over 12 square feet require a permit, and once the temporary sign is removed, there shall be a gap of at least 30 days between display of the same temporary sign on the same zoning lot. The maximum display time of temporary over 12 square feet is 30 days up to maximum of four times per calendar year unless additional time is granted under one of the following subsections. 
(c)  When all or a portion of a building or land area on a zoning lot is listed for sale or lease, the maximum display time of freestanding temporary signs for all uses and temporary signs mounted on buildings for all uses except residential uses shall be the duration the building, building unit or land is listed for sale or lease. 
(1)  For residential lots less than one acre in size, the freestanding sign area limits in Table 134-9 A. apply. 
(2)  For residential lots greater than one acre in size, the maximum freestanding sign area for any individual sign may be increased to 12 square feet. 
(d)  In recognition that there is a need for additional expression of speech prior to a scheduled election, the following applies for a period of 60 days prior to until three days after a city-designated election day on which there is at least one ballot item: the maximum allowable area of temporary freestanding signs shall be increased to 64 square feet in all districts. The maximum area of an individual sign remains as stated in the table above during this period. 
(e)  Display of temporary banners and temporary signs mounted on building walls (temporary wall signs) shall be limited to a total of 30 days per calendar year. Such signs shall not be displayed for any continuous period greater than 14 days. 
(f)  Temporary signs shall be constructed of durable, all-weather materials and designed to remain in place and in good repair so long as they remain on display. 
(g)  Temporary signs shall be subject to the maintenance standards of this section. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 605 , § 5, 6-18-2018)  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 134-10. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any sign existing on April 16, 1997, or on the effective date of any amendment to this chapter that does not comply with all of the sections of this chapter, including any amendment, shall be considered nonconforming. Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Structural change or rebuilding. An existing sign shall not be structurally altered so as to change the shape, size, type, or design of the sign. A sign and/or sign structure shall not be rebuilt so as to extend its life. 
(2)  Change in words or panel. A panel or wording on a sign within the same space on the sign may be changed periodically, except as provided in subsection (5), below. 
(3)  Obsolete sign. If a sign and/or sign structure shall become obsolete, it shall be unlawful to maintain a sign and/or sign structure and it shall be removed within 30 days of receipt of written notice to remove from the city. A sign shall be considered to be obsolete when no operation of a business, service or activity is conducted on the property for a period of six months. 
(4)  Damage or destruction. An existing sign structure (including support and frame, but excluding panel) shall not be re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the cost of constructing a comparable conforming sign. 
(5)  Discontinuation of nonconforming signs; amortization. Nonconforming signs or sign structures shall be removed when: 
a.  The responsible parties voluntarily change or relocate the nonconforming sign; 
b.  The name of the premises or business the nonconforming sign pertains to changes; 
c.  The nature or type of premises or business the nonconforming sign pertains to requires a new certificate of occupancy; 
d.  Significant changes or improvements are made to the premises where the nonconforming sign is located requiring site plan review and approval; and 
e.  The nonconforming sign structure (including support and frame, but excluding panel) is determined by the building department to be dilapidated, unsafe or in violation of the building code. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 134-11. - Construction standards and maintenance of signs. 
(a)  Construction standards. 
(1)  Conformance. All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the provisions for materials, loads, and stresses of the state construction codes, and the requirements of this chapter and the city zoning ordinance in chapter 138. 
(2)  Materials and fasteners. All signs shall be erected in such a manner and with such materials to remain safe and secure during the period of use, and all bolts, cables, and other sign components shall be kept free of peeling paint, corrosion and all other defects and deterioration. All signs other than temporary signs shall be securely attached to a permanent structure or foundation in accordance with the state construction code. Any defect due to the fault of the erector shall be repaired by the property owner. 
(3)  Approved electrical devices. No sign shall be illuminated by other than approved electrical devices, and the devices shall be installed in accordance with the regulations adopted by the city. 
(4)  Appeals and variances of construction requirements. Any appeal of a matter relating to, and variances from, the construction standards of this section 134-11 shall be made to and shall follow the procedures of the city construction board of appeals. 
(b)  Maintenance of signs and property. 
(1)  Unsafe signs. 
a.  Correction. If any sign is found unsafe, insecure, improperly constructed and not in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the erector and/or owner shall be required to make any such sign safe, secure and otherwise in compliance with this chapter. 
b.  Failure to comply. Failure to comply within 48 hours from the time of written notification from the building department shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Maintenance of property. Property surrounding any monument sign shall be kept clean, sanitary, and free from obnoxious and offensive substances, weeds, rubbish and flammable material. 
(3)  Share equally. The owner of any property on which a sign is placed and the person maintaining the sign are declared to be equally responsible for the condition of the sign and the area in the vicinity thereof. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 134-12. - Sign board of appeals. 
The city zoning board of appeals shall constitute the sign board of appeals for the purposes of interpreting and carrying out the provisions of this chapter, except for questions of construction standards for which the city construction board of appeals shall have jurisdiction. 
(1)  Hearings. 
a.  Application by aggrieved person. Any person aggrieved by a notice or order of the building official issued in connection with any alleged violation of this chapter or any applicable rules and regulations pursuant to this chapter may file with the sign board of appeals an application setting forth reasons for contesting the notice or order. 
b.  Application filing. The application shall be filed within 21 days after the notice or order of the building official is served by the city on the applicant. 
c.  Time of hearing; notice. Within 45 days after receipt of a valid application, the sign board of appeals shall conduct a public hearing. The building official shall set the time and place of the hearing and, at least 15 days prior to the hearing date, shall serve the applicant and owners of property within 300 feet of the location of the sign with notice, pursuant to subsection (5)d., of this section. 
(2)  Action of sign board of appeals. 
a.  Power. The sign board of appeals shall have the power to modify or reverse, wholly or partly, the notice or order given under this chapter, grant variances and grant extensions of time for the performance of any act required of not more than three additional months where the sign board of appeals finds such extension is in harmony with the general purpose with this chapter to secure the public health, safety and welfare. 
b.  Necessary vote. The concurring vote of four members of the sign board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse, wholly or partly, or modify any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building official or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass or to effect any variation in this chapter. 
c.  Period of validity. No order or variance of the sign board permitting the erection or alteration of a sign, except for an interpretation made by the sign board, shall be valid for a period longer than six months from the date of approval, unless a permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection and alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
d.  Site plan; transferability. A variance granted shall be valid only under a site plan or layout of the property which was considered by the sign board. A variance granted shall run with the land and shall transfer to a new owner. 
e.  Reconsideration. After a variance has been denied in whole or in part by the sign board, such application may not be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the last denial. However, a denied variance may be reconsidered by the sign board when, in the opinion of the building official or the sign board, newly discovered evidence or changed conditions warrant such reconsideration. 
f.  Conditions of approval. In authorizing a variance or extension, the sign board may attach conditions it determines to be reasonable, necessary or appropriate to further the purposes and spirit of this chapter and to protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(3)  Scope of hearing. At the hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice or order should be modified or withdrawn or why the period of time permitted for compliance should be extended. 
(4)  Stay. An appeal made under this chapter shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building official certifies to the sign board of appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that because of facts stated in the certificate an emergency exists, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, except by a restraining order or by the circuit court, following timely notice of application therefor, to the building official. 
(5)  Variances. 
a.  Findings of fact. A variance to this chapter may be authorized by the sign board of appeals only in cases when competent, material and substantial evidence in the official record of the appeal supports all the following affirmative findings: 
1.  Special conditions. That special conditions or circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. 
2.  Deprivation of rights. That literal interpretation or application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of property rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter. 
3.  Substantial justice. Allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this chapter, the individual difficulties that will be suffered by a failure of the sign board to grant a variance, and the rights of others whose property would be affected by the allowance of the variance, and will not be contrary to the public purpose and general intent and purpose of this chapter. 
b.  Support of findings. The findings of fact in subsection (5)a. of this section shall be made by the sign board of appeals, which is not empowered to grant a variance without an affirmative finding of fact in each of the categories listed in subsection (5)a. of this section. Every finding of fact shall be supported by the record of the proceedings of the sign board. 
c.  Limitations. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to empower the sign board of appeals to substantially change the terms of this chapter or to significantly add to the types of signs permitted on any premises. 
d.  Appeal procedure. 
1.  Notice. The sign board of appeals shall give written notice of all hearings on appeals made under this chapter. The notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the hearing to all owners of record of real property within 300 feet of the premises in question. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the addresses given in the last assessment roll. 
2.  Official record. The sign board of appeals shall prepare an official record for each appeal and shall base its decision on this record. The official record shall include the following: 
i.  The relevant administrative records and administrative orders issued relating to the appeal. 
ii.  A notice of appeal. 
iii.  Such documents, exhibits, photographs, or written reports as may be submitted to the board for its consideration. 
3.  Secretary's signature on documents. The requisite written findings of fact, the conditions attached, the decisions and orders by the board of appeals in disposing of the appeal shall be signed by the secretary of the board. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 134-13. - Registration of sign erectors. 
All signs erectors are required to register with the city before work is commenced. A certificate of insurance is necessary prior to registration. Registration shall be renewed each calendar year. The fee for this registration, as provided in section 110-401, is not prorated. Permits may be issued to sign erectors for any of the work covered by a permit only after registration and compliance with the following: 
(1)  Annual registration. Sign erectors shall register each calendar year with the building department in accordance with the following: 
a.  Information. The registration shall include at least the sign erector's name, place of business, telephone number, nature of organization and the name of a representative. 
b.  Fee. A registration fee as set forth in section 110-401 shall be paid. 
(2)  Certificate of insurance. At the time of registration, a sign erector or his agent or a property owner or his agent shall submit a certificate of insurance per the requirements of the city's insurance provisions. 
(3)  Changes in insurance. 
a.  Cancellation or material change. No cancellation or material change in insurance may occur without 30 days' advance written notice to the city. 
b.  Lapse of coverage. At any time the insurance of any sign erector is permitted to lapse, his right to obtain or retain permits shall automatically be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Sec. 134-14. - Penalties. 
(a)  Municipal civil infractions. All violations of this chapter shall be municipal civil infractions and, upon a determination of responsibility therefor, shall be punishable by a civil fine as set forth in section 66-37. 
(b)  Civil remedies. Any sign or sign structure erected, used, or maintained in violation of this chapter or in disobedience to any order validly issued by the building department pursuant to this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se. Upon application by the city or any interested party to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation, threatened violation, or disobedience may be punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided in chapter 66. 
(Ord. No. 600 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
Chapter 138 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 532, adopted Apr. 20, 2009, repealed ch. 138, Zoning, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Cross reference— Any pertaining to a zoning map amendment or rezoning saved from repeal, § 1-7(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 106; floods, ch. 114; historical preservation, ch. 118; land division, ch. 122; natural resources, ch. 126; planning, ch. 130; signs, ch. 134. 
 
ARTICLE 1 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
CHAPTER 1. - PURPOSE, VALIDITY AND SCOPE 
 
SECTION 138-1.100 - Title 
This ordinance, enacted under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended), governing the incorporated portions of the City of Rochester Hills, Oakland County, Michigan, is to regulate and restrict the locations and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and for public and semipublic or other specified uses; and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings, and other structures; to regulate and determine the size of yards, courts and open spaces; to regulate and to limit the density of population; and for such purposes to divide the City into districts and establish the boundaries thereof; to provide for changes in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of such districts; to define certain terms used in this ordinance; to provide for enforcement; to establish a Zoning Board of Appeals; and to impose penalties for the violation of this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-1.101 - Preamble 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in such case made and provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding the land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation, and other public requirements; and by other means, all in accordance with an adopted comprehensive plan, the City has ordained this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-1.102 - Scope 
No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. No yard or open space surrounding any building shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the regulations established for the district in which such building is located, unless otherwise addressed.  
SECTION 138-1.103 - Short Title 
This ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rochester Hills, and will be referred to herein as "this ordinance."  
SECTION 138-1.104 - Validity and Severability 
Sections of this ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph, or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
SECTION 138-1.105 - Adoption and Effective Date 
A.  Repeal of Prior Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance adopted by the City of Rochester Hills City Council on October 29, 1986, and all amendments thereto, is hereby repealed insofar as it conflicts with this ordinance. The repeal of the ordinance and all amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
B.  Adoption and Effective Date. This ordinance, which specifically includes the Zoning District Map, is hereby ordered to be given immediate effect and be in force from and after the earliest date allowed by law, and this ordinance is hereby ordered to be published, in the manner provided by law, in the Rochester Eccentric, on Sunday, the 26 th day of April, 2009. 
This ordinance was adopted by the City Council of Rochester Hills by authority of Act 110 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 2006 (as amended) at a meeting thereof duly called and held on Monday the 20th day of April, 2009 and ordered to be published in the manner provided by law.  
SECTION 138-1.106 - Conflicting Provisions 
Whenever any section of this ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the sections of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this ordinance, the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 
In interpreting and applying the sections of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum or maximum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, morals and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the sections of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.  
SECTION 138-1.107 - Vested Right 
Nothing in this ordinance should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein and they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. EXCEPTION: if a site plan or plat has been submitted for general review under the site plan or plat review procedure on or before the effective date of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply so far as they are more stringent or require more than the requirements in effect at the time of the site plan or plat was submitted for general review. All other requirements of this ordinance shall be in effect and followed from and after the effective date of this ordinance.  
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
SECTION 138-1.200 - Amendments 
A.  Initiation of Amendment. The City Council may, from time to time, on recommendation from the Planning Commission or on its own motion or on petition, amend, supplement, modify or change this ordinance in accordance with the authority of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (as amended). Upon presentation to the City of a petition for amendment of such ordinance by an owner of real estate to be affected, such petition shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in Section 110-438. The amount of such fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council and shall be used to defray the expense of publishing the required notices and the expense of such Planning Commission. 
B.  Amendment Review Procedure. The amendment and application materials shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Section, and shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedure. Amendments or application materials that do not meet the stipulated requirements shall be considered incomplete and shall not be eligible for consideration by the Planning Commission: 
1.  Technical Review. Prior to Planning Commission consideration, the proposed amendment and application materials shall be distributed to appropriate City officials and staff for review and comment. The proposed amendment and application materials may also be distributed to applicable outside agencies and designated City consultants for review. 
2.  Public hearing. The plannning commission shall hold a public hearing for all proposed amendments in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended) as summarized in Section 138-1.203. 
3.  Planning Commission consideration of the proposed amendment. Subsequent to the hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the proposed amendment, together with any reports and recommendations from staff, consultants, other reviewing agencies and any public comments. The Planning Commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition, including the appropriate criteria listed in this Section, and shall report its findings and recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  City Council action on the proposed amendment. Upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider the proposed amendment. If determined to be necessary, the City Council may refer the amendment back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. In the case of an amendment to the official Zoning Map, the City Council shall approve or deny the amendment, based upon its consideration of the criteria contained herein this Section. 
C.  Re-application. Whenever an application for an amendment to this ordinance has been denied by the City Council, a new application for the same amendment shall not be accepted by the Planning Commission for consideration for a period of 365 days, unless, upon recommendation by Staff, the Planning Commission determines that one or more of the following conditions has been met: 
1.  There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered during review of the application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the application. 
2.  New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed. 
3.  The new application is materially different from the prior application. 
D.  Criteria for Amendment of the Official Zoning Map. In considering any petition for an amendment to the official zoning map, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following criteria in making its findings, recommendations, and decision: 
1.  Consistency with the goals, policies and objectives of the Master Plan and any sub-area plans. If conditions have changed since the Master Plan was adopted, consistency with recent development trends in the area shall be considered. 
2.  Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological and other environmental features with the uses permitted in the proposed zoning district. 
3.  Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return on investment through developing the property with one or more of the uses permitted under the current zoning. 
4.  Compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values. 
5.  The capacity of City's utilities and services sufficient to accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising the health, safety and welfare of the City. 
6.  The capability of the street system to safely and efficiently accommodate the expected traffic generated by uses permitted in the requested zoning district. 
7.  The boundaries of the requested rezoning district are reasonable in relationship to surroundings and construction on the site will be able to meet the dimensional regulations for the requested zoning district. 
8.  If a rezoning is appropriate, the requested zoning district is considered to be more appropriate from the City's perspective than another zoning district. 
9.  If the request is for a specific use, rezoning the land is considered to be more appropriate than amending the list of permitted or conditional uses in the current zoning district to allow the use. 
10.  The requested rezoning will not create an isolated or incompatible zone in the neighborhood.  
SECTION 138-1.201 - Uses Not Listed 
A land use that is not cited by name as a permitted use in a zoning district may be permitted upon a determination by the City Council that such a use is clearly similar in nature and compatible with the listed or existing uses in that district. In making such a determination, the City Council shall seek the advice of and recommendation by the Planning Commission. Consideration shall be given to the following: 
A.  Determination of Compatibility. In making the determination of compatibility, the City Council shall consider specific characteristics of the use in question and compare such characteristics with those of the uses that are expressly permitted in the district. Such characteristics shall include, but are not limited to, traffic generation, types of service offered, types of goods produced, methods of operation, and building characteristics. 
B.  Conditions. If the City Council determines that the proposed use is compatible with permitted and existing uses in the district, the Council shall then decide whether the proposed use shall be permitted by right, by special approval, or as a permitted accessory use. The proposed use shall be subject to the review and approval requirements for the district in which it is located. The City Council shall have the authority to establish additional standards and conditions applicable to the use. 
No use shall be permitted in a district under the terms of this section if the use is specifically listed as a use permitted by right or special approval in any other zoning district.  
SECTION 138-1.202 - Prohibited Land Uses 
Uses that are not specifically listed in and permitted by this ordinance, or otherwise determined to be similar to listed and permitted uses, are hereby determined to be prohibited uses.  
SECTION 138-1.203 - Public Hearing Procedures 
The body charged with conducting a public hearing by this ordinance shall, upon receipt of a completed application, select a reasonable time and place for such hearing. Such hearings shall be subject to the procedures set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended). The public hearing procedures of PA 110 in effect at the date of adoption are summarized as follows. Any further amendments to PA 110 that alter the public hearing procedure requirements following the date of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance will supersede the following procedures. 
A.  General Public Hearing Procedures. The following procedures are applicable to all public hearings except zoning ordinance text and map amendments, which are described in subsection B, below: 
1.  Publication in a Newspaper of General Circulation. Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. 
2.  Personal and Mailed Notice. 
a.  Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. 
b.  Notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property, regardless of municipal jurisdiction. 
c.  Notice shall be given to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of municipal jurisdiction. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area leased by different persons, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. If a single structure contains more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance(s) to the structure. 
d.  All notice delivered by mail or personal delivery must be given not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be deemed given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the U.S. postal service or other public or private delivery service. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used for the intended recipient of the notice. 
e.  The City shall prepare a list of property owners and occupants to whom notice was mailed. 
3.  Content. Any notice published in a newspaper or delivered by mail shall: 
a.  Describe the nature of the request. 
b.  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. 
c.  Include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. If no such addresses exist, other means of identifying the property may be used. 
d.  When and where the public hearing will occur. 
e.  When and where written comments may be submitted concerning the request. 
B.  Zoning Ordinance Text and Map Amendments. 
1.  Map or Text Amendments Affecting Ten or Fewer Parcels. If the proposed map or text amendment will impact 10 or fewer parcels, notice shall be given as specified in Section 138-1.203.A. 
2.  Map or Text Amendments Affecting 11 or More Parcels. If the proposed map or text amendment will impact 11 or more parcels, notice shall be given as specified in Section 138-1.203.A, with the exception that the notice need not list street addresses of properties that will be impacted by the map or text amendment. 
3.  Notice to Other Entities. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall also be given by mail to any of the following entities that have registered their name with the City Clerk for the purposes of receiving public notice: any electric, gas, or pipeline public utility company; each telecommunication service provider; each railroad operating within the district or zone affected; and the airport manager of each airport. 
4.  Notice of Proposed Map Amendment Signs. An applicant requesting a zoning map amendment shall construct and install a sign indicating the requested zoning map amendment. The sign shall be installed no less than 15 days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The sign shall be installed on the parcel(s) requested for the zoning map amendment consideration and shall be clearly visible from an adjoining roadway. Parcels with frontage on multiple roads shall place a sign along each road frontage. The sign shall not be placed within a public right-of-way, nor shall the sign obstruct clear vision for motorists. 
a.  The sign shall comply with the following sign specifications: 
1)  Black letters on white background, 
2)  Size: minimum four feet (vertical) by six feet (horizontal), 
3)  Signs face must be exterior plywood, aluminum or similar material, 
4)  Wording shall be as follows: 
 
5)  Sign support system must be structurally sound and mounted with four inches × four inches or "u" channel steel posts. The posts shall be set in the ground at least 30 inches below the surface. The bottom of the sign shall be no less than three feet above the ground level. 
b.  Rezoning signs shall be removed within seven days of action by the City Council or within seven days of withdrawing the rezoning request. 
c.  Failure to remove the sign in the aforementioned period may result in removal of the sign by the City, following notice and an opportunity to cure, at the owner's expense. 
C.  Conditional Use Requests. 
1.  General Requirements. Public notice shall comply with the provisions listed in Section 138-1.203.A of this ordinance. 
2.  Notice of Proposed Conditional Use Signs. An applicant requesting conditional use approval shall construct and install a sign indicating the requested conditional use. The sign shall be installed no less than 15 days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The sign shall be installed on the parcel(s) requested for the conditional use consideration and shall be clearly visible from an adjoining roadway. Parcels with frontage on multiple roads shall place a sign along each road frontage. The sign shall not be placed within a public right-of-way, nor shall the sign obstruct clear vision for motorists. 
a.  The sign shall comply with the following sign specifications: 
1)  Black letters on white background, 
2)  Size: minimum four feet (vertical) by six feet (horizontal), 
3)  Signs face must be exterior plywood, aluminum or similar material, 
4)  Wording shall be as follows: 
5)  Sign support system must be structurally sound and mounted with four inches × four inches or "u" channel steel posts. The posts shall be set in the ground at least 30 inches below the surface. The bottom of the sign shall be no less than three feet above the ground level. 
b.  Conditional use signs shall be removed within seven days of action by the City Council or within seven days of withdrawing the conditional use request. 
c.  Failure to remove the sign in the aforementioned period may result in removal of the sign by the City, following notice and an opportunity to cure, at the owner's expense. 
d.  A conditional use sign is not required for alcoholic beverage sales (for on-premises consumption) accessory to a permitted use. 
3.  Additional Information Required in Notice. Any notice required under this section shall include the places and times at which the proposed text or map amendment may be examined. 
ACTIONS REQUIRING A PUBLIC HEARING 
Section 	Action 	Reviewing Body 
Section 138-1.200.B 	Ordinance amendments 	PC 
Section 138-2.207.D 	Rescinding site plan approval 	PC 
Section 138-2.301 	Conditional use review 	PC 
Article 2, Chapter 4 	Variances and appeals - various actions 	ZBA 
Section 138-4.415.C 	Home occupation violation determinations 	ZBA 
Section 138-4.437.A 	Private stables 	PC 
Section 138-4.438.B 	Raising & keeping of animals - nuisance determination 	ZBA 
Section 138-5.101.H 	Rear yard setback modification in B-3 district 	PC 
Section 138-7.105.A 	PUD review process 	PC 
Section 138-9.205.C 	Steep slope permit review 	PC 
Section 138-10.400.E 	Height modification for small wind energy systems 	PC 
 
(Ord. No. 182 , § 1, 2-5-2018)  
CHAPTER 3. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 
 
SECTION 138-1.300 - Duties, Powers, and Limitations 
A.  The building department shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, and the building and public services, and fire departments shall have the authority to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out their respective duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
B.  The City shall have the authority to conduct inspections as necessary to assure that landscaping and irrigation systems are installed according to approved plans and permits. 
C.  The building, public services, and fire departments are under no circumstances permitted to make changes in this ordinance or to vary the terms of this ordinance in carrying out their duties.  
SECTION 138-1.301 - Plot Plan 
The building official shall require that all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
A.  The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. 
B.  The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved, and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
C.  Dimensions between property lines and all existing and proposed structures. 
D.  Natural features and existing trees measuring six inches or greater in diameter, measured 4.5 feet above grade level. 
E.  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
F.  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential in determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed.  
SECTION 138-1.302 - Permits 
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit under this ordinance. 
A.  Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all sections of this ordinance. 
B.  Permits required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts; stairways; type of construction; type, class or kind of occupancy; light or ventilation; means of egress and ingress; or other changes affecting or regulated by the City building code, the housing law of the state, or this ordinance, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of such features. 
C.  Temporary permits. The building department may issue a temporary permit for a temporary building or use allowed in the zoning district for up to one year. The temporary permit may be renewed once by the Zoning Board of Appeals for a second one year period if the issuance of the permit would avoid an unreasonable hardship and not cause any undue or unreasonable disturbances to surrounding properties or in the general area.  
SECTION 138-1.303 - Certificate of Occupancy 
A.  Generally. A certificate of occupancy is required before any person may occupy or allow occupancy of any land, building or part thereof whenever: 
1.  A building permit is required. 
2.  Site plan approval is required. 
3.  Additional parking in connection with the use is required. 
4.  A nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use. 
If a certificate of occupancy is not required by this section, a change of occupancy or use of any land, building or part thereof may be made without obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Certificates including zoning. A certificate of occupancy required for the erection or enlargement of buildings or structures; extension or alteration in whole or in part; or a change of use, occupancy, or a combination thereof shall also constitute a certificate of zoning as required by this ordinance. No such certificate shall be issued until there is compliance with all sections of this ordinance. 
C.  Certificate for existing buildings and uses. 
1.  Change of use or occupancy. A certificate of occupancy may be issued for a change of use or occupancy of existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with this ordinance. 
A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before there is any new use or modification of an existing use of a building or land or part thereof, or if any additional parking is required by Article 11 for the new or modified use. If additional parking is required by Article 11, the additional parking shall be provided and there shall be compliance with all of the requirements of this ordinance that are reasonably related to providing the additional parking. Paving of the entire parking area, as otherwise provided by this ordinance, shall not be required if the existing parking area is not paved and the number of the additional required parking spaces does not exceed the number of parking spaces existing on the property by more than 25 percent. 
The Planning and Development Director and the directors of the building and public services departments may require a site plan in such detail as may be required to show compliance with this ordinance, and shall have discretion to determine what requirements of this ordinance shall apply. 
2.  Upgrading an existing building or improved land. Whenever an existing building or improved land is upgraded or otherwise improved, where a building permit or site plan is required, there shall be compliance with the provisions of this ordinance that are reasonably related to the improvement or changes being made. 
a.  Determination of which provisions of this ordinance shall apply shall be made by the Planning Commission if a site plan is required to be approved by the Planning Commission. 
b.  When a building permit is required but site plan approval is not required, the determination of which provisions of this ordinance shall apply shall be made jointly by the planning and zoning director and the directors of the building and public services departments. 
c.  Any such determination shall be documented with a written statement of findings stating the reasons for the determination. 
d.  A property owner may appeal an adverse determination by City Staff to the Planning Commission, and an adverse determination by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
D.  Temporary certificates of occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued if the property owner is entitled to a temporary certificate of occupancy under the building code, provided there is compliance with the additional requirements of this section. Any temporary certificate of occupancy issued shall specify a reasonable time for site improvements. Failure to comply with the time limit set forth shall be considered a violation of the time limit placed on the temporary certificate of occupancy for purposes of enforcing this ordinance and requiring completion of site improvements. 
1.  Duration of temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be effective for more than six months. Thereafter, occupancy may only be authorized under a final certificate of occupancy. 
2.  Unfinished site improvements. All unfinished site improvements which are included on an approved site plan or which are otherwise required by this ordinance shall be constructed, installed or placed on the property and shall be approved by the City building or public services department within six months of obtaining a temporary certificate of occupancy. Failure to finish and obtain approval of such improvements shall constitute a violation of this ordinance giving rise to the penalties provided for in this ordinance and shall constitute a basis for relief in circuit court. 
3.  Cash, letters of credit and bonds. Whenever an applicant seeks occupancy of premises prior to the completion of all improvements and construction in accordance with an approved site plan and the requirements of the City's ordinances, or when the applicant occupies the premises at the time of application for a building permit and continued occupancy is contemplated during the time of construction, the applicant shall deposit cash, a certified check, an irrevocable bank letter of credit or a corporate surety bond forfeitable to the City in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the remaining improvements pursuant to such site plan and the requirements of this ordinance and the City ordinances and requirements. 
The estimate of such cost shall be solely in the discretion of the building and public services departments. As used in this subsection, the term "improvements" means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to protect natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and drainage. The term "improvements" does not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
This subsection shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited pursuant to the land division act, PA 288 of 1967 (as amended) or the City drainage ordinance contained in Article II of ordinance 114 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
4.  Administration of Sureties. Such cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or bond shall run to the City and shall be forfeitable by its terms and conditions, automatically, 15 days after notice to the applicant that the requirements of the site plan or this ordinance have not been met according to the terms of the temporary certificate or a time specified in the building permit in the case of occupancy at the time of applying for the building permit. 
Such cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or bond shall be considered posted with the condition that, upon passage of such 15 days after such notice in writing by first class mail at the last known address of the applicant, such amount shall automatically be transferred to the City fund, or otherwise enforceable by the City by any means available. Thereafter the City shall be authorized to go onto the property and complete the construction in accordance with the site plan requirements with the funds available. 
The City may retain ten percent of the cost of such completion as the City administrative expense and refund any balance to the applicant. No part of an irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond shall be released until all of the work is completed. In the case of a deposit of cash or a certified check, portions of such amount may be rebated as work progresses, at reasonable intervals, provided that at all times the amount on deposit equals the cost of the work to be completed. 
5.  Submittal of As-Built Drawings. When a property owner requesting a temporary certificate of occupancy has not yet made an initial submission of as-built drawings to the Department of Public Services, the property owner shall submit a minimum $10,000.00 cash deposit or submit the as-built drawings prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
E.  Final certificate of occupancy. No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all on-site improvements required by an approved site plan and by this ordinance shall be constructed, installed, or placed on the property in accordance with the approved site plan and this ordinance and approval for such has been obtained from the building and public services departments. In no case shall a final certificate of occupancy be approved until final as-built drawings are submitted to and approved by the public services department. 
F.  Records of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building department. 
G.  Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings accessory to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan, and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
H.  Applications for certificates. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building department on forms furnished by the City, and such certificates shall be issued within ten days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, of the land use is in accordance with this ordinance. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the ten-day period.  
SECTION 138-1.304 - Final Inspection 
The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure, or part thereof shall notify the building inspector immediately, upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection.  
SECTION 138-1.305 - Fees 
Applicants for permits required by this ordinance shall pay to the City treasurer, at the time application for such permit is made, such fees as are set by resolution of the City Council.  
CHAPTER 4. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
SECTION 138-1.400 - Enforcement 
The Mayor or his or her designee shall administer and enforce this ordinance. In the exercise of their duties, the directors, employees, representatives and deputies shall have authority provided by law for the enforcement of ordinances, including, but not by way of limitation, the authority to issue and serve municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices, as provided by Public Act No. 12 of 1994 (MCL 600.8701 et seq., MSA 27A.8701 et seq.), and the right to enter private premises as provided by law.  
SECTION 138-1.401 - Municipal Civil Infraction 
Any person violating any of the sections of this ordinance or the owner of any building, structure or premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this ordinance shall exist or be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination or admission of responsibility therefore shall be subject to a civil fine as provided in Section 66-37, the costs of prosecution, and such other costs, damages, expenses, sanctions and remedies authorized by law.  
SECTION 138-1.402 - Public Nuisance 
In addition to all other remedies, including the penalties provided in this Article, the City may commence and prosecute appropriate actions or proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or prevent any noncompliance with or violation of any of the sections in this ordinance or to correct, remedy or abate such noncompliance or violation. Buildings erected, altered, razed or converted, or uses carried on in violation of any section of this ordinance or in violation of any regulations made under the authority of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended) are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and the court shall order such nuisance abated.  
SECTION 138-1.403 - Cumulative Rights and Remedies 
The rights and remedies provided in this ordinance are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law.  
SECTION 138-1.404 - Forbearance Not Condoned 
Forbearance of enforcement of this ordinance shall not be deemed to condone any violation thereof.  
SECTION 138-1.405 - Each Day of Violation a Separate Offense 
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation of this ordinance occurs or continues.  
ARTICLE 2 - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES  
CHAPTER 1. - ORGANIZATION 
 
SECTION 138-2.100 - Overview 
The Mayor or his or her duly authorized representatives as specified in this Article are hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance. Accordingly, the administration of this ordinance is hereby vested in the following City entities: 
A.  City Council 
B.  Planning Commission 
C.  Zoning Board of Appeals  
SECTION 138-2.101 - City Council 
The City Council shall have the following responsibilities and authority pursuant to this ordinance. 
A.  Adoption of Zoning Ordinance and Amendments. In accordance with the intent and purposes of this ordinance, and pursuant to the authority conferred by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended), the City Council shall have the authority to adopt this ordinance, as well as amendments previously considered by the City Council at a hearing or as decreed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.  Setting of Fees. The City Council shall have the authority to set all fees for permits, applications, and requests for action pursuant to the regulations set forth in this ordinance. In the absence of specific action taken by the City Council to set a fee for a specific permit or application, the appropriate City administrative official shall assess the fee based on the estimated costs of processing and reviewing the permit or application. 
C.  Approval of Planning Commission Members. In accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Michigan Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. 
D.  Conditional Use. City Council review and approval is required for all Conditional Uses. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 1, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-2.102 - Planning Commission 
A.  In General. As designated in Article II of Chapter 130, the Planning Commission is designated as the commission specified in Public Act No. 33 of 2008 and shall perform the duties of such commission as provided in the statute in connection with this ordinance. 
B.  Approvals. 
1.  When the Planning Commission is empowered to recommend approval for certain use of premises under this ordinance, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by such commission for the proper consideration of the matter. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties, who may, in its opinion, be affected thereby, as required under its rules of procedure. 
3.  The Planning Commission may recommend imposing such conditions or limitations in recommending approval that, in its judgment, are necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this ordinance. 
C.  Zoning Commission. The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Zoning Commission specified in Article III of Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, and shall perform the duties of said Commission as provided in the statute. 
D.  Composition, Appointment, Terms, Vacancies and Compensation. The Planning Commission shall consist of nine members, as established by resolution of the City Council and pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 33 of 2008 (as amended). 
The term of any ex-officio members shall be determined by the City Council and stated in the resolution selecting the ex-officio members, but shall not exceed the member's term of office as a member of the City Council. A vacancy on the Planning Commission occurring for any reason other than the expiration of term shall be filled for the un-expired term by the Mayor (in the case of a member appointed by the Mayor) subject to approval by the City Council, and by the City Council (in the case of the ex-officio member selected by the City Council). The ex-officio member shall have full voting rights. 
The Planning Commission shall elect its chairman from amongst the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. 
E.  Removal of a Member for Cause. After a public hearing, a member other than the member selected by the City Council may be removed by the Mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The City Council may for like cause remove the ex-officio member selected by the City Council. 
F.  Organization, Meetings, Records and Rules. The Planning Commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern all other City employees. The Commission may consult with planners, engineers, architects, attorneys and other consultants for such services as it may require, as contracted by the City Council. The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City Council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the Commission's work. 
G.  Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall have such powers concerning the preparation and adoption of a master plan consisting of future land use, street and thoroughfare plan, community facilities, public improvements programs, zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, and other such rights, powers, duties and responsibilities as are expressly provided for in this ordinance, the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.  
SECTION 138-2.103 - Zoning Board of Appeals 
The Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as "ZBA") is created pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended). 
A.  Organization. 
1.  The ZBA shall consist of seven members and two alternates who shall be appointed in accordance with Article VI of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended. 
2.  The ZBA shall be appointed by the City Council, and shall represent insofar as is possible the population distribution in the City, and different professions or occupations. The term of each member shall be for three years, expiring on March 31 in the year of expiration. The terms shall be staggered. Successors in office shall be appointed not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has expired. All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
3.  A member of the ZBA may be a member of the Planning Commission, and a member of the ZBA may be a member of the City Council whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of the Planning Commission or City Council, respectively, or the period stated in the resolution appointing them, whichever is shorter. If appointments are made from the Planning Commission and/or the City Council, one or two of the terms shall be modified to facilitate these appointments. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  The qualifications of members, the term of each member, filling of vacancies, compensation of members, and operation of the ZBA shall be in accordance with Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended. 
2.  All meetings of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as such board may determine. All hearings conducted by such board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
3.  An alternate member may be called by the chairperson of the ZBA to sit as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular member if a regular member is absent from or unable to attend two or more consecutive meetings of the ZBA or is absent for a period of more than 30 consecutive days. An alternate member may also be called by the chairperson to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which a regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. Once an alternate member has been appointed the member shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. An alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the ZBA. 
4.  The ZBA shall not conduct business unless a majority of the ZBA is present. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the ZBA, i.e. a minimum of three affirmative votes, shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by an official, board, or commission. 
C.  Jurisdiction. The ZBA shall have the authority outlined in Section 138-2.400.  
CHAPTER 2. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
SECTION 138-2.200 - Site Plan Review 
A.  Purpose. The site plan review procedures, standards, and required information in this Section are intended to provide a consistent and uniform method of review of proposed development plans, to ensure full compliance with the regulations and standards contained in this ordinance and other applicable ordinances and laws, to achieve efficient use of the land, to protect natural resources, and to prevent adverse impact on adjoining or nearby properties. It is the intent of these provisions to encourage cooperation and consultation between the City and applicant so as to facilitate development in accordance with the City's land use objectives. 
B.  Type of Review Required. Four levels of site plan review are required by this ordinance: site plan review not required; administrative review; sketch plan review; and site plan review. 
1.  Site Plan Review Not Required. Site plan review is not required for the construction of single-family dwellings and small accessory structures. 
2.  Administrative Review is required for certain small scale projects that do not impact neighboring properties. The Planning and Development Director shall have the authority to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny any plan requiring administrative review. The Planning and Development Director or the applicant shall have the option to request Planning Commission consideration of plans eligible for administrative review. All appeals of administrative site plan decisions made by the Planning and Development Director shall be made to the Planning Commission. In such cases, the Planning Commission shall review the plan in accordance with the site plan review procedures set forth in Section 138-2.202. 
3.  Sketch Plan Review is required for smaller scale projects and expansions or changes in use for existing sites. Less detailed information is required for sketch plan review compared to site plan review, and the level of information required is intended to be only that necessary to verify compliance with applicable ordinance standards. 
The application requirements and review procedures for sketch plan review are the same as those established for site plan review in Section 138-2.202. 
4.  Site Plan Review is required for larger and more intense projects, including most new developments, major expansions, and redevelopment. Site plan review procedures and requirements are listed in Section 138-2.202. 
The following table summarizes what kind of site plan review is required for various development activities. 
Table 1. Type of Review Required 
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY 	Not Required 	Administrative
Review 	Sketch Plan 	Site Plan
Review 
BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS 
Accessory structures in any district, up to 200 sq. ft. in area 	• 			
Accessory structures in any non-single-family residential district, 200 sq. ft. in area or greater. Administrative review shall be required if Planning and Development Director determines the accessory building will not have detrimental impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. Otherwise, sketch plan review shall be required 		• 	• 	
Construction of any nonresidential, multiple-family, or manufactured housing community 				• 
Demolition of less than 50% of the existing footprint area of a building and reconstruction without expanding the building footprint by more than 10% 		• 		
Demolition of less than 50% of the existing footprint area of a building and reconstruction that expands the building footprint by more than 10% 			• 	
Demolition and reconstruction of more than 50% of the existing footprint area of a building 				• 
Minor modifications to a building façade or architectural features that do not significantly alter the appearance of the building, increase height 		• 		
Single-family dwelling and accessory structures on a single lot 	• 			
INCREASE IN FLOOR AREA 
Increases in floor area to existing multiple-family or nonresidential buildings based on the cumulative total of expansions in the previous 5 years shall be reviewed as follows. Note that associated site improvements that are required due to the increase in floor area such as parking or landscaping may require a different level of review. 
An increase of up to 25% of the existing floor area of an existing industrial or office building or up to 20% of any other building, provided that the addition will not negatively impact surrounding property in the opinion of the Planning and Economic Development Director 		• 		
An increase of more than 25% of the existing floor area for an existing industrial or office building or more than 20% of any other building 				• 
SITE IMPROVEMENTS OTHER THAN BUILDINGS 
Changes to a site required by City for safety considerations 		• 		
Improvements in outdoor recreation facilities and parks 		• 		
Improvements to a site that has previously received site plan approval (e.g. entrance features, walls, landscaping, sidewalks, bike paths, fences, exterior lighting, relocation of driveways, road improvements, etc.) 		• 		
Increase in parking and loading areas of less than 15% of the existing area 		• 		
Increase in parking and loading areas of more than 15% of the existing area 			• 	
Landscape changes to similar species consistent with the standards of this Ordinance that do not reduce the total amount of landscaping on the site 		• 		
Minor changes during construction due to unanticipated site constraints, or to improve safety, protect natural features or comply with unanticipated requirements of outside agencies 		• 		
Parking lot improvements, alterations to the internal layout, resurfacing or re-striping, or the installation of pavement and curbs to off-street parking lots 		• 		
Utility system improvements and modifications to upgrade a building to improve barrier-free design or to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar regulations 	• 			
USE - CHANGES IN and ESTABLISHMENT OF 
Accessory open air businesses 		• 		
Change in use to a similar or less intense use, provided that significant changes in the existing site design, facilities, structures or amenities are not required 		• 		
Change in use to a similar or less intense use, when significant changes in the existing site design, facilities, structures or amenities are required 			• 	
Establishment of a conditional use 				• 
Family child day care homes, as licensed by the State of Michigan 	• 			
Re-occupancy of a building that has been unoccupied for more than 30 days 		• 		
Substitution of a nonconforming use for a more conforming use, or a change in the use of a nonconforming site 			• 	
GENERAL 
Any activity that, in the opinion of the Planning and Development Director, is not exempted from site plan review or that does not qualify for administrative or sketch plan review 				• 
Projects and activities of a similar character and intensity to other projects and activities with the same required review procedure, as determined by the Planning and Development Director 	• 	• 	• 	• 
 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 1, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 183 , § 2, 6-18-2018) 
SECTION 138-2.201   Informal Review of Conceptual Plans
Applicants are encouraged to meet with the Planning Department for informal review of conceptual site plans. The purpose of this informal review is to discuss applicable standards and technical issues, comment on the project's compliance with the standards of this ordinance, and determine the appropriate type of review process. The applicant or Planning and Development Director may also request input from other City staff or consultants. 
Conceptual plans should, at minimum, include the proposed use, building footprint, existing conditions, general site layout and conceptual grading. Conceptual plan review comments are non-binding, and should be considered by the applicant to be suggestions and recommendations only. A review fee may be required for conceptual plan review, as determined by City Council resolution. 
SECTION 138-2.202   Site Plan Review Procedure
Site and sketch plans shall be reviewed according to the following procedures: 
A.  Application. The owner of an interest in land for which site plan approval is sought, or the owner's designated agent, shall submit a completed application form and sufficient copies of a site plan to the City. The site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Article, including all appropriate information required by Section 138-2.208 (Required Information). A site plan that does not meet the stipulated requirements shall be considered incomplete and shall not be eligible for consideration by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Technical review. Prior to Planning Commission consideration, the site plan and application shall be distributed to appropriate City officials and staff for review and comment. If deemed necessary the plans shall also be submitted to applicable outside agencies and designated City consultants for review and comment. 
C.  Preliminary Site Plan Review. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan, together with any reports and recommendations from staff, consultants and other reviewing agencies and any public comments. The Planning Commission shall then make a determination based on the requirements of this ordinance and the standards of Section 138-2.203 (Standards for Site Plan Approval). The Planning Commission is authorized to postpone, approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the site plan as follows: 
1.  Postponement. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a site plan is not sufficiently complete for approval or denial or upon a request by the applicant, the Planning Commission may postpone consideration until a later meeting. 
2.  Denial. Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth in this ordinance, or would require extensive revisions to comply with said standards and regulations, the site plan shall be denied. If a site plan is denied, a written record shall be provided to the applicant listing the reasons for such denial. 
3.  Approval Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances and laws, the site plan shall be approved. 
4.  Approval subject to conditions. The Planning Commission may approve a site plan, subject to one or more conditions necessary to address minor modifications to the site plan, ensure that public services and facilities can accommodate the proposed use, protect significant natural features, ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses, or otherwise meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance. Such conditions may include the need to obtain variances or approvals from other agencies. 
D.  Final Site Plan Review. The procedures for final site plan review are as follows: 
1.  Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall review the final site plan, including items of information required by Section 138-2.208 (Required Information) for a final site plan and any requested reports and recommendations from City staff, consultants, and other reviewing agencies. The Planning Commission shall then make a determination based on the requirements of this ordinance, the standards of Section 138-2.203 (Standards for Site Plan Approval), and the following considerations: 
a.  The proposed final site plan is consistent with the approved preliminary site plan in terms of building location and architecture, amount and quality of landscaping, site details such as lighting, parking, and circulation layout. 
b.  All conditions imposed during preliminary plan approval are met. 
c.  The engineering requirements applicable at final site plan approval are met. 
2.  Planning Commission Decision. The Planning Commission is authorized to postpone, approve, approve subject to conditions or deny a final site plan in the same manner as a preliminary site plan. 
3.  Single-step site plan approval. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the Planning Commission from granting final site plan approval without first granting a preliminary site plan approval if the plans are in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance for a final site plan. 
E.  Outside agency permits or approvals. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits or approvals from applicable outside state and county agencies. All federal, state and local laws and ordinances shall be met and no unresolved negative comments issued by any governmental agency or public utility shall exist prior to the issuance of a land improvement permit (see Article 11 of Chapter 114 of the City Code of Ordinances). 
F.  Distribution of Approved Plans. Approved site plans will be forwarded to the Building and Public Services Departments and any other department identified by the Planning and Development Director. 
SECTION 138-2.203   Standards for Site Plan Approval
The following criteria shall form the basis upon which a site plan is reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
A.  Adequacy of information and compliance with ordinance requirements. The site plan includes all required information in a complete and understandable form that provides an accurate description of the proposed uses, structures and site improvements. The site plan complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, including but not limited to minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, yard space and density. 
B.  Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design are harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, parcel configuration, adjacent properties, traffic operations, adjacent streets and driveways, pedestrian access, and the type and size of buildings. The site is designed in a manner that promotes the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for uses permitted by this ordinance. 
C.  Site appearance and coordination. Site elements are designed and located so that the proposed development is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious with adjacent existing or future developments. All site features, including circulation, parking, building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities, common facilities, and open space are harmonious and coordinated with adjacent properties. 
D.  Preservation of site features. The site design preserves and conserves natural, cultural, historical and architectural site features, including architecturally or historically significant buildings, archeological sites, wetlands, topography, tree-rows and hedgerows, wooded areas and significant individual trees. Refer to Section 138-2.204 for specific environmental requirements. 
E.  Pedestrian access and circulation. The arrangement of public or common ways for pedestrian circulation connects to existing or planned sidewalks or bicycle pathways in the area, and is reasonably insulated from the vehicular circulation system. The site design complies with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations regarding barrier-free access. 
F.  Vehicular access and circulation. Drives, streets, parking, site access and other vehicle-related elements are designed to minimize traffic conflicts on adjacent streets and promote safe and efficient traffic circulation within the site. 
G.  Building design and architecture. Building design and architecture relate to and are harmonious with the surrounding neighborhood with regard to texture, scale, mass, proportion, materials and color. Proposed buildings shall comply with the City's building design guidelines. 
H.  Parking and loading. Off-street parking lots and loading zones are arranged, located and designed to accommodate the intensity of proposed uses, minimize conflicts with adjacent uses, enhance the character of the neighborhood, and promote shared-use of common facilities by adjoining properties. 
I.  Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening are provided in a manner that adequately buffers adjacent land uses and screens off-street parking, mechanical equipment, loading and unloading areas and storage areas from adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way. 
J.  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures are designed, arranged and shielded to minimize glare and light trespass, prevent night blindness and vision impairments, and maximize security in accordance with the requirements of Article 10, Chapter 2. 
K.  Impact upon public services. The impact upon public services will not exceed the existing or planned capacity of such services, and adequate public services (including but not limited to utilities (water, sanitary & storm sewers, county drains, natural gas, electricity and telephone), streets, police and fire protection, public schools and sidewalks/bicycle paths) are available or provided to the site, and are designed with sufficient capacity and durability to properly serve the development. Refer to Section 138-2.205 for specific engineering requirements. 
L.  Drainage and soil erosion. Drainage systems, stormwater facilities, and soil erosion, sedimentation and dust control measures are arranged, located and designed to promote shared-use of common facilities by adjoining properties. Adjoining properties, public rights-of-way and the capacity of the public storm drainage system will not be adversely affected by stormwater runoff and sedimentation. 
M.  Emergency access. All sites and buildings are designed to allow convenient and direct emergency access, and the level of vulnerability to injury or loss from incidents involving hazardous materials or processes will not exceed the City's emergency response capabilities. 
N.  Energy Efficiency. All sites and buildings shall be designed to incorporate, to the greatest extent possible, energy efficient design and sustainable site features, including alternative or distributed energy generation, LEED certification, stormwater management best management practices, and other similar measures. 
O.  Additional Standards. Site plan decisions shall also take into account the standards for discretionary decisions in Section 138-2.302. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 2, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 183 , § 3, 6-18-2018) 
SECTION 138-2.204   Environmental Requirements
A.  Purpose. The City has natural features and characteristics which must be preserved wherever possible. The City's rapid growth, development and increasing demands have and may encroach upon, despoil, pollute and eliminate many of the natural characteristics, features and resources including watercourses, wetlands, trees and vegetation, etc. If the natural features and characteristics are preserved and protected, as nearly as possible, in an undisturbed and natural condition, it will be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the existing and future residents of the City as it will provide important physical, aesthetic, recreational and economic benefits. Proper regulation and provisions for the protection and preservation of the environmental features of the City will provide for the absorption of air pollutants and contamination; reduce excessive noise and mental and physical damage related to noise pollution; protect against erosion, siltation and flooding; and preserve areas of natural beauty, recreation and irreplaceable heritage for existing and future residents, etc. 
B.  Official Maps. The City Council, with the assistance of the Planning Commission, shall have the duty and authority to study and adopt, after public hearing, official maps designating wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, floodways and drainage courses, and steep slopes in the City. Such maps are to be adopted and revised according to the procedures and standards set forth in the City floodplains, watercourse and wetlands protection ordinance. 
C.  Construction in wetlands, floodplains, floodways, drainage courses, steep slopes and watercourses prohibited. No uses nor the construction or location of any structures shall be allowed within any area designated on official City maps as wetlands, floodplains, floodways, drainage courses, steep slopes, or watercourses, except as may be allowed according to the requirements and provisions of any ordinances, standards and regulations of the City. 
D.  Woodlands. It being of extreme importance to protect woodlands and trees in the City, the applicant for any site plan and/or plat shall take appropriate action to preserve and replace trees. The following information shall be presented with any proposed site plan and/or plat: 
1.  Specification of the location of existing stands of trees, existing individual trees having a diameter measurement of six inches or greater at 4½ feet above the ground. On multistem trees, the largest diameter stem shall be measured. 
2.  Specification of the location of trees to be retained. 
3.  Specifications for protection of the trees to be retained during development. 
4.  Specification for grading and drainage to ensure the preservation of the trees to be retained. 
5.  Details of steps to be taken for reforestation. 
E.  Trees and Vegetation Near Watercourses. No cutting, trimming or otherwise clearing of trees and other natural vegetation shall be allowed within 100 feet of rivers and free-flowing streams, or within floodplains and wetlands, as defined by the corps of engineers or official City maps, without the express written approval of the City Council. 
F.  Conservation Easements. Construction or development shall occur in compliance with any conservation easements located on or impacting a property. 
G.  Environmental Impact Statement. The applicant for any rezoning, site plan and/or plat shall submit with such site plan and/or plat an environmental impact statement which shall be according to the requirements adopted by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission, as soon as is reasonably possible, shall adopt specific questions, guidelines and requirements which shall: 
1.  Provide relevant information on the environmental impact of applications for rezoning, platting, site plan approval and other actions which will have a significant effect on the environment. 
2.  Inject into a developer's planning process consideration of the characteristics of the land and the interest of the community at large as well as his or her own interest and the interests of his potential customers. 
3.  Facilitate participation of the citizenry in the review of community developments. 
SECTION 138-2.205   Engineering Requirements
No person shall start building or construction of anything for which a site plan approval is required by this ordinance until there has been compliance with the requirements of this Section 138-2.205. This section does not apply to lands being platted pursuant to the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (as amended), and subject to Article III of Chapter 122 of the City Code of Ordinances. The department of public services shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. Any and all construction and development on a site requiring site plan approval shall be consistent with the approved site plan, unless a change conforming to this ordinance receives an additional approval, and subject to the following additional approvals and requirements: 
A.  Engineering Drawings Required. After site plan approval and before commencement of construction, detailed engineering drawings for roads and utilities as may be required by the standards and specifications for roads and utilities shall be approved by the Engineering Services Division. 
B.  Land Improvement Permit. After site plan approval and before commencement of construction, a land improvement permit shall be obtained pursuant to Article II of Chapter 114 of the City Code of Ordinances for drainage and grading of the site. 
1.  Internal. A graphic layout, superimposed on the topographic map, shall be filed clearly defining and delineating the area proposed to contribute surface drainage to each stormwater structure where surface water is proposed to enter the drainage system. 
2.  External. If drainage from areas outside the limits of the proposed development is to be accommodated, such areas shall be described and/or delineated and dimensioned in sufficient detail to provide for the location of the limits of such areas on a property line map of the area involved. 
3.  Drainage map with computations. The topographic map relating to drainage facilities proposed to be utilized shall be accompanied by computations used in determining the adequacy of both existing and proposed drainage facilities, including an analysis of the adequacy of off-site outlet facilities proposed to be used. 
C.  Engineering Requirements. All site plan and development of property shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Internal road systems. All internal road systems to be dedicated to the City shall conform to current standards and regulations established by the City. 
2.  Rights-of-way. That portion of the proposed development, situated within the limits of the proposed right-of-way lines as set forth in the master thoroughfare plan, shall be dedicated by the owner to the county road commission, state department of transportation, or the City, depending on which agency has jurisdiction over the affected road. 
3.  Grading. 
a.  Elevations adjacent to roads. Areas adjacent to roads shall be graded to an elevation at the property line which is not lower than two feet below the centerline of the road nor higher than two feet above the centerline of the road, unless otherwise authorized by the City engineer. 
b.  Slope away from roads. The grading from the property line away from the road shall generally not exceed five percent, which equals one foot in 20 feet. 
c.  Drainage considerations. A minimum slope of two percent shall be provided to ensure drainage. 
d.  Natural drainage courses. Natural drainage courses shall not be diverted to cause damage to adjacent property. They shall not be filled unless provision is made to accommodate the surface drainage with proper ditch sections or enclosures approved by the City. 
e.  Consideration of future road improvements. Grading of properties abutting unimproved roads (roads without concrete or asphalt surfacing) shall indicate consideration of future vertical realignment of such roads. 
f.  Meeting adjacent elevations. Proposed grades shall meet elevations of adjacent properties. 
g.  Erosion control. A minimum depth of three inches of topsoil shall be replaced on all graded areas, and shall then be seeded or sodded with grass to control erosion. 
4.  Stormwater retention/detention. Each development shall be responsible to provide stormwater retention/detention on site and/or proper conveyance by ditch or enclosure to natural drains or county facilities capable of receiving stormwaters. The off-site discharge of stormwater in excess of the capacity of existing downstream facilities will not be permitted. All stormwater management systems shall be designed in accordance with best management practices (BMP) adopted by the City. 
5.  Nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
a.  Nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. Eight-foot asphalt nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths shall be provided in all rights-of-way abutting the subject property which are either existing or planned rights-of-way of 120 feet in width or greater, as designated on the master thoroughfare plan of the City adopted by resolution of the City Council. Nothing shall prohibit the construction of a nonmotorized pathway on a road with an existing or planned right-of-way of less than 120 feet. 
b.  Natural Beauty Roads. When a road has been designated a natural beauty road pursuant to Public Act No. 59 of 1995 (as amended), nonmotorized paths may be constructed in the right-of-way but are not required. 
c.  School access easements. Except when a road has been designated a natural beauty road pursuant to Public Act No. 59 of 1995 (as amended), easements for walkways and walkways shall be provided for school access routes. The walkways shall conform to the requirements for nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. 
6.  Easements to the public. Easements shall be provided before the final occupancy permit is issued, in recordable form, and in a form satisfactory to the City attorney, and in conformity with the City design standards and specifications, for the following: 
a.  Internal, undedicated roads or driveways. Easements to the public on all internal, undedicated roads or driveways being used in common by the residents of the development for vehicular traffic, for access of emergency vehicles and other public services. 
b.  Portions of the utility systems. Easements to the public for such parts of the utility systems as shall be under public jurisdiction. 
D.  Occupancy Permit. As a condition for the issuance of a temporary or final occupancy permit for any structure for any use, other than a model being used as a model, the following shall be required: 
1.  Completion of utilities and improvements. Completion and acceptance of the installation of all utilities and improvements required by this ordinance for that structure for which an occupancy permit has been requested. 
2.  Restrictive covenants. Presenting, in recordable form, and in a form satisfactory to the City attorney, such instruments as may be necessary to guarantee the maintenance and common control of areas to be used in common by the residents of the development. 
3.  Dedication of road rights-of-way. Dedication of all road rights-of-way as are indicated on the site plan. 
4.  Escrow Account. The escrow account for the application with the City shall be in good standing, without an outstanding balance. 
E.  Review and Inspection Fees. Plan reviews and inspection costs shall be in accord with schedules adopted by the City Council currently in effect. The fee shall be deposited by the property owner at the time application is made for an approval or a building permit, as the case may be. 
F.  Additional Engineering Standards. Authority is given for the City Council to adopt by resolution, from time to time, such engineering standards and specifications for utilities, drainage, grading, landscaping, roads, nonmotorized pedestrian pathways, sidewalks, and other similar aspects of development of property. All construction and development pursuant to this ordinance shall be in conformity with such engineering standards and specifications. 
G.  Variance Not Permitted. The Zoning Board of Appeals does not have jurisdiction or authority to grant relief from or variances to the requirements of this section. The City Council may authorize a variance from the requirements of this section when undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, the City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed development and the probable effect of the proposed development upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the City Council finds that: 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that the strict application of the provisions of this section would deprive the property owner of the reasonable use of his land. 
2.  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right. 
3.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which such property is situated. 
SECTION 138-2.206   Use and Maintenance of Property in Accordance with an Approved Site Plan
A.  Use. No owner, tenant, occupant, or person shall use or allow to be used a part or all of any property which was the subject of an approved site plan, other than as set forth on such approved site plan, after completion and approval of the improvements required by the site plan and this ordinance. An example, but not by way of limitation, is using only areas designated for parking for parking purposes, and not some other area of the property. 
B.  Maintenance. The owner, tenant, occupant or person responsible for any property which was the subject of an approved site plan shall maintain the property and the improvements thereon in accordance with the approved site plan or an approved amendment thereof. This responsibility shall include the duty to maintain in a condition substantially similar as approved, including the duty to replace, if necessary, all improvements such as, but not by way of limitation, all greenbelts, planting, walls, fences, paving, trash receptacles, handicapped parking areas, etc. 
SECTION 138-2.207   General Provisions
A.  Expiration of site plans. 
1.  Preliminary site plans shall expire 365 days after the date of approval, unless the final site plan for the project has been submitted to the Planning Department for review. 
2.  Final site plans shall expire 365 days after the date of final approval, unless building permits have been issued or construction has commenced. The date of final approval is established by the most recent date stamp on the final plans. 
3.  If building permits have been issued or construction has commenced, final site plan approval shall continue for a period of five years from the date thereof. If such construction lapses for more than 180 continuous days, said approval shall immediately expire. 
4.  Upon written request received by the City prior to the expiration date, the Planning and Development Director may grant one extension of up to 365 days to any site plan approval, either preliminary or final, provided that the approved site plan conforms to current Zoning Ordinance standards. The Planning Commission may grant one additional extension of up to 365 days to any site plan approval extended by the Planning and Development Director provided that the approved site plan conforms to current Zoning Ordinance standards. 
B.  Resubmission. A site plan that has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found by the Planning Commission to be valid. 
C.  Appeals. 
1.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to consider appeals of site plan determinations, except as defined in this Section. 
2.  When the Planning Commission approves a site plan contingent upon approval of one or more variances from specific requirements of this ordinance, the applicant shall initiate such a request to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Planning and Development Director shall provide copies of the site plan, application materials and Planning Commission meeting minutes to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Zoning Board of Appeals consideration shall be limited to the specific variances identified as conditions of site plan approval by the Planning Commission. This shall not preclude the applicant from seeking a dimensional variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to obtaining site plan approval. 
D.  Rescinding Site Plan Approval. Approval of a site plan may be rescinded by the Planning Commission upon determination that the site has not been improved, constructed or maintained in compliance with approved permits, site plans, or conditions of site plan or conditional use approval. Such action shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Public hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 138-1.203 of this ordinance (Public Hearing Procedures), at which time the owner of an interest in land for which site plan approval was sought, or the owner's designated agent, shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to rescission. 
2.  Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the Commission with regard to the rescission shall be made and written notification provided to the property owner or his or her designated agent. 
E.  Revisions to Approved Site Plans. Minor revisions to an approved site plan may be administratively reviewed by the Planning and Development Director, provided that such changes do not materially alter the approved site design, intensity of use or demand for public services. Revisions to an approved site plan that are not considered by the Planning and Development Director to be minor shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as an amended site plan. 
SECTION 138-2.208   Required Information
The following information shall be included with all site plan applications, except where the Planning and Development Director or the Planning Commission determines that certain information is not necessary or applicable to review of the site plan. 
Table 2. Site Plan Required Information 
SITE PLAN REQUIRED INFORMATION 	Preliminary 
Site Plan 	Final Site Plan 	Sketch Plan 	Administrative 
Review 
DESCRIPTIVE INFORMATION: 
Name, address, email (if available), telephone and facsimile numbers of the applicant (and property owner, if different from applicant) and firm or individual preparing the site plan, and the property location (address, lot number, tax identification number). 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Total area of land in acres or square-feet. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing and proposed use(s) of the site 	• 	• 	• 	
Zoning classification of the property and surrounding parcels (including across street rights-of-way). 	• 	• 	• 	
Legal description of the property. 	• 	• 		
Architect's, engineer's, surveyor's, landscape architect's, or planner's seal. 	• 	• 	• 	
SITE PLAN DATA AND NOTES: 
Site plans shall be drawn to an engineer's scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'). A general plan sheet drawn at scale of not less than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') shall be provided if the project covers more than one plan sheet at 1" = 50'. 	• 	• 	• 	
Title block, including the scale, north arrow, revision date, name of the City, and a location map drawn at one inch equals 2,000 feet (1" = 2,000') showing surrounding land, water features and streets within one mile of the site boundaries. 	• 	• 	• 	
Size and dimensions of proposed buildings, including gross and usable floor area, number of stories, overall height and number of units in each building, if applicable. 	• 	• 	• 	
Detailed parking (including accessible and van accessible parking), residential density and lot coverage calculations. 	• 	• 	• 	
Construction type and use group of all buildings as defined by the Michigan Building Code. If two or more uses not in the same occupancy classification are proposed, indicate if the structure is being designed for separated or non-separated uses. 	• 	• 	• 	
All plan sheets shall be labeled "not to be used as construction drawings." 	• 	• 	• 	
EXISTING CONDITIONS: 
Location of soil types and existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes, streams, drains and wetlands, with surface drainage flow directions, including high points, low points and swales. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing topography on site and 50 feet beyond the site boundaries at two-foot contour intervals. 	• 	• 	• 	
Slopes greater than 20% with a 10' or greater elevation change. 	• 	• 	• 	
Buildings located within 100 feet of any property line. 	• 	• 	• 	
Dimensions of all lots and property lines, showing the relationship of the site to abutting properties. If the site is part of a larger parcel, the plan should indicate the boundaries of total land holding. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing tree survey including the location of all trees 6" or greater d.b.h. The tree survey shall include a key showing the tag number, size, species, and condition of all trees located on the site. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Existing site features, including significant natural, historical, cultural and architectural features, buildings and structures, driveway openings, fences, walls, signs and other improvements. The site plan shall clearly note which features will be removed, altered or preserved and provide information regarding the method of preservation or alteration. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing and proposed right-of-way lines and the centerline of adjacent roads. 	• 	• 	• 	
Driveways, sidewalks, paths, public transit routes, streets and curb cuts on the applicant's parcel and all abutting parcels (including across street rights-of-way). 	• 	• 	• 	
SITE PLAN DETAILS: 
Location, outside dimensions, setback distances and proposed uses of all site improvements. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Gross and usable building floor areas. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way (locations and descriptions) for utilities, access and drainage. 	• 	• 	• 	
An exterior lighting plan with all existing and proposed lighting locations, heights from grade, specifications, lamp types and methods of shielding. 		• 	• 	
A photometric grid overlaid on the site plan indicating light intensity throughout the site in foot-candles. 		• 	• 	
Specifications and details for each type of light fixture, including the total lumen output, type of lamp, and method of shielding. 		• 		
Waste receptacle locations and methods of screening. 	• 	• 	• 	
Transformer pad location and method of screening, if applicable. 		• 	• 	
Outdoor sales, display or storage locations and method of screening, if applicable. 	• 	• 	• 	
Locations, sizes, heights, types and methods of illumination of all proposed signs. 	• 	• 	• 	
BUILDING AND ARCHITECTURAL DETAILS: 
General architectural drawings sufficient to convey the intended look and appearance of the building, and to indicate the type and color of building materials, detailing, and other architectural features. 	• 			
Detailed building façade elevations, drawn to an appropriate scale and indicating type and color of building materials, roof design, projections, canopies, awnings, window openings, entrance features, doors, overhangs, other architectural features and any building-mounted mechanical equipment, such as air-conditioning and heating units. 		• 		
Building floor plans with all exits clearly delineated. 		• 		
Entrance details, including signs and details of signs. 	• 	• 	• 	
Carport locations and details, if applicable. 	• 	• 		
ACCESS AND CIRCULATION: 
Names of abutting streets, and the width, depth, type and curbing for all streets, parking lots, sidewalks and other paved surfaces. 	• 	• 		
Loading and unloading areas. 	• 	• 		
Designation of fire lanes and signs stating "no parking" and "fire lane." 	• 	• 	• 	
Locations and dimensions of access points, including deceleration or passing lanes and distances between adjacent or opposing driveways and street intersections. 	• 	• 		
Location and dimensions of existing and proposed interior sidewalks and sidewalks or paths within public rights-of-way. 	• 	• 	• 	
Parking space and maneuvering aisle dimensions (including accessible parking space and access aisle dimensions), pavement markings, traffic control signage, designation of fire lanes and location and dimension of loading areas. 	• 	• 	• 	
Proposed accessible routes from accessible parking spaces to accessible building entrances, with sufficient grade information along the route to verify compliance with the Michigan Building Code. 	• 	• 	• 	
Accessible access aisle and ramp slopes by indicating point elevations at the perimeter of such areas. 	• 	• 	• 	
Details along the proposed accessible route(s), including accessible parking signs, curb ramps, ramps, and maneuvering clearances of accessible building entrances/doors, as applicable. 		• 	• 	
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING: 
Landscape plan, including location, size, quantity and type of proposed shrubs, trees, ground cover (including grass) and other live plant materials, and the location, size and type of any existing plant materials that will be preserved. All landscape plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect. 	• 	• 	• 	
Planting list for proposed landscape materials with quantity, caliper-size and height of material, botanical and common names, and standards of installation. 	• 	• 	• 	
Location, dimensions, construction materials, cross-section and slope ratio for any required or proposed berms or greenbelts. 	• 	• 		
Proposed fences and walls, including typical cross-section, materials and height above the ground on both sides. 	• 	• 		
Complete irrigation system design. 		• 		
Cost estimate (including materials and labor) for all landscaping and irrigation improvements. 		• 		
A basic annual landscape maintenance program. 		• 		
UTILITIES, DRAINAGE AND THE ENVIRONMENT: 
Grading plan, with existing and proposed topography at a minimum of two-foot (2') contour levels, drainage patterns and a general description of grades within 100 feet of the site to indicate stormwater runoff. 		• 		• 
An environmental impact statement as required by Section 138-2.204. 	• 	• 		
A statement concerning trees and other vegetation, as required. 	• 	• 	• 	
General location of sanitary sewers and building leads upon which no structures or earth berms shall be located. 	• 			
Detailed location of sanitary sewers and building leads 		• 		
Water mains, hydrants and building services and sizes. 		• 	• 	
General stormwater runoff calculations and approximate size and location of retention basins 	• 			
Detailed storm sewers, site grading, drainage, detention basins, and/or other pertinent facilities. 		• 	• 	
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED INFORMATION: 
Other information as requested by the Planning and Development Director, Planning Commission, or City Engineer to verify that the site and project are developed or improved in accordance with the spirit and intent of this ordinance and the City's Master Plan. Such information may include use or environmental impact assessments, traffic impact studies, market analyses and evaluations of the demand on public facilities and services. The Planning and Development Director may also require that information listed in this table be submitted even if the table indicates that the information is not required for the particular type of review. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Community building details and method of fencing the swimming pool, if applicable. 		• 		
Propane tank locations and methods of screening, any overhead utilities, or any outside storage of materials, chemicals, gases, liquids, etc., if applicable. 	• 	• 	• 	
  
SECTION 138-2.201 - Informal Review of Conceptual Plans 
Applicants are encouraged to meet with the Planning Department for informal review of conceptual site plans. The purpose of this informal review is to discuss applicable standards and technical issues, comment on the project's compliance with the standards of this ordinance, and determine the appropriate type of review process. The applicant or Planning and Development Director may also request input from other City staff or consultants. 
Conceptual plans should, at minimum, include the proposed use, building footprint, existing conditions, general site layout and conceptual grading. Conceptual plan review comments are non-binding, and should be considered by the applicant to be suggestions and recommendations only. A review fee may be required for conceptual plan review, as determined by City Council resolution.  
SECTION 138-2.202 - Site Plan Review Procedure 
Site and sketch plans shall be reviewed according to the following procedures: 
A.  Application. The owner of an interest in land for which site plan approval is sought, or the owner's designated agent, shall submit a completed application form and sufficient copies of a site plan to the City. The site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Article, including all appropriate information required by Section 138-2.208 (Required Information). A site plan that does not meet the stipulated requirements shall be considered incomplete and shall not be eligible for consideration by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Technical review. Prior to Planning Commission consideration, the site plan and application shall be distributed to appropriate City officials and staff for review and comment. If deemed necessary the plans shall also be submitted to applicable outside agencies and designated City consultants for review and comment. 
C.  Preliminary Site Plan Review. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan, together with any reports and recommendations from staff, consultants and other reviewing agencies and any public comments. The Planning Commission shall then make a determination based on the requirements of this ordinance and the standards of Section 138-2.203 (Standards for Site Plan Approval). The Planning Commission is authorized to postpone, approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the site plan as follows: 
1.  Postponement. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a site plan is not sufficiently complete for approval or denial or upon a request by the applicant, the Planning Commission may postpone consideration until a later meeting. 
2.  Denial. Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth in this ordinance, or would require extensive revisions to comply with said standards and regulations, the site plan shall be denied. If a site plan is denied, a written record shall be provided to the applicant listing the reasons for such denial. 
3.  Approval Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances and laws, the site plan shall be approved. 
4.  Approval subject to conditions. The Planning Commission may approve a site plan, subject to one or more conditions necessary to address minor modifications to the site plan, ensure that public services and facilities can accommodate the proposed use, protect significant natural features, ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses, or otherwise meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance. Such conditions may include the need to obtain variances or approvals from other agencies. 
D.  Final Site Plan Review. The procedures for final site plan review are as follows: 
1.  Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall review the final site plan, including items of information required by Section 138-2.208 (Required Information) for a final site plan and any requested reports and recommendations from City staff, consultants, and other reviewing agencies. The Planning Commission shall then make a determination based on the requirements of this ordinance, the standards of Section 138-2.203 (Standards for Site Plan Approval), and the following considerations: 
a.  The proposed final site plan is consistent with the approved preliminary site plan in terms of building location and architecture, amount and quality of landscaping, site details such as lighting, parking, and circulation layout. 
b.  All conditions imposed during preliminary plan approval are met. 
c.  The engineering requirements applicable at final site plan approval are met. 
2.  Planning Commission Decision. The Planning Commission is authorized to postpone, approve, approve subject to conditions or deny a final site plan in the same manner as a preliminary site plan. 
3.  Single-step site plan approval. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the Planning Commission from granting final site plan approval without first granting a preliminary site plan approval if the plans are in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance for a final site plan. 
E.  Outside agency permits or approvals. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits or approvals from applicable outside state and county agencies. All federal, state and local laws and ordinances shall be met and no unresolved negative comments issued by any governmental agency or public utility shall exist prior to the issuance of a land improvement permit (see Article 11 of Chapter 114 of the City Code of Ordinances). 
F.  Distribution of Approved Plans. Approved site plans will be forwarded to the Building and Public Services Departments and any other department identified by the Planning and Development Director.  
SECTION 138-2.203 - Standards for Site Plan Approval 
The following criteria shall form the basis upon which a site plan is reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
A.  Adequacy of information and compliance with ordinance requirements. The site plan includes all required information in a complete and understandable form that provides an accurate description of the proposed uses, structures and site improvements. The site plan complies with all applicable ordinance requirements, including but not limited to minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, yard space and density. 
B.  Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design are harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, parcel configuration, adjacent properties, traffic operations, adjacent streets and driveways, pedestrian access, and the type and size of buildings. The site is designed in a manner that promotes the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for uses permitted by this ordinance. 
C.  Site appearance and coordination. Site elements are designed and located so that the proposed development is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious with adjacent existing or future developments. All site features, including circulation, parking, building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities, common facilities, and open space are harmonious and coordinated with adjacent properties. 
D.  Preservation of site features. The site design preserves and conserves natural, cultural, historical and architectural site features, including architecturally or historically significant buildings, archeological sites, wetlands, topography, tree-rows and hedgerows, wooded areas and significant individual trees. Refer to Section 138-2.204 for specific environmental requirements. 
E.  Pedestrian access and circulation. The arrangement of public or common ways for pedestrian circulation connects to existing or planned sidewalks or bicycle pathways in the area, and is reasonably insulated from the vehicular circulation system. The site design complies with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations regarding barrier-free access. 
F.  Vehicular access and circulation. Drives, streets, parking, site access and other vehicle-related elements are designed to minimize traffic conflicts on adjacent streets and promote safe and efficient traffic circulation within the site. 
G.  Building design and architecture. Building design and architecture relate to and are harmonious with the surrounding neighborhood with regard to texture, scale, mass, proportion, materials and color. Proposed buildings shall comply with the City's building design guidelines. 
H.  Parking and loading. Off-street parking lots and loading zones are arranged, located and designed to accommodate the intensity of proposed uses, minimize conflicts with adjacent uses, enhance the character of the neighborhood, and promote shared-use of common facilities by adjoining properties. 
I.  Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening are provided in a manner that adequately buffers adjacent land uses and screens off-street parking, mechanical equipment, loading and unloading areas and storage areas from adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way. 
J.  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures are designed, arranged and shielded to minimize glare and light trespass, prevent night blindness and vision impairments, and maximize security in accordance with the requirements of Article 10, Chapter 2. 
K.  Impact upon public services. The impact upon public services will not exceed the existing or planned capacity of such services, and adequate public services (including but not limited to utilities (water, sanitary & storm sewers, county drains, natural gas, electricity and telephone), streets, police and fire protection, public schools and sidewalks/bicycle paths) are available or provided to the site, and are designed with sufficient capacity and durability to properly serve the development. Refer to Section 138-2.205 for specific engineering requirements. 
L.  Drainage and soil erosion. Drainage systems, stormwater facilities, and soil erosion, sedimentation and dust control measures are arranged, located and designed to promote shared-use of common facilities by adjoining properties. Adjoining properties, public rights-of-way and the capacity of the public storm drainage system will not be adversely affected by stormwater runoff and sedimentation. 
M.  Emergency access. All sites and buildings are designed to allow convenient and direct emergency access, and the level of vulnerability to injury or loss from incidents involving hazardous materials or processes will not exceed the City's emergency response capabilities. 
N.  Energy Efficiency. All sites and buildings shall be designed to incorporate, to the greatest extent possible, energy efficient design and sustainable site features, including alternative or distributed energy generation, LEED certification, stormwater management best management practices, and other similar measures. 
O.  Additional Standards. Site plan decisions shall also take into account the standards for discretionary decisions in Section 138-2.302. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 2, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 183 , § 3, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-2.204 - Environmental Requirements 
A.  Purpose. The City has natural features and characteristics which must be preserved wherever possible. The City's rapid growth, development and increasing demands have and may encroach upon, despoil, pollute and eliminate many of the natural characteristics, features and resources including watercourses, wetlands, trees and vegetation, etc. If the natural features and characteristics are preserved and protected, as nearly as possible, in an undisturbed and natural condition, it will be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the existing and future residents of the City as it will provide important physical, aesthetic, recreational and economic benefits. Proper regulation and provisions for the protection and preservation of the environmental features of the City will provide for the absorption of air pollutants and contamination; reduce excessive noise and mental and physical damage related to noise pollution; protect against erosion, siltation and flooding; and preserve areas of natural beauty, recreation and irreplaceable heritage for existing and future residents, etc. 
B.  Official Maps. The City Council, with the assistance of the Planning Commission, shall have the duty and authority to study and adopt, after public hearing, official maps designating wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, floodways and drainage courses, and steep slopes in the City. Such maps are to be adopted and revised according to the procedures and standards set forth in the City floodplains, watercourse and wetlands protection ordinance. 
C.  Construction in wetlands, floodplains, floodways, drainage courses, steep slopes and watercourses prohibited. No uses nor the construction or location of any structures shall be allowed within any area designated on official City maps as wetlands, floodplains, floodways, drainage courses, steep slopes, or watercourses, except as may be allowed according to the requirements and provisions of any ordinances, standards and regulations of the City. 
D.  Woodlands. It being of extreme importance to protect woodlands and trees in the City, the applicant for any site plan and/or plat shall take appropriate action to preserve and replace trees. The following information shall be presented with any proposed site plan and/or plat: 
1.  Specification of the location of existing stands of trees, existing individual trees having a diameter measurement of six inches or greater at 4½ feet above the ground. On multistem trees, the largest diameter stem shall be measured. 
2.  Specification of the location of trees to be retained. 
3.  Specifications for protection of the trees to be retained during development. 
4.  Specification for grading and drainage to ensure the preservation of the trees to be retained. 
5.  Details of steps to be taken for reforestation. 
E.  Trees and Vegetation Near Watercourses. No cutting, trimming or otherwise clearing of trees and other natural vegetation shall be allowed within 100 feet of rivers and free-flowing streams, or within floodplains and wetlands, as defined by the corps of engineers or official City maps, without the express written approval of the City Council. 
F.  Conservation Easements. Construction or development shall occur in compliance with any conservation easements located on or impacting a property. 
G.  Environmental Impact Statement. The applicant for any rezoning, site plan and/or plat shall submit with such site plan and/or plat an environmental impact statement which shall be according to the requirements adopted by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission, as soon as is reasonably possible, shall adopt specific questions, guidelines and requirements which shall: 
1.  Provide relevant information on the environmental impact of applications for rezoning, platting, site plan approval and other actions which will have a significant effect on the environment. 
2.  Inject into a developer's planning process consideration of the characteristics of the land and the interest of the community at large as well as his or her own interest and the interests of his potential customers. 
3.  Facilitate participation of the citizenry in the review of community developments.  
SECTION 138-2.205 - Engineering Requirements 
No person shall start building or construction of anything for which a site plan approval is required by this ordinance until there has been compliance with the requirements of this Section 138-2.205. This section does not apply to lands being platted pursuant to the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (as amended), and subject to Article III of Chapter 122 of the City Code of Ordinances. The department of public services shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. Any and all construction and development on a site requiring site plan approval shall be consistent with the approved site plan, unless a change conforming to this ordinance receives an additional approval, and subject to the following additional approvals and requirements: 
A.  Engineering Drawings Required. After site plan approval and before commencement of construction, detailed engineering drawings for roads and utilities as may be required by the standards and specifications for roads and utilities shall be approved by the Engineering Services Division. 
B.  Land Improvement Permit. After site plan approval and before commencement of construction, a land improvement permit shall be obtained pursuant to Article II of Chapter 114 of the City Code of Ordinances for drainage and grading of the site. 
1.  Internal. A graphic layout, superimposed on the topographic map, shall be filed clearly defining and delineating the area proposed to contribute surface drainage to each stormwater structure where surface water is proposed to enter the drainage system. 
2.  External. If drainage from areas outside the limits of the proposed development is to be accommodated, such areas shall be described and/or delineated and dimensioned in sufficient detail to provide for the location of the limits of such areas on a property line map of the area involved. 
3.  Drainage map with computations. The topographic map relating to drainage facilities proposed to be utilized shall be accompanied by computations used in determining the adequacy of both existing and proposed drainage facilities, including an analysis of the adequacy of off-site outlet facilities proposed to be used. 
C.  Engineering Requirements. All site plan and development of property shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Internal road systems. All internal road systems to be dedicated to the City shall conform to current standards and regulations established by the City. 
2.  Rights-of-way. That portion of the proposed development, situated within the limits of the proposed right-of-way lines as set forth in the master thoroughfare plan, shall be dedicated by the owner to the county road commission, state department of transportation, or the City, depending on which agency has jurisdiction over the affected road. 
3.  Grading. 
a.  Elevations adjacent to roads. Areas adjacent to roads shall be graded to an elevation at the property line which is not lower than two feet below the centerline of the road nor higher than two feet above the centerline of the road, unless otherwise authorized by the City engineer. 
b.  Slope away from roads. The grading from the property line away from the road shall generally not exceed five percent, which equals one foot in 20 feet. 
c.  Drainage considerations. A minimum slope of two percent shall be provided to ensure drainage. 
d.  Natural drainage courses. Natural drainage courses shall not be diverted to cause damage to adjacent property. They shall not be filled unless provision is made to accommodate the surface drainage with proper ditch sections or enclosures approved by the City. 
e.  Consideration of future road improvements. Grading of properties abutting unimproved roads (roads without concrete or asphalt surfacing) shall indicate consideration of future vertical realignment of such roads. 
f.  Meeting adjacent elevations. Proposed grades shall meet elevations of adjacent properties. 
g.  Erosion control. A minimum depth of three inches of topsoil shall be replaced on all graded areas, and shall then be seeded or sodded with grass to control erosion. 
4.  Stormwater retention/detention. Each development shall be responsible to provide stormwater retention/detention on site and/or proper conveyance by ditch or enclosure to natural drains or county facilities capable of receiving stormwaters. The off-site discharge of stormwater in excess of the capacity of existing downstream facilities will not be permitted. All stormwater management systems shall be designed in accordance with best management practices (BMP) adopted by the City. 
5.  Nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
a.  Nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. Eight-foot asphalt nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths shall be provided in all rights-of-way abutting the subject property which are either existing or planned rights-of-way of 120 feet in width or greater, as designated on the master thoroughfare plan of the City adopted by resolution of the City Council. Nothing shall prohibit the construction of a nonmotorized pathway on a road with an existing or planned right-of-way of less than 120 feet. 
b.  Natural Beauty Roads. When a road has been designated a natural beauty road pursuant to Public Act No. 59 of 1995 (as amended), nonmotorized paths may be constructed in the right-of-way but are not required. 
c.  School access easements. Except when a road has been designated a natural beauty road pursuant to Public Act No. 59 of 1995 (as amended), easements for walkways and walkways shall be provided for school access routes. The walkways shall conform to the requirements for nonmotorized vehicle-pedestrian paths. 
6.  Easements to the public. Easements shall be provided before the final occupancy permit is issued, in recordable form, and in a form satisfactory to the City attorney, and in conformity with the City design standards and specifications, for the following: 
a.  Internal, undedicated roads or driveways. Easements to the public on all internal, undedicated roads or driveways being used in common by the residents of the development for vehicular traffic, for access of emergency vehicles and other public services. 
b.  Portions of the utility systems. Easements to the public for such parts of the utility systems as shall be under public jurisdiction. 
D.  Occupancy Permit. As a condition for the issuance of a temporary or final occupancy permit for any structure for any use, other than a model being used as a model, the following shall be required: 
1.  Completion of utilities and improvements. Completion and acceptance of the installation of all utilities and improvements required by this ordinance for that structure for which an occupancy permit has been requested. 
2.  Restrictive covenants. Presenting, in recordable form, and in a form satisfactory to the City attorney, such instruments as may be necessary to guarantee the maintenance and common control of areas to be used in common by the residents of the development. 
3.  Dedication of road rights-of-way. Dedication of all road rights-of-way as are indicated on the site plan. 
4.  Escrow Account. The escrow account for the application with the City shall be in good standing, without an outstanding balance. 
E.  Review and Inspection Fees. Plan reviews and inspection costs shall be in accord with schedules adopted by the City Council currently in effect. The fee shall be deposited by the property owner at the time application is made for an approval or a building permit, as the case may be. 
F.  Additional Engineering Standards. Authority is given for the City Council to adopt by resolution, from time to time, such engineering standards and specifications for utilities, drainage, grading, landscaping, roads, nonmotorized pedestrian pathways, sidewalks, and other similar aspects of development of property. All construction and development pursuant to this ordinance shall be in conformity with such engineering standards and specifications. 
G.  Variance Not Permitted. The Zoning Board of Appeals does not have jurisdiction or authority to grant relief from or variances to the requirements of this section. The City Council may authorize a variance from the requirements of this section when undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, the City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed development and the probable effect of the proposed development upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the City Council finds that: 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that the strict application of the provisions of this section would deprive the property owner of the reasonable use of his land. 
2.  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right. 
3.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which such property is situated.  
SECTION 138-2.206 - Use and Maintenance of Property in Accordance with an Approved Site Plan 
A.  Use. No owner, tenant, occupant, or person shall use or allow to be used a part or all of any property which was the subject of an approved site plan, other than as set forth on such approved site plan, after completion and approval of the improvements required by the site plan and this ordinance. An example, but not by way of limitation, is using only areas designated for parking for parking purposes, and not some other area of the property. 
B.  Maintenance. The owner, tenant, occupant or person responsible for any property which was the subject of an approved site plan shall maintain the property and the improvements thereon in accordance with the approved site plan or an approved amendment thereof. This responsibility shall include the duty to maintain in a condition substantially similar as approved, including the duty to replace, if necessary, all improvements such as, but not by way of limitation, all greenbelts, planting, walls, fences, paving, trash receptacles, handicapped parking areas, etc.  
SECTION 138-2.207 - General Provisions 
A.  Expiration of site plans. 
1.  Preliminary site plans shall expire 365 days after the date of approval, unless the final site plan for the project has been submitted to the Planning Department for review. 
2.  Final site plans shall expire 365 days after the date of final approval, unless building permits have been issued or construction has commenced. The date of final approval is established by the most recent date stamp on the final plans. 
3.  If building permits have been issued or construction has commenced, final site plan approval shall continue for a period of five years from the date thereof. If such construction lapses for more than 180 continuous days, said approval shall immediately expire. 
4.  Upon written request received by the City prior to the expiration date, the Planning and Development Director may grant one extension of up to 365 days to any site plan approval, either preliminary or final, provided that the approved site plan conforms to current Zoning Ordinance standards. The Planning Commission may grant one additional extension of up to 365 days to any site plan approval extended by the Planning and Development Director provided that the approved site plan conforms to current Zoning Ordinance standards. 
B.  Resubmission. A site plan that has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found by the Planning Commission to be valid. 
C.  Appeals. 
1.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to consider appeals of site plan determinations, except as defined in this Section. 
2.  When the Planning Commission approves a site plan contingent upon approval of one or more variances from specific requirements of this ordinance, the applicant shall initiate such a request to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Planning and Development Director shall provide copies of the site plan, application materials and Planning Commission meeting minutes to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Zoning Board of Appeals consideration shall be limited to the specific variances identified as conditions of site plan approval by the Planning Commission. This shall not preclude the applicant from seeking a dimensional variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to obtaining site plan approval. 
D.  Rescinding Site Plan Approval. Approval of a site plan may be rescinded by the Planning Commission upon determination that the site has not been improved, constructed or maintained in compliance with approved permits, site plans, or conditions of site plan or conditional use approval. Such action shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Public hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 138-1.203 of this ordinance (Public Hearing Procedures), at which time the owner of an interest in land for which site plan approval was sought, or the owner's designated agent, shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to rescission. 
2.  Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the Commission with regard to the rescission shall be made and written notification provided to the property owner or his or her designated agent. 
E.  Revisions to Approved Site Plans. Minor revisions to an approved site plan may be administratively reviewed by the Planning and Development Director, provided that such changes do not materially alter the approved site design, intensity of use or demand for public services. Revisions to an approved site plan that are not considered by the Planning and Development Director to be minor shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as an amended site plan.  
SECTION 138-2.208 - Required Information 
The following information shall be included with all site plan applications, except where the Planning and Development Director or the Planning Commission determines that certain information is not necessary or applicable to review of the site plan. 
Table 2. Site Plan Required Information 
SITE PLAN REQUIRED INFORMATION 	Preliminary 
Site Plan 	Final Site Plan 	Sketch Plan 	Administrative 
Review 
DESCRIPTIVE INFORMATION: 
Name, address, email (if available), telephone and facsimile numbers of the applicant (and property owner, if different from applicant) and firm or individual preparing the site plan, and the property location (address, lot number, tax identification number). 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Total area of land in acres or square-feet. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing and proposed use(s) of the site 	• 	• 	• 	
Zoning classification of the property and surrounding parcels (including across street rights-of-way). 	• 	• 	• 	
Legal description of the property. 	• 	• 		
Architect's, engineer's, surveyor's, landscape architect's, or planner's seal. 	• 	• 	• 	
SITE PLAN DATA AND NOTES: 
Site plans shall be drawn to an engineer's scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'). A general plan sheet drawn at scale of not less than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') shall be provided if the project covers more than one plan sheet at 1" = 50'. 	• 	• 	• 	
Title block, including the scale, north arrow, revision date, name of the City, and a location map drawn at one inch equals 2,000 feet (1" = 2,000') showing surrounding land, water features and streets within one mile of the site boundaries. 	• 	• 	• 	
Size and dimensions of proposed buildings, including gross and usable floor area, number of stories, overall height and number of units in each building, if applicable. 	• 	• 	• 	
Detailed parking (including accessible and van accessible parking), residential density and lot coverage calculations. 	• 	• 	• 	
Construction type and use group of all buildings as defined by the Michigan Building Code. If two or more uses not in the same occupancy classification are proposed, indicate if the structure is being designed for separated or non-separated uses. 	• 	• 	• 	
All plan sheets shall be labeled "not to be used as construction drawings." 	• 	• 	• 	
EXISTING CONDITIONS: 
Location of soil types and existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes, streams, drains and wetlands, with surface drainage flow directions, including high points, low points and swales. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing topography on site and 50 feet beyond the site boundaries at two-foot contour intervals. 	• 	• 	• 	
Slopes greater than 20% with a 10' or greater elevation change. 	• 	• 	• 	
Buildings located within 100 feet of any property line. 	• 	• 	• 	
Dimensions of all lots and property lines, showing the relationship of the site to abutting properties. If the site is part of a larger parcel, the plan should indicate the boundaries of total land holding. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing tree survey including the location of all trees 6" or greater d.b.h. The tree survey shall include a key showing the tag number, size, species, and condition of all trees located on the site. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Existing site features, including significant natural, historical, cultural and architectural features, buildings and structures, driveway openings, fences, walls, signs and other improvements. The site plan shall clearly note which features will be removed, altered or preserved and provide information regarding the method of preservation or alteration. 	• 	• 	• 	
Existing and proposed right-of-way lines and the centerline of adjacent roads. 	• 	• 	• 	
Driveways, sidewalks, paths, public transit routes, streets and curb cuts on the applicant's parcel and all abutting parcels (including across street rights-of-way). 	• 	• 	• 	
SITE PLAN DETAILS: 
Location, outside dimensions, setback distances and proposed uses of all site improvements. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Gross and usable building floor areas. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way (locations and descriptions) for utilities, access and drainage. 	• 	• 	• 	
An exterior lighting plan with all existing and proposed lighting locations, heights from grade, specifications, lamp types and methods of shielding. 		• 	• 	
A photometric grid overlaid on the site plan indicating light intensity throughout the site in foot-candles. 		• 	• 	
Specifications and details for each type of light fixture, including the total lumen output, type of lamp, and method of shielding. 		• 		
Waste receptacle locations and methods of screening. 	• 	• 	• 	
Transformer pad location and method of screening, if applicable. 		• 	• 	
Outdoor sales, display or storage locations and method of screening, if applicable. 	• 	• 	• 	
Locations, sizes, heights, types and methods of illumination of all proposed signs. 	• 	• 	• 	
BUILDING AND ARCHITECTURAL DETAILS: 
General architectural drawings sufficient to convey the intended look and appearance of the building, and to indicate the type and color of building materials, detailing, and other architectural features. 	• 			
Detailed building façade elevations, drawn to an appropriate scale and indicating type and color of building materials, roof design, projections, canopies, awnings, window openings, entrance features, doors, overhangs, other architectural features and any building-mounted mechanical equipment, such as air-conditioning and heating units. 		• 		
Building floor plans with all exits clearly delineated. 		• 		
Entrance details, including signs and details of signs. 	• 	• 	• 	
Carport locations and details, if applicable. 	• 	• 		
ACCESS AND CIRCULATION: 
Names of abutting streets, and the width, depth, type and curbing for all streets, parking lots, sidewalks and other paved surfaces. 	• 	• 		
Loading and unloading areas. 	• 	• 		
Designation of fire lanes and signs stating "no parking" and "fire lane." 	• 	• 	• 	
Locations and dimensions of access points, including deceleration or passing lanes and distances between adjacent or opposing driveways and street intersections. 	• 	• 		
Location and dimensions of existing and proposed interior sidewalks and sidewalks or paths within public rights-of-way. 	• 	• 	• 	
Parking space and maneuvering aisle dimensions (including accessible parking space and access aisle dimensions), pavement markings, traffic control signage, designation of fire lanes and location and dimension of loading areas. 	• 	• 	• 	
Proposed accessible routes from accessible parking spaces to accessible building entrances, with sufficient grade information along the route to verify compliance with the Michigan Building Code. 	• 	• 	• 	
Accessible access aisle and ramp slopes by indicating point elevations at the perimeter of such areas. 	• 	• 	• 	
Details along the proposed accessible route(s), including accessible parking signs, curb ramps, ramps, and maneuvering clearances of accessible building entrances/doors, as applicable. 		• 	• 	
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING: 
Landscape plan, including location, size, quantity and type of proposed shrubs, trees, ground cover (including grass) and other live plant materials, and the location, size and type of any existing plant materials that will be preserved. All landscape plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect. 	• 	• 	• 	
Planting list for proposed landscape materials with quantity, caliper-size and height of material, botanical and common names, and standards of installation. 	• 	• 	• 	
Location, dimensions, construction materials, cross-section and slope ratio for any required or proposed berms or greenbelts. 	• 	• 		
Proposed fences and walls, including typical cross-section, materials and height above the ground on both sides. 	• 	• 		
Complete irrigation system design. 		• 		
Cost estimate (including materials and labor) for all landscaping and irrigation improvements. 		• 		
A basic annual landscape maintenance program. 		• 		
UTILITIES, DRAINAGE AND THE ENVIRONMENT: 
Grading plan, with existing and proposed topography at a minimum of two-foot (2') contour levels, drainage patterns and a general description of grades within 100 feet of the site to indicate stormwater runoff. 		• 		• 
An environmental impact statement as required by Section 138-2.204. 	• 	• 		
A statement concerning trees and other vegetation, as required. 	• 	• 	• 	
General location of sanitary sewers and building leads upon which no structures or earth berms shall be located. 	• 			
Detailed location of sanitary sewers and building leads 		• 		
Water mains, hydrants and building services and sizes. 		• 	• 	
General stormwater runoff calculations and approximate size and location of retention basins 	• 			
Detailed storm sewers, site grading, drainage, detention basins, and/or other pertinent facilities. 		• 	• 	
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED INFORMATION: 
Other information as requested by the Planning and Development Director, Planning Commission, or City Engineer to verify that the site and project are developed or improved in accordance with the spirit and intent of this ordinance and the City's Master Plan. Such information may include use or environmental impact assessments, traffic impact studies, market analyses and evaluations of the demand on public facilities and services. The Planning and Development Director may also require that information listed in this table be submitted even if the table indicates that the information is not required for the particular type of review. 	• 	• 	• 	• 
Community building details and method of fencing the swimming pool, if applicable. 		• 		
Propane tank locations and methods of screening, any overhead utilities, or any outside storage of materials, chemicals, gases, liquids, etc., if applicable. 	• 	• 	• 	
  
CHAPTER 3. - CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL 
 
SECTION 138-2.300 - Intent 
Conditional uses are uses that serve an area, interest or purpose that extends beyond the borders of the City, create particular problems of control in relation to adjoining uses or districts, may have detrimental effects upon public health, safety or welfare, or possess other unique characteristics that prevent such uses from being classified as principal permitted uses in a particular zoning district. 
This Chapter is intended to provide a consistent and uniform method for review of conditional use applications, ensure full compliance with the standards contained in this ordinance and other applicable local ordinances, and state and federal laws, achieve efficient use of the land, minimize or prevent adverse impacts on neighboring properties and districts, protect natural resources and facilitate development in accordance with the land use objectives of the Master Plan and any sub-area or corridor plans.  
SECTION 138-2.301 - Procedures and Requirements 
A.  Planning Commission Recommendation. Prior to the City Council making a discretionary decision on a conditional use, the Planning Commission, or the Zoning Board of Appeals if specifically indicated, shall hold a public hearing, make a record of the public comment, make a recommendation and forward such record and recommendation to the City Council before the decision is made. 
B.  Public Hearing Notice. The public hearing provided for in this subsection shall be held to comply with the requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended), as set forth in Section 138-1.203. The notice of the public hearing provided for in this section shall state a public hearing before the City Council may be requested by those persons indicated in the preceding sentence. 
C.  City Council Decision. The City Council may deny, approve or approve with conditions a conditional use application. The decision on a conditional use shall be incorporated in a statement containing the conclusions relative to the conditional use specifying the basis for the decision, and any conditions of approval imposed on the application. 
1.  Approval. Upon determination that a conditional use proposal is in compliance with the standards and requirements of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances and laws, approval shall be granted. 
2.  Approval with Conditions. The City Council may impose reasonable conditions with the approval of a conditional use. The conditions may include provisions necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed conditional use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads generated by the new development, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  Conditions shall be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, welfare, and social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole. 
b.  Conditions shall be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
c.  Conditions shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, related to the standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and necessary to insure compliance with those standards. 
3.  Denial. A conditional use application shall be denied upon determination by the City Council that a conditional use proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth in this ordinance, or otherwise will be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or orderly development of the City. 
The City Council decision on a conditional use shall be incorporated in a written statement of findings relative to the conditional use under consideration. Said findings shall specify the reasons for the decision and any conditions imposed. 
D.  Coordination with Site Plan Review. 
1.  When a two-step site plan review process is used, the Planning Commission shall consider the preliminary site plan and conditional use simultaneously, and shall act upon the preliminary site plan prior to making a conditional use recommendation to the City Council. A final site plan associated with a conditional use may not be approved until the conditional use has first been approved by the City Council. 
2.  If the applicant chooses a one-step site plan approval process, the Planning Commission shall act upon the final site plan prior to making a conditional use recommendation to the City Council, and any action to grant final site plan approval shall be conditioned upon the City Council granting conditional use approval. 
E.  Resubmission. A conditional use application that has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found by the Planning Commission to be valid. 
F.  Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to consider appeals of conditional use determinations by the City Council. 
G.  Expiration of Conditional Use Approval. Conditional use approval shall expire 365 days after the date of approval, unless the use has been established on the site, or the final site plan associated with the conditional use has been submitted to the Planning Department for review. Conditional use approval shall also expire upon expiration of the approved final site plan associated with a conditional use. Upon written request received by the City prior to the expiration date, the Planning Commission may grant one extension of up to 180 days, provided that the approved conditional use conforms to current Zoning Ordinance standards. 
H.  Rescinding Approval of Conditional Uses. Approval of a conditional use may be rescinded by the City Council upon determination that the use has not been improved, constructed or maintained in compliance with this ordinance, approved permits, site plans, or conditions of site plan or conditional use approval. Such action shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Public hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held by the City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended) as summarized in Section 138-1.203, at which time the owner of an interest in land for which conditional use approval was sought, or the owner's designated agent, shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to rescission. 
2.  Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the Council's decision regarding to the rescission shall be made and written notification shall be provided to the property owner or the owner's designated agent.  
SECTION 138-2.302 - Standards for Conditional Use Approval and Other Discretionary Decisions 
For decisions on conditional uses referred to in subsection (a) of this section and in all other instances in this ordinance where discretionary decisions must be made by a board, commission or official, including decisions on site plans, the requirements and standards as particularly set forth in this ordinance concerning the matter for decision shall be followed, and such discretionary decision shall also be based upon the findings that the conditional use will: 
A.  Promote the intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
B.  Be designed, constructed, operated, maintained and managed so as to be compatible, harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or planned character of the general vicinity, adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacity of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and the community as a whole. 
C.  Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainageways, refuse disposal, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the land use or activity shall be able to provide adequately any such service. 
D.  Not be detrimental, hazardous, or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses, persons, property or the public welfare. 
E.  Not create additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services that will be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
The City Council shall grant the requested approval only upon determination of compliance with the standards in this subsection. In granting the requested approval, the City Council shall impose such requirements or conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public interest of the City and the surrounding property and to achieve the objectives of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 4, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-2.303 - Operation and Maintenance in Accordance with Conditional Use Approval 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property and the operator of the use for which conditional use approval has been granted to develop, improve, operate and maintain the use, including the site, buildings and all site elements, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and all conditions of conditional use approval until the use is discontinued. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Section shall be a violation of the use provisions of this ordinance and shall be subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use violation. 
The Mayor or his or her designee may make periodic investigations of developments for which a conditional use has been approved. Noncompliance with Ordinance requirements or conditions of approval shall constitute grounds for the City Council to rescind conditional use approval.  
CHAPTER 4. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
 
SECTION 138-2.400 - Jurisdiction, Powers and Duties 
A.  Powers and Duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and it shall be its duty to: 
1.  Hear and decide on all matters referred to it by the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building, planning, or public services department in the enforcement of this ordinance. See Section 138-2.404 for additional considerations. 
3.  Interpret the text and map and all matters relating thereto whenever a question arises in the administration of this ordinance as to the meaning and intent of any provision or part of this ordinance. Any interpretations shall be in a manner as to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance and zoning map, and commonly accepted rules of construction for ordinances and laws in general. See Section 138-2.405 and Section 138-2.406 for additional considerations. 
4.  Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, within the meaning of state law and this ordinance, in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power upon appeal in specific cases to authorize such variation or modification of the provisions of this ordinance so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. See Section 138-2.407 and Section 138-2.408 for additional considerations. 
B.  Review Considerations. In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variances to this ordinance the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, before granting any variance to this ordinance in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
C.  Majority Vote Required. Except for use variances, the concurring vote of a majority of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building department, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is authorized by this ordinance to render a decision. 
D.  Limitations of Authority. 
1.  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to give or grant to the Zoning Board of Appeals the power or authority to alter or change this ordinance or the zoning map or to rezone, such power and authority being reserved to the City Council. 
2.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Zoning Board of Appeals to hear, review or decide any appeal from a decision of the City Council or Planning Commission to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a site plan or special use. 
E.  Conditions. In authorizing a variance or taking any other action within its jurisdiction, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions as may be deemed necessary in the furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance, provided any conditions are in compliance with the standards for imposing conditions as contained in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended).  
SECTION 138-2.401 - Exercising Powers 
In exercising the powers described in Section 138-2.400, the Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may take such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building department from whom the appeal is taken.  
SECTION 138-2.402 - Notice 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a hearing conducted by such board. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in the manner established in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended).  
SECTION 138-2.403 - Effect of Actions 
A.  Expiration of Approval. 
1.  No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting the erection or alteration of a building, except in the case of an interpretation made by the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date of approval unless a building permit or site plan approval for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection and alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit or approved site plan. 
2.  No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting a use of a building or premises, except in the case of an interpretation made by the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date of approval, unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit or site plan approval for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit or approved site plan. 
B.  Resubmittal. No request or appeal which the Zoning Board of Appeals has denied wholly or in part may be resubmitted to or reheard by the Zoning Board of Appeals for a period of one year following the effective date of the decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals, except where the Zoning Board of Appeals determines there is valid new evidence that was unavailable to the applicant at the time of the prior hearing or a substantial change in circumstances. Applications for a rehearing shall be in writing and shall be subject to the same rules and requirements as an original request.  
SECTION 138-2.404 - Appeals of Administrative Decisions 
A.  Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the person or body charged with administration or enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. Such appeals may be taken to the Board by the person, firm or corporation aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by the order, requirement, decision or determination, provided that a notice of appeal application is filed with Planning and Development Department within 21 days of such action. 
B.  Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building or public services department certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of facts stated in a certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the building or public services department and on due cause shown. 
C.  Public Hearing. The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and shall give due notice in accordance with the public hearing requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 (as amended) as summarized in Section 138-1.203 and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. 
D.  Fee. A fee shall be paid at the time the notice of appeal is filed to the City treasurer to the credit of the general revenue fund of the City. The fees to be charged for appeals shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The fee for appeals shall be as provided in Section 110-437 for variance, interpretation or appeal of decision requests regarding alterations, modifications, additions or accessory buildings for existing single-family residences, and a fee as provided in Section 110-437 for all other variance, interpretation, appeal of decision or approval requests. 
E.  Required Findings. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse an administrative action only if it finds that the order, requirement, decision or determination was arbitrary or capricious, based upon an erroneous finding of a material fact, constituted an abuse of discretion, or based upon an erroneous interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance.  
SECTION 138-2.405 - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries 
Where the actual lines of streets, alleys, or property boundaries vary from the portions indicated on the Zoning Map, or some ambiguity exists as to zoning district boundaries, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to interpret the Zoning Map in such a way as to carry out the intents and purposes of Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan.  
SECTION 138-2.406 - Interpretation of Zoning Ordinance Provisions 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide requests for interpretations of Zoning Ordinance provisions in such a way as to preserve and promote the character of the zoning district in question, and carry out the intents and purposes of the Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan.  
SECTION 138-2.407 - Dimensional Variance 
A.  Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a dimensional (nonuse) variance to provide relief from a specific standard in this ordinance relating to an area, a dimension or a construction requirement or limitation, upon the concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
B.  Practical Difficulty. A nonuse variance shall not be granted unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that there is a practical difficulty in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance. In determining whether a practical difficulty exists, the Zoning Board of Appeals must find that: 
1.  Compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, lot coverage, density or other dimensional or construction standards will unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or will render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. 
2.  A grant of the variance will do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district, and a lesser variance will not give substantial relief to the applicant as well as be more consistent with justice to other property owners in the zoning district. 
3.  The plight of the applicant is due to the unique circumstances of the property. 
4.  The problem is not self-created. 
5.  The spirit of this ordinance will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
6.  There is compliance with the standards set forth in Section 138-2.400B. 
7.  There is compliance with the standards for discretionary decisions as contained in Section 138-2.302 of this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-2.408 - Use Variance 
A.  Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a use variance to authorize a land use which is not otherwise permitted by this ordinance in the district where the property is located, upon the concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
B.  Remedies Exhausted. An application for a use variance shall not be submitted or considered unless the applicant has first received a written determination from the building department that the proposed land use is not permitted under this ordinance in the district where the property is located, and, second has received a final decision from the City Council denying a rezoning of the property to a zoning district where the proposed land use would be permitted under this ordinance. 
C.  Unnecessary Hardship. A use variance shall not be granted unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds, on the basis of substantial evidence presented by the applicant, that there is an unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance. In determining that an unnecessary hardship exists, the Zoning Board of Appeals must find that: 
1.  The property in question cannot be reasonably used or cannot yield a reasonable return on a prudent investment if the property would be used only for a purpose allowed in the zoning district. 
2.  The plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to general neighborhood conditions. 
3.  The use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the essential character of the area and locality. 
4.  The problem is not self-created. 
5.  The spirit of this ordinance will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
6.  There is compliance with the standards set forth in Section 138-2.400B. 
7.  There is compliance with the standards for discretionary decisions as contained in Section 138-2.302 of this ordinance.  
ARTICLE 3 - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
SECTION 138-3.100 - Intent 
Nonconformities are uses, structures, buildings, or lots which do not conform to one or more provisions or requirements of this ordinance or a subsequent amendment, but which were lawfully established prior to the time of adoption of this ordinance or amendment. Such nonconformities are not compatible with the current or intended use of land in the district in which they are located. Therefore, it is the intent of this ordinance to permit such nonconformities to continue under certain conditions, but to foster the elimination of nonconformities by discouraging their expansion, enlargement, or extension. Accordingly, the purpose of this section is to establish regulations that govern the completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension, and/or substitution of nonconformities, and to specify the circumstances and conditions under which nonconformities shall be permitted to continue.  
SECTION 138-3.101 - General Requirements 
A.  Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding the state equalized value of the property, provided that the floor area of the building as it existed on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto shall not be increased. 
B.  Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises, provided there is no change or a lessening in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses except in conformity with this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-3.102 - Nonconforming Lots 
The following requirements shall apply to any legally created lot of record that does not comply with one or more of the dimensional requirements of this ordinance and that existed prior to the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. 
A.  Construction permitted. Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other sections of this ordinance, a permitted use may be erected on any single lawfully created lot of record in existence at the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. This section shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width or both that are generally applicable in the district, provided that the lot can be developed in compliance with other dimensional requirements (such as setback requirements) without any adverse impact on surrounding properties or the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Contiguous lots under common ownership. If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage and single ownership are of record on the effective date of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance and no portion of such parcel shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-3.103 - Nonconforming Uses of Land 
Where, on the effective date of the ordinance amendment thereto, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following: 
A.  Expansion prohibited. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
B.  Relocation prohibited. No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. 
C.  Period of nonuse before nonconformity shall cease. If a nonconforming use of land ceases operation with the intent of abandonment for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
D.  Establishment of a conforming use. In the event that a nonconforming use is superseded or replaced by a conforming principal use, the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.  
SECTION 138-3.104 - Nonconforming Structures 
Where a lawful structure exists on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following: 
A.  Increase in nonconformity prohibited. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. For example, an existing residence on a lot of a width less than required in this ordinance may add a rear porch, provided that other requirements relative to yard space and land coverage are met. 
B.  Expansion of one-family dwellings. With respect to any structure which is considered nonconforming due to its noncompliance with a required side or rear yard setback, and notwithstanding subsection A. of this section, any enlargement or alteration of the structure which involves the extension of the existing side or rear building line shall be permitted without need for a setback variance or variance to this section, provided that the enlargement or alteration: 
1.  Is not located closer to the side or rear property line than the structure's existing nonconforming side or rear yard setback; 
2.  Is attached to a one-family dwelling located within an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RE zoning district and is designed for use as enclosed or screened living space; 
3.  Is not taller than 16 feet or one story in height; and 
4.  Complies with all other requirements of this ordinance and does not necessitate any other variances. 
C.  Reconstruction. Nonconforming structures that are declared to be physically unsafe by the building official or otherwise damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent that the repair cost is greater than the assessed value of the structure shall not be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in complete compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. Buildings or structures that are listed on a local, state, or national register of historic buildings or places may be reconstructed provided that the nonconformity that existed prior to destruction is not increased. 
D.  Relocation. If such structure is moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 9, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-3.105 - Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land 
If a lawful use of a structure or of structure and land in combination exists on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following: 
A.  Alteration prohibited. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
B.  Expansion within existing building permitted. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this ordinance derives or at the time of amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
C.  Nonconforming use superseded by conforming use. Any structure or structure and land in combination in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations pertaining to the uses permitted in the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. Section 138-3.104 shall apply to any nonconformity relating to the structure. 
D.  Period of nonuse before nonconformity shall cease. If such nonconforming use of land and structures ceases operation with the intent of abandonment for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance pertaining to the uses permitted in the district in which such land is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this subsection only so long as seasonal uses shall continue. 
E.  Removal or destruction of structure. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.  
ARTICLE 4 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND PERMITTED USES  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERALLY 
 
SECTION 138-4.100 - Zoning Districts Established 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Rochester Hills is divided into the following districts: 
Table 3. Zoning Districts 
Symbol 	Name 
R-1 	One-family Residential District 
R-2 	One-family Residential District 
R-3 	One-family Residential District 
R-4 	One-family Residential District 
RE 	One-family Residential District 
RCD 	One-family Residential Cluster District 
RM-1 	Multiple-Family Residential District 
RMH 	Manufactured Housing Park District 
MR 	Mixed Residential (overlay) District 
B-1 	Local Business District 
B-2 	General Business District 
B-3 	Shopping Center Business District 
B-5 	Automotive Service Business District 
FB-1 	Flex Business (overlay) District 
FB-2 	Flex Business (overlay) District 
FB-3 	Flex Business (overlay) District 
CI 	Commercial Improvement District 
O-1 	Office Business District 
ORT 	Office, Research and Technology District 
I 	Industrial District 
SP 	Special Purpose District 
REC-W 	Regional Employment Center - Workplace 
REC-C 	Regional Employment Center - M-59 Corridor 
REC-I 	Regional Employment Center - Interchange 
REC-M 	Regional Employment Center - Mixed Use 
 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 3, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.101 - Zoning Map and District Boundaries 
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established as shown on the zoning map. The map, all notations, references, and other information shown thereon is as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described in this Article 4, provided: 
A.  Unless clearly shown otherwise on the Map, the boundaries of the districts are: 
1.  Lot lines; 
2.  The centerlines of streets, alleys, roads, watercourses, or such lines extended; and 
3.  The corporate limits of the City. 
B.  Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the zoning map accompanying this ordinance there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the location of any district boundaries shown thereon, an interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined by the Building Official, upon written application or upon its own motion. Any decision of the Building Official in these matters may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in Section 138-2.405.  
SECTION 138-4.102 - Zoning of Rights-of-Way 
All streets, alleys and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.  
SECTION 138-4.103 - Zoning of Vacated Areas 
Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the City is vacated by official governmental action and when the lands previously within the boundaries of the public way attach to and become a part of the land adjoining such street, alley or other public way, such lands shall automatically, and without further governmental action be subject to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to the land to which it attaches.  
SECTION 138-4.104 - Principal Uses and Conditional Uses 
In all districts, no structure or land shall be used or occupied, except in conformance with Section 138-4.300 (Table of Permitted Land Uses by District), and as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. Conditional uses may be permitted in accordance with Section 138-4.300 (Table of Permitted Land Uses by District), subject to a public hearing and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures and conditions defined in Article 2, Chapter 3 (Conditional Uses).  
SECTION 138-4.105 - Prohibited Uses 
Uses that are not specifically listed as a principal use or conditional use permitted by this ordinance in a zoning district, or otherwise determined to be similar to a listed and permitted use, shall be prohibited in the district.  
SECTION 138-4.106 - Design and Development Requirements 
All principal permitted uses and conditional uses shall comply with any applicable requirements of this ordinance and other City Codes and Ordinances. No structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor shall permits or certificates of occupancy be issued, except in conformance with this ordinance and other City Codes and Ordinances.  
CHAPTER 2. - PURPOSE OF DISTRICTS 
 
SECTION 138-4.200 - RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 One-Family Residential Districts 
The RE, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 one-family residential districts are designed to provide for one-family, low density dwelling sites and residentially related uses in keeping with the master plan of residential development in the City. The uses permitted by right and on special condition as conditional uses are intended to promote a compatible arrangement of land uses for homes, with the intent to keep neighborhoods relatively quiet and free of unrelated traffic noises.  
SECTION 138-4.201 - RCD One-Family Residential Cluster District 
The intent of the RCD one-family residential cluster district is to permit the development of one-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will introduce flexibility so as to provide for the sound physical handling of site plans in situations where the normal subdivision approach would otherwise be unnecessarily restrictive. 
RCD one-family residential cluster districts are intended for those areas having at least one of the following characteristics: 
A.  An area generally parallel to, and generally not to exceed, 360 feet in depth on those unsubdivided parcels of land abutting a major thoroughfare or freeway of at least 120 feet of right-of-way width as indicated on the current City Master Thoroughfare Plan, so as to provide transition between such major thoroughfare and adjacent one-family detached housing on platted lots. The density in the cluster area shall not exceed 3.9 dwelling units per acre, including all residential roads, except as provided in Section 138-6.206 pertaining to floodplains, subaqueous areas, or wetlands. 
B.  An area generally parallel to, and generally not to exceed, 360 feet in depth on those unsubdivided parcels of land being so located as to provide transition between nonresidential or multiple-family districts and one-family development. The density in the cluster area shall not exceed 3.0 dwelling units per acre, including all residential roads, except as provided in Section 138-6.206 pertaining to floodplains, subaqueous areas, or wetlands. 
C.  An unsubdivided area which is found to be of such an unusual shape or which is found to contain unstable or generally unbuildable soil conditions or which is characterized by some other unusual physical or development factor which would make sound physical development under the normal residential subdivision approach, including lot size variation and subdivision open space plan, impractical. The following conditions shall exist: 
1.  The natural land forms are so arranged that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in excess of 15 percent between these elevations. These elevation changes and slopes shall appear on at least 35 percent of the site rather than as exceptional or infrequent features of the site. 
2.  The achieving of road grades of less than six percent is impossible unless the site were mass graded. The providing of one-family clusters will allow a greater preservation of the natural setting. 
3.  The area in open space, including recreation areas and water, accomplished through the use of one-family clusters shall represent at least 25 percent of the horizontal development area of a one-family cluster development. This entire area may be used in computing density when preserved as open space. 
4.  The overall permitted density within an unsubdivided parcel not located in relation to a major thoroughfare, as described in subsections 1. and 2. of this section shall not exceed 3.0 dwelling units per acre, averaged over the entire area included within the general development plan, except as defined in Section 138-6.206 pertaining to floodplains, subaqueous areas, or wetlands.  
SECTION 138-4.202 - RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District 
The RM-1 multiple-family residential district is designed to provide sites for multiple dwelling structures with height restrictions compatible with single-family residential districts, to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise single-family residential community, and to provide zones of transition. The RM-1 district is intended generally for the development of a planned complex of buildings on acreage parcels.  
SECTION 138-4.203 - RMH Manufactured Housing Park District 
The RMH manufactured housing park district is established to allow the development of state-licensed manufactured housing communities that comply with the requirements of this ordinance, applicable Manufactured Housing Commission rules, and PA 96 of 1987.  
SECTION 138-4.204 - MR Mixed Residential (Overlay) District 
The mixed residential (overlay) district is designed to permit the construction of varied residential development types on parcels greater than ten acres. The mixed residential (overlay) district is intended to result in higher quality development by providing design flexibility in lot size, lot configuration, and building type within densities allowed by the Master Land Use Plan and existing zoning; to result in better buffers from major thoroughfares for residential development; the protection of natural features, and the creation of site amenities such as open space or parks.  
SECTION 138-4.205 - B-1 Local Business District 
The B-1 local business districts are designed for the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas to permit only such uses as are necessary to satisfy those limited basic shopping and/or service needs which, by their very nature and size, are not related to the shopping pattern of the Citywide or regional shopping centers.  
SECTION 138-4.206 - B-2 General Business District 
The B-2 general business districts are designed to cater to the needs of the larger consumer population than serviced by the B-1 local business district.  
SECTION 138-4.207 - B-3 Shopping Center Business District 
The B-3 shopping center business districts are designed to cater to the needs of the larger consumer population than served by the B-1 local business district and the B-2 general business district and so are mapped typically in shopping center locations characterized by establishments so grouped as to generate larger volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.  
SECTION 138-4.208 - B-5 Automotive Service Business District 
The B-5 automotive service business districts are established to accommodate those uses which attract and generate a high volume of moving or standing vehicular traffic. These districts are designed to be located on major thoroughfares in the City, other than freeways, and are generally incompatible with residential vehicular traffic from secondary thoroughfares (86-foot right-of-way) and local thoroughfares (60-foot right-of-way). 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 179 , § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 2016, deleted former § 138-4.208, which was entitled "B-4 Freeway Service Business District." Said ordinance further amended ch. 138 by renumbering §§ 138-4.209—138-4.219 as §§ 138-4.208—138-4.218 as herein set out.  
SECTION 138-4.209 - CI, Commercial Improvement District 
The CI commercial improvement district is intended to apply to certain business properties in the City which require relaxation of site improvement requirements in order to allow and encourage the upgrading and improvement of those properties. The irregularities of the parcels, the closeness of existing buildings to the roadway and adjacent buildings, and the lack of space for on-site parking hamper investment in the properties. Improvement and growth of such areas is determined to be of importance to the City and the general welfare of the area. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.210 - O-1 Office Business District 
The O-1 office business districts are designed to accommodate office uses, office sales uses and basic personal services, particularly larger planned office complexes and office centers. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.211 - ORT Office, Research and Technology District 
The ORT district is established to: 
A.  Permit the combination of certain uses that are complementary to one another within the same structure or within the same zone. 
B.  Provide for orderly and integrated planning, so as to avoid fragmentary, short-term, or speculative investments and to avoid delay in achieving the highest and best use of the area. 
C.  Optimize the City's tax base and encourage economic development. 
D.  Provide a tool for redeveloping and revitalizing areas where existing buildings and infrastructure are located. 
E.  Provide for satisfactory transitions to surrounding land use areas. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.212 - I Industrial District 
The I industrial districts are designed to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material, it being the intent of the district that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location not be permitted. 
The general goals of this use district include, among others, the specific purpose to: 
A.  Provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the City's expected future economy for selected types of manufacturing and related uses. 
B.  Protect abutting residential districts from the negative impacts of industrial land uses by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
C.  Promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
D.  Promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan. 
E.  Protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures and protect the City's economic tax base. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.213 - SP Special Purpose Districts 
The SP special purpose district is established to provide for uses which cater to the general public and require substantially larger sites. These uses do not fit readily into other districts and must be given special consideration. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.214 - FB-1, FB-2, and FB-3 Flex Business (Overlay) Districts 
The FB districts are designed to permit a wider range of uses in areas already used for commercial purposes. The FB districts are an optional method of development that permits a mixture of uses that may include residential, public, institutional, office, business, and retail commercial uses, depending upon the FB district. The FB overlay districts establish specific and detailed design standards for the physical development of the districts, while permitting the wider range of uses. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.215 - REC-W Regional Employment Center Workplace District 
The REC-W district is located along the perimeter of the overall REC area, and consists primarily of the City's existing industrial and technology parks developed in the 1980s and 1990s. It is the intent of the REC-W district to allow for their continued evolution while maintaining compatibility with residential land uses abutting the perimeter of the REC area. The REC-W district corresponds with the "Workplace" category as described in the M-59 Corridor Plan and as shown on the development plan therein. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 4, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.216 - REC-C Regional Employment Center M-59 Corridor District 
The REC-C district is located adjacent to M-59, forming a corridor along the freeway. Sites in the REC-C district are visible from M-59 and are a potential location for a range of industrial and office land uses that benefit from visibility from a major regional highway. Lands in the REC-C district primarily consist of existing industrial and technology parks developed in the 1980s and 1990s. It is the intent of the REC-C district to allow for their continued evolution and intensification. Lands in the REC-C district are not adjacent to residential land uses, reducing the potential for land use conflicts and supporting higher maximum height limits in the REC-C district. The REC-C district corresponds with the "Technology and Office Image Corridor" category as described in the M-59 Corridor Plan and as shown on the development plan therein. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 5, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.217 - REC-I Regional Employment Center Interchange District 
The REC-I district is intended to create a gateway into the REC district and the City at the Crooks and M-59 interchange. This area is not adjacent to existing residential development and has direct access to the regional road system, making it an appropriate location for higher intensity development, potentially with mixed land uses. The REC-I district corresponds with the "Interchange" category as described in the M-59 Corridor Plan and as shown on the development plan therein. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 6, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.218 - REC-M Regional Employment Center Mixed Use District 
REC-M districts are located along major roads at the perimeter of the REC area. The REC-M district is intended to allow for the development and redevelopment of property with mixed land uses that upgrade the image of the area and that provide services and living accommodations to support the businesses within the REC district and in adjacent areas. The REC-M district corresponds with the "Corridor Mixed Use" category as described in the M-59 Corridor Plan and as shown on the development plan therein. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 7, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
CHAPTER 3. - LAND USE TABLE 
 
SECTION 138-4.300 - Table of Permitted Uses by District 
Table 4. Permitted Uses by Zoning District 
Key:       P: Permitted Use       C: Conditional Use       [—]: Use Not Permitted 
Use 	R A 	RM-1 	B-1 B 	B-2 B 	B-3 B 	B-5 C 	O-1 D 	ORT 	REC-W 	REC-C 	REC-1 	REC-M 	I 	SP 	Additional Standards 
Animal and Agriculture Uses 
Agriculture 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.401 
Kennels 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.422 
Pet boarding facilities 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.432 
Plant material nurseries 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.434 
Private stables 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.437 
Public stables, riding academies and hunt clubs 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	Section 138-4.437 
Raising and keeping of animals 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 138-4.438 
Veterinary hospitals or clinics 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	C 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.444 
Residential Uses 
One-family detached dwellings 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	· In the SP district follow the requirements of the R-1 district · In the RM-1 district follow the requirements of the R-3 district 
Attached dwelling units 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Not permitted on first floor in REC-I 
Two-family dwellings 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	In the RM-1 district follow the requirements of the R-4 district 
Boarding and rooming dwellings 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Nursing homes, convalescent homes and assisted living facilities 	— 	P 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	P 	Section 138-4.423 
State licensed residential facilities (6 or fewer residents) 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.439 
State licensed residential facilities (more than 7 but not more than 12 residents) 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.439 
Community, Public and Recreation Uses 
Cemeteries 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Minimum site size of 5 acres 
Colleges, universities, or other institutions of higher learning offering courses in general, technical, or religious education 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	P 	Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) 
Concert halls and auditoriums 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Facilities for community groups such as theatrical groups 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Fraternities and sororities 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Golf courses (may or may not be operated for-profit) 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.413 
Hospitals 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	Section 138-4.416 
Libraries and museums 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) Section 138-4.433 
Nursery schools, day nurseries, child care centers, adult foster care large group homes and adult foster care congregate facilities 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.424 
Places of worship 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 138-4.433 
Primary and secondary schools (public, private and parochial) 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	
Private recreational areas, swim clubs and tennis courts 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.435 
Privately operated recreational facilities located on publicly owned parkland 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Utilities and publicly owned buildings and uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section138-4.427 (ORT district only) 
Section 138-4.442 
Transit passenger stations 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	P 	P 	
Commercial and Retail Uses 
Adult regulated businesses 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.400 
Alcoholic beverage sales (for on-premises consumption) accessory to a permitted use 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Automotive gasoline service stations and associated retail uses 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.404 
Automotive service centers 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.405 
Banks, credit unions and similar uses 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.406 
Banquet halls/conference centers 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	C 	P 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) Section 138-4.407 (O-1 district only) 
Car washes 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	
Drive-through accessory to a permitted use 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.410 
Dry cleaners 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.411 
Health or exercise clubs 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	C 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) 
Home improvement store 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Fabrication, processing, or manufacturing shall not occur on site 
Indoor theatres, including movie theatres 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
New car office, sales or showroom 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Accessory bump shops incidental to the main business may be permitted by the Planning Commission if screened 
Office/showroom or workshop establishment 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	A maximum of 5 persons may be employed at any time in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods 
Outdoor display and sales of goods 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.426 
Outdoor recreation, commercial 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.429 
Outdoor sales of used cars, recreational vehicles, travel trailers and manufactured homes 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.430 
Private indoor recreational facilities 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	Section 138-4.408 
Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.410, not permitted on sites with frontage on Auburn in REC districts 
Restaurant, sit down 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) 
Retail sales establishments 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) 
Sales and service of food outdoors 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.428 
Office and Service Uses 
Dry cleaners 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Service only, not plants 
Funeral Homes 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.412 
Hotel, motel and residential inns 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	C 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.417, Section 138-4.427 (ORT district only) 
Medical offices and clinics 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.427 (ORT district only) 
Personal service establishments 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Professional offices 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.427 (ORT district only) 
Retail businesses normally associated with and complementary to office districts (e.g., stationery shops, office supplies, coffee shops, etc.) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Entrances or exits directly to the outside of the building from the retail businesses shall not be permitted 
Research and development and/or technical training, including data processing and computer centers 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.427 (ORT district only) 
Studios or instruction centers for music, art, dance, crafts, martial arts, etc. 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Industrial, Research and Technology Uses 
Airports, landing fields, heliports, platforms, hangars, masts and other aeronautical facilities 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.402 
Assembly and machining operations when adjunct to research and development activities occurring at the same location 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.418, Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) 
Auto racetracks, including midget, carting and snow-manufactured tracks 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.403 
Automobile and machinery assembly plants 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420 
Building material storage and sales 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420 
Caretaker's or manager's residence 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	Permitted only when accessory to a principal use, residence may not exceed 750 sq. ft. of total living area 
Commercial communication towers, including commercial television, radio and public utility transmitting and/or receiving towers and receiving microwave antennas 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.409 
Contractor's or builder's office including a storage equipment yard if related to the contracting or building business 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.431 
Dry cleaning plants 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.419 
Equipment and trailer rental facilities 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	C 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.431 
Freight yards and terminals 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	C 	— 	
Gun clubs (for-profit or not-for-profit) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.414 
Heating and electric power generating plants 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.419 
Junkyards 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.421 
Laboratories (experimental, film, or testing) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420, Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) 
Lumber and planing mills 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Such uses shall be completely enclosed and located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I district 
Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of finished or semi-finished products, articles, or merchandise where the external and physical effects are restricted to the site and will not impact neighboring land uses 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420 
Manufacture, compounding, processing, or packaging of raw materials into finished or semi-finished products, or manufacturing, compounding, packaging or recycling operations that will generate external physical effects that will be felt to some degree by neighboring land uses 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.419 
Manufacture of scientific instruments, electrical or electronic prototypes, and specialized display and exhibit materials 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.426 (ORT district only) 
Metal plating, buffing and polishing 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	— 	Appropriate measures to control noxious odors and/or nuisances shall be provided 
Media and entertainment production facilities 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Such uses shall be primarily operated within an enclosed building, but may include an outdoor element provided that the use is operated in conformance with Section 138-10.310 
Oil or gas well 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.425 
Painting and varnishing shops 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420 
Recreational vehicle storage yards 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.443 
Tool, die, gauge and machine shops 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420 
Tractor and trucking facilities, including storage and repair 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	— 	Outdoor storage of vehicles subject to the requirements of Section 138-4.437 
Vehicle collision repair and undercoating 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420 
Warehousing and wholesale establishments 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.420 
Waste lagoon ponds 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	Section 138-4.445 
Water supply and sewage disposal plants 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	
Water and gas tank holders 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	
Temporary, Special Event and Other Uses 
Accessory buildings and accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses in this section 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Article 10, Chapter 1 
Home occupations 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Section 138-4.415 
Outdoor storage 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	— 	Section 138-4.430 
Roadside stands and markets and Christmas tree sales 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 138-4.438 
Temporary construction 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 138-4.440 
Wireless telecommunication facilities 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	P 	C 	Section 138-4.446 
 
(Ord. No. 165, §§ 2, 10, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 581, § 10, 11-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 173 , § 1, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 175 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 182 , § 2, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 183 , § 5, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.301 - Footnotes to the Table of Permitted Uses by District 
A.  R districts include RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4. 
B.  All uses in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and CI districts are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
2.  All business, servicing, storage and processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
C.  All uses in the B-5 district are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Entrances and exits shall adhere to the following standards: 
a.  Entrances and exits shall be no less than 35 feet from any two street right-of-way lines, with the exception that for car washes, entrances and exits shall be at least 75 feet from the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines. 
b.  Entrances and exits shall be no less than 50 feet from any residential district, with the exception that for car washes, entrances and exits shall be located at least 200 feet from any adjacent residential district. 
c.  All principal uses and conditional uses permitted shall be located only on major thoroughfares of at least 120-foot right-of-way as indicated on the current City master thoroughfare plan. 
D.  All uses in O-1 office business districts shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited, irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
b.  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incidental to the permitted uses in this division, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.302 - Reserved 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 179 , § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 2016, deleted § 138-4.302 entitled "Table of Permitted Uses - REC Districts", which derived from: Ord. No. 170 , § 8, adopted June 16, 2014; and Ord. No. 175 , § 2, adopted June 1, 2015.  
CHAPTER 4. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 
 
SECTION 138-4.400 - Adult Regulated Businesses 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  Adult bookstore or video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in video cassettes, discs or films or media recorded, pressed, engraved or prepared for playback and books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, rental and/or display of such material. 
2.  Adult cabaret means an establishment which features one or more dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers, performers, wait staff or other persons who reveal or show specified anatomical areas of their bodies or who engage in, perform or simulate specified sexual activities. 
3.  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting motion picture films, videocassettes, cable television or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
4.  Specified anatomical areas means: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
5.  Specified sexual activities means: 
a.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
b.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
c.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
6.  Used, in the definition of the term "adult motion picture theater" in this subsection, describes a continuing course of conduct of exhibiting specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas in a manner which appeals to a prurient interest. 
B.  It is determined necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the City to adopt this section pertaining to and regulating adult businesses for the following reasons: 
1.  Many parents are concerned about the influence of pornographic entertainment outlets and businesses and have chosen the City to raise their families because of the absence of such adult businesses. 
2.  Location of and easy availability of adult businesses in close proximity to homes, apartments, schools, churches and public parks give an impression of legitimacy to such uses and have adverse effects upon children, established family relations, respect for marital relationships and the concept of nonaggressive consensual sexual relations. 
3.  Location of adult businesses in close proximity to houses, apartments, schools, churches and public parks will draw persons who are not known in the community and will create police and safety problems in areas of the City which should be free of such problems. 
4.  Property values in areas adjacent to adult businesses will decline, thus causing a blight upon both commercial and residential areas of the City. 
5.  Location of adult businesses near or within residential neighborhoods and commercial areas of the City would be disruptive to youth programs such as Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Campfire Girls and church youth groups. 
6.  Location of adult businesses in close proximity to residential uses, schools, churches, parks and other public facilities will cause a degradation of the community standard of morality. Pornographic material has a degrading effect upon the relationship between spouses. 
C.  An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or video store or adult cabaret shall not be located: 
1.  Within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RE, RCD, RM-1 or RMH) or the property line of any single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential use. For purposes of this section, the term "multiple-family residential use" shall specifically include, but not by way of limitation, any retirement, convalescent or nursing home or facility or other housing for the elderly. 
2.  Within 1,000 feet of the property line of any public or private school, college or university, or of any nursery school, day nursery or child care center. 
3.  Within 1,000 feet of the property line of any church or other religious facility or institution. 
4.  Within 1,000 feet of any public park. 
5.  Within 1,000 feet of any other adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or video store, or adult cabaret. 
The distances provided for in this subsection shall be measured by projecting a straight line, without regard for intervening buildings or structures, from the nearest point of the building, structure or tenant space within which the proposed use is to be located to the nearest point of the property line, specified use or zoning district boundary from which the proposed use is to be separated. 
D.  An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or video store, or adult cabaret shall be located only within a B-3 shopping center business district. 
E.  An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or video store, or adult cabaret shall be permitted only by special land use approval granted by the City Council after review and recommendation of the Planning Commission, and after public hearing pursuant to the discretionary decisions in Section 138-2.302 pertaining to special and conditional uses. The special land use shall be approved only if the following criteria are satisfied: 
1.  There has been compliance with all provisions of this section and all other sections of this ordinance and the City Code of Ordinances. 
2.  The establishment of an adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or video store, or adult cabaret will not have a deleterious effect on the surrounding area or the City in general. 
3.  There is compliance with the standards included in Section 138-2.302. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 6, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.401 - Agriculture 
Agricultural operations are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and RE districts subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Agricultural operations are permitted only on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area of not less than five acres, and subject to the City health and sanitation provisions. 
B.  Agriculture may be conducted on parcels of less than five acres but there shall be no keeping or raising of livestock, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-4.402 - Airports 
A.  The plans for such facility shall be given approval by the Federal Aviation Administration prior to submittal to the Planning Commission and City Council for their review and action. 
B.  The standards concerning objects affecting navigable airspace, as provided in 14 CFR subchapter E, airspace, part 77, and any other amendments thereto shall be complied with. These standards shall be applied by the class of facility as determined by the FAA. 
C.  The area of the clear zone as defined by the FAA shall be provided for within the land area under airport ownership, and in no instance shall the clear zone be above property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RE, RCD, RM-1, RMH or SP.  
SECTION 138-4.403 - Auto Racetracks 
A.  Such uses shall be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare and on a parcel of land which is abutting land zoned for industrial purposes on all four sides of the parcel in question and no closer than 1,000 feet of a residential district. 
B.  All parking shall be provided as off-street parking within the boundaries of the development. 
C.  All access to the parking areas shall be provided from a major thoroughfare.  
SECTION 138-4.404 - Automotive Gasoline Service Stations 
A.  Standards Applicable to All Gas Stations. 
1.  Major engine and body repair, steam cleaning, and undercoating are expressly prohibited. 
2.  The storage of damaged or wrecked vehicles, or those waiting for minor repair or service, shall comply with the Property Maintenance Code and shall be obscured from public view in an area provided for such purpose on the site, and no vehicle of any kind shall be stored in the open for a period exceeding one week. 
3.  In no instance shall more than five vehicles be allowed to accumulate on the site at any one time, and the storage area shall be kept free of trash and debris. 
4.  Permanently installed and/or nonportable hoists, ramps or heavy equipment for the repair of vehicles shall be located inside an enclosed building. 
5.  Underground storage tanks, gasoline pumps, air and water hose stands, and other appurtenances shall be set back not less than 20 feet from all existing and/or proposed street right-of-way lines. 
6.  In the case of automotive gasoline service stations, the minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet and so arranged that ample space is available for vehicles which are required to wait. Lot frontage on the principal thoroughfare shall not be less than 100 feet. 
B.  Front Building/Rear Canopy Gas Stations. Gas stations may be developed according to the following design standards which allow for the building to be closer to the street with the pump islands and canopy located behind the building. The standards of this subsection B shall take precedence over any conflicting design or dimensional requirement contained elsewhere in this ordinance. 
1.  Principal building setbacks. The principal building shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the front property line. 
2.  Canopy location and setbacks. The pump canopy shall be located to the rear of the principal building, and shall comply with all requirements of Footnote S to the Schedule of Regulations (Section 138-5.501). Additionally, any pump canopy shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any residential district. If such a setback cannot be achieved, this design option may not be used. 
3.  Site Design. 
a.  Vehicle access. On corner sites, driveways shall be located as far from intersections as possible and no more than one driveway access shall be permitted per street frontage unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Pedestrian access. Sidewalks shall be provided to connect the front door of any building to the public sidewalks along any streets. 
c.  Landscaping. Whenever a pump island is located such that it will have reasonable visibility from or impact on a nearby residential district, the Planning Commission may require a Type C landscape buffer along the property line facing the residential district. See Section 138-12.300 for buffer requirements. 
d.  Corner clearance. All site improvements, including buildings, shall comply with the corner clearance requirements of Section 138-5.204. 
4.  Building Requirements. 
a.  Transparency. The building shall have a minimum transparency of 60% on any façade facing a pump island or the front lot line. Transparency shall be measured based on the total wall area of the façade. False windows, spandrel glass or similar shall not be counted towards the transparency requirement. 
b.  Design. All sides of the building shall incorporate a consistent architectural style, including horizontal or vertical design elements that have sufficient relief to create shadow lines. The type of element (i.e., horizontal or vertical) will be determined by the intended design aesthetic of the building. 
c.  Materials. Building materials for gas stations shall comply with the standards of Section 138-8.502.B. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 8, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-4.405 - Automotive Service Centers 
A.  In the B-3 District. Automotive service centers (but not fueling stations) are permitted in the B-3 district only when physically attached and incidental to another permitted nonautomotive retail use that is part of a larger planned shopping center. Freestanding automotive service centers are not permitted in the B-3 zoning district. 
B.  In the I District. Automotive service centers in the I district may conduct major mechanical repairs, collision work, undercoating and painting. The sale of gasoline and other fuels is prohibited.  
SECTION 138-4.406 - Banks 
Banks with drive-in facilities are permitted only when drive-in facilities are incidental to a principal bank use on the site.  
SECTION 138-4.407 - Banquet Halls and Conference Centers 
Banquet halls and conference centers in the O-1 district shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Such uses shall have frontage on and access to a thoroughfare with an existing or planned right-of-way of at least 120 feet. 
B.  Events open to the general public, such as brunches or dinners, shall be prohibited.  
SECTION 138-4.408 - Bowling Alleys 
Bowling alleys shall be located at least 100 feet from any adjacent residential zoning district.  
SECTION 138-4.409 - Commercial Communication Towers 
A.  The tower or antenna shall be located on the property so that, if collapse occurs, the structure will not fall on adjacent property or a public road right-of-way. In determining appropriate location on the property, the manufacturer's specifications shall be considered. In lieu of the manufacturer's specifications, a written opinion of a registered professional engineer attesting to the required fall radius based on structural design shall be provided. 
B.  Soil borings shall be conducted by a registered professional engineer, who shall provide written evidence that soil conditions will provide sufficient stability for erection of the tower or antenna. 
C.  Written evidence shall be provided indicating that the Federal Aviation Agency has no objection to the tower or antenna. 
D.  The tower or antenna is not detrimental to the character of the area, it would not adversely affect the use or value of surrounding properties, and it would not be injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the City.  
SECTION 138-4.410 - Drive-Through Facilities 
Any use or building that contains a drive-through facility that is designed to provide service to a patron who remains in their car shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Drive-through uses must be built as an integral architectural element of the primary structure and use. Building materials shall be the same as those used in the primary structure. Drive-through facilities and structures separate from the primary structure are prohibited. 
B.  Drive-through uses must be located to the rear or side of the primary structure, and set back a minimum of ten feet from the front building wall of the primary structure. 
C.  Drive-through uses shall be configured such that glare from headlights is obstructed from shining into a public right-of-way or neighboring residential use. 
D.  Unless a more intense buffer is required by Section 138-12.300, a type B landscape buffer shall be provided along rear and side lot lines of a drive-through use located adjacent to a residentially zoned or used property.  
SECTION 138-4.411. - Dry Cleaners 
Dry cleaning chemicals shall be self-contained within the machines that use them. Floors shall be sealed with a chemical-proof material or industrial-grade epoxy coating and shaped to form a basin to contain any chemicals and to prevent them from leaching into the ground or otherwise escaping the premises. 
( Ord. No. 581, § 11, 11-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.446, which was renumbered by Ord. No. 179 and §§ 138-4.411—138-4.416 have subsequently been renumbered as §§ 138-4.412—138-4.417.  
SECTION 138-4.412 - Funeral Homes 
A.  Funeral homes located in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or RE districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The funeral home site shall be located on a separately owned parcel surrounded by an existing cemetery consisting of at least 50 acres, and which cemetery is a conforming use under this ordinance. 
2.  Ingress and egress to and from the funeral home parcel shall be gained through the internal drive system of the cemetery in order to minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and funeral processions or visitors entering or leaving the cemetery and the funeral home. 
3.  The minimum lot area for the funeral home parcel shall be 25,000 square feet and shall be so arranged that an adequate off-street assembly area is provided for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. 
4.  Wherever the parking area is designed so that automobile headlights will be directed toward any nearby residences, screening shall be provided to prevent headlights from shining onto adjacent or nearby residences. 
5.  Loading and unloading areas used by ambulance, hearse, or other such service vehicles shall also be obscured from view from nearby residences. 
6.  All structures on the funeral home parcel shall have a residential appearance compatible with residences in the general area. 
B.  Funeral homes located in O-1 districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The minimum lot area shall be 25,000 square feet and so arranged that adequate assembly area is provided off street for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. 
2.  The site shall be so located as to have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare of not less than 120 feet of right-of-way width, either existing or proposed, and all ingress and egress for the site shall be directly onto such major thoroughfare or a marginal access service road. 
3.  Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be so laid out as to minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and funeral processions or visitors entering or leaving the site. 
4.  No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of the district when such property line abuts any residential district. 
5.  A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of the mortuary establishment. 
6.  Loading and unloading areas used by ambulance, hearse, or other such service vehicles shall be obscured from all residential view with a solid masonry wall six feet in height or alternate method of screening acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.413 - Golf Courses 
A.  Any such use developed and requiring a structure shall have such structure so located on the site as not to be closer than 200 feet from the lot line of any adjacent residential land. 
B.  All ingress and egress from the site shall be directly onto a major thoroughfare having an existing or proposed right-of-way at least 86 feet as shown on the City's master thoroughfare plan. 
C.  Parking areas, and ingress and egress, shall be so located so as to not become a nuisance to any adjacent residential area. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.414 - Gun Clubs 
Gun clubs may be permitted only after review by the Planning Commission and approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  All federal, state, county and City codes and ordinances in regard to firearms shall be strictly adhered to. 
B.  In no instance shall a firearm be discharged outdoors closer than 1,250 feet to an existing residence in the City or any adjacent community. 
C.  In no instance shall a firearm be discharged on any range in any gun club without the presence of an employee of the gun club for supervision. 
D.  A site plan for the range, whether indoor or outdoor, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review in compliance with Section 138-2.103.C.,and clearly indicating all provisions to ensure safety to the surrounding community. 
E.  A six-foot vinyl coated chain link fence with conspicuous warning signs attached to the fence every 100 feet shall be provided around the entire gun club site to ensure that individuals will not unknowingly trespass on the property, particularly where firearms are being discharged. 
F.  Any other provision which the City Council and Planning Commission deem necessary to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and adjacent communities. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.415 - Home Occupations 
A.  Required conditions. Home occupations are permitted in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and RE districts provided that the home occupation: 
1.  Does not create a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.  Does not become more than an incidental function of the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
3.  Does not draw truck traffic other than a delivery by a truck no more frequently than an average of once a week or by trucks or vehicles allowed under Section 138-10.308. 
4.  Does not employ paid assistants or employees other than those living at the premises. 
5.  Does not cause more than a nominal increase of traffic. 
6.  Does not cause the erection or maintenance of any signs other than signs allowed on vehicles under Section 138-10.308. 
7.  Does not take place outside of the dwelling and/or accessory buildings, so as to be a nuisance or not be in keeping with the residential nature of the surrounding residential area. 
B.  Bed and Breakfasts. In addition to meeting all of the requirements of subsection A, above, bed and breakfast operations shall conform to the following additional requirements: 
1.  No more than four sleeping rooms, and no more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit, shall be available for rent to transient guests. 
2.  Each sleeping room used for the bed and breakfast operation shall have a separate smoke detector, and each floor of the premises shall have a fire extinguisher. All are to be kept in proper working order, in compliance with applicable state law. 
3.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on site. 
4.  The maximum stay for any transient guest shall be 14 consecutive days. 
C.  Restrictions and enforcement. Operating a business or carrying on a business activity in excess of the limitations of a home occupation as defined and allowed in this ordinance in a residential district is prohibited. The conducting of a business or a business activity which results in violations of the limitations or is not a home occupation as defined in this ordinance may be prosecuted in the district court, or may be enjoined in the circuit court. 
As an alternative, the mayor or his or her designee may refer the matter first to the Zoning Board of Appeals if there is a reasonable question as to whether there is a violation. Whenever a complaint is received from a neighbor, the mayor shall make an investigation and either take action against the violator, refer the matter to the Zoning Board of Appeals or advise the complainant there is no violation and the reason for that determination. 
If a question concerning a home occupation is referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals, that board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 138-1.203 and shall determine whether there is, in fact, a home occupation and, if so, whether there are any violations of the limitations in this subsection. The Zoning Board of Appeals may take no further action or may issue a permit, renewable yearly, for the continuation of such use, with or without restrictions. If a hearing is held and a determination is made, the matter may not be reviewed at the complaint of a neighbor unless there has been a change of circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.416 - Hospitals 
A.  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites of at least five acres in area. 
B.  The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of existing or proposed right-of-way as indicated on the current City master thoroughfare plan. At least two ingress routes shall be provided for the facility. 
C.  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 50 feet for front, rear and side yards for all two-story structures. For every story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
D.  Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view with an obscuring wall or fence six feet in height. Ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
E.  All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area for guests, employees, staff or other users of the facility shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.417 - Hotels, Motels, and Residential Inns 
A.  No guest shall rent a unit at a motel or hotel for more than 30 days within any 12 consecutive months. This subsection shall not apply to residential inns. 
B.  Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area. 
C.  When reviewing developments complying with the requirements in this subsection, consideration shall be given to the effect created by the proposed use on existing and potential development patterns within the area. The construction of a hotel/motel or residential inn shall not conflict with and/or disrupt reasonable vehicular, pedestrian, building and user patterns characteristic of a planned commercial area and the principal uses permitted in this division. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.418 - Industrial Uses: Assembly and Machining Operations 
A.  Assembly activity shall be limited to assembly of pre-manufactured finished objects or components and shall include only small volume nonroutine production of innovative products or equipment and shall not include or permit mass production or mass assembly of products or equipment. 
B.  Machining shall be permitted on a limited basis and only for research and development activities, repair, demonstration, and/or training. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.421 entitled "Assembly and Machining Operations", which was amended and renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.419 - Industrial Uses: Heavy 
A.  Performance Standards. All activities shall comply with the Performance Standards in Section 138-10.310. 
B.  Site Area. A minimum site area of ten acres is required for heavy industrial land uses. 
C.  Setbacks. 
1.  A minimum setback of 1,500 feet is required between any building or outdoor area involved in the heavy industrial use and a one-family residential zoning district or a detached one-family residential dwelling unit. 
2.  Offices and components of the use which are not characterized as or qualify as heavy industrial uses are not subject to the 1,500-foot setback requirement. 
D.  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of raw materials used in the operation may be permitted, provided that: 
1.  Storage piles shall have a maximum height of 12 feet and shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any property line. The storage pile height may be increased to a maximum of 35 feet provided that 2.5 feet of additional set back is provided over and above the 100-foot minimum setback for each one foot of additional pile height. 
2.  The perimeter of any material storage areas shall be surrounded by an obscuring masonry wall or wood fence of at least eight feet in height. 
3.  Measures shall be taken to control dust, odor, or any other detectable impact of the materials being stored. 
E.  Hours of Operation. The City Council may establish restrictions on the hours of operation as a condition of conditional use approval. 
F.  Internal Vehicle Use Areas. All internal roads and vehicle circulation areas within the site shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. 
G.  Existing Heavy Industrial Uses. Heavy industrial uses and operations that lawfully existed at the date of adoption of this ordinance on properties zoned I-2 under the previous zoning ordinance are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Continuation of Use. Such uses may continue as permitted uses on said formerly zoned I-2 properties. Such uses or operations, including any structures and equipment relating to such uses or operations, may be improved, repaired, relocated, replaced or expanded on the property without being required to meet the requirements of subsections 138-4.420.C.1, C.2, D.1, D.2, and F. 
2.  Setbacks. Buildings associated with a heavy industrial use that lawfully existed at the date of adoption of this ordinance shall comply with the setback requirements of the former I-2 district, including a 100-foot front yard setback, 50-foot side yard setback, and 75-foot rear yard setback. 
3.  Outdoor Storage. Screening shall be provided for outdoor storage areas as required by footnote Q of the schedule of regulations. 
4.  Review Process. 
a.  Activities Permitted by Right. Any development activity on the property that requires administrative or sketch plan review under Table 1 [Section 138-2.200] of this ordinance shall be considered a permitted use, and shall be reviewed following the administrative or sketch plan review procedures, as the case may be. 
b.  Activities Requiring Conditional Use Approval. Any development activity on the property that requires site plan review under Table 1 [Section 138-2.200] of this ordinance shall be considered a conditional use requiring approval by the City Council under Article 2, Chapter 3 of this ordinance. The City Council may impose reasonable conditions in accordance with Section 138-2.301 in order to limit or restrict the off-site impacts of the heavy industrial uses and operations to those off-site impacts existing prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.420 which was amended and renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.420 - Industrial Uses: Light 
A.  All activities shall comply with the Performance Standards in Section 138-10.310. 
B.  Light industrial uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building or within a designated area enclosed on all sides by a six-foot tall obscuring fence or wall on those sides abutting or adjacent to residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.419 which was amended and renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.421 - Junkyards 
Such uses shall be entirely enclosed with an eight-foot obscuring wall. No burning on site is permitted. All industrial processes including the use of equipment for cutting, processing or packaging shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.417 which was renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.422 - Kennels 
The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, or training of three or more dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age either: 1) not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises; or 2) for commercial gain may be permitted only after review by the Planning Commission and City Council approval, provided the following requirements are met: 
A.  Minimum Site Area. Such activity shall be permitted only on a parcel of land not less than five acres in area and provided, further, that such parcel shall not abut or be adjacent to any lot or parcel which is part of a recorded residential subdivision. 
B.  Enclosures. All animals shall be kept in pens or cages designed, constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the character of the general area in which located, and such use will not affect the character of the same area in a negative way. 
C.  Enclosure Setbacks. All pens or cages shall be located not less than 100 feet from any property line, and all animals shall be kept therein or within a building. No animal shall be allowed to run at large. 
D.  Noise and Odor. Such activity shall be conducted so as not to be detrimental to any person, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive noise or odor. 
E.  Nuisance Prohibited. The keeping of the animals described in this subsection shall not constitute a nuisance to persons living in the surrounding area. Upon receipt of a written complaint filed by a neighbor with the City stating the animals constitute a nuisance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing with notice to all property owners within 300 feet of the property where the animals are kept. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine if in fact the animals do constitute a nuisance. 
If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the animals have and will likely continue to constitute a nuisance, the animals shall not be kept on the property after the date set by the Zoning Board of Appeals. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, there is reason to believe that reasonable measures will be taken to alleviate the nuisance associated with the animals, the Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a permit, renewable yearly, for the keeping of such animals with or without restrictions. If a hearing is held and a determination is made, the matter may not be reviewed again on a complaint of a neighbor unless there has been a change of circumstances. 
F.  No person shall allow animals under such person's control or ownership to constitute a nuisance. The violation of this subsection may be prosecuted in the district court or may be enjoined in the circuit court. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this ordinance, this subsection shall not be a limitation on, lessen the effect of, or interfere with any other City ordinance pertaining to animals, and the enforcement of it. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.418 which was amended and renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.423 - Nursing Homes, Convalescent Homes, and Assisted Living Facilities 
Nursing homes, convalescent homes, and assisted living facilities are subject to the following requirements, which shall supersede any other applicable requirements of this ordinance. 
A.  Setbacks. All buildings shall be set back 60 feet from any adjacent one-family residential district or 25 feet from any other zoning district. 
B.  Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 40 feet, except that buildings located within 100 feet of an R, one-family district shall have a maximum height of 30 feet. 
C.  Landscaping. A type D buffer shall be provided along any one-family residential district or property used for one family residential purpose. A type B buffer shall be provided along any property line adjacent to a zoning district other than one-family. Refer to Section 138-12.300.B for landscaping and buffering requirements. 
D.  Parking. Parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space for every two beds in the facility. 
E.  Floor Area. For Assisted Living Facilities all studio or efficiency units shall have a minimum floor area of 300 sq. ft., one bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 400 sq. ft., and two or more bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 550 sq. ft. 
F.  Common Areas and Facilities. Common areas (exclusive of corridors, entrance vestibules and hallways) that are incidental to and/or enhance any primary use shall be provided and shall amount to a minimum of 50 square feet per dwelling unit or bed in the facility. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, recreational rooms, meeting or social rooms, common kitchen areas, exercise facilities, laundry areas, or storage rooms for the use of residents. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 8, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.424 - Nursery Schools, Day Nurseries and Child Care Centers 
A.  Such facilities shall be located on major thoroughfares with an existing or proposed right-of-way of 120 feet. Additionally, the facility shall be on a corner lot or shall directly abut nonresidential zoning on at least one side, and such zoning shall be on the same side of the major thoroughfare. 
B.  Hours of operation shall not exceed 15 hours a day with closing time of not later than 9:00 p.m. 
C.  All parking and child dropoff areas shall be in the side or rear yard only. This requirement may be waived when an existing building that has front yard parking or circulation is being occupied by a nursery school, day nursery, or child care center. 
D.  Outdoor play areas shall be in the side or rear yard in the amount required by the Licensing Rules for Child Care Centers as set forth by the State of Michigan. 
E.  Parking, dropoff, and play areas shall be screened in a manner deemed sufficient by the Planning Commission to achieve the objective of screening and controlling noise levels. 
F.  Any trash receptacle shall be screened with a six-foot-high obscuring fence or wall,with evergreen screening provided on the three sides of the enclosure without access gates. 
G.  Lighting shall be shielded downward so as not to become a nuisance to abutting property. 
H.  Front, side and rear elevations of the building shall be provided to ensure that the use will have the appearance and character of residences in the vicinity. If there are no residences within 200 feet, in making a determination on the compatibility of such uses, the following architectural features shall be reviewed: 
1.  Roof pitch, overhang, and drainage. 
2.  Window sills and other window features. 
3.  Facade treatment (both material and appearance). 
4.  Entrance features. 
5.  Heating exhaust devices. 
6.  Penthouses or similar mechanical rooftop features shall be prohibited unless completely screened from adjacent properties and the adjacent public right-of-way. 
I.  Signs shall meet the requirements of Chapter 134 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
J.  The facility shall comply with applicable state licensing requirements and regulations. 
K.  Any other conditions which the Planning Commission and City Council deem necessary to ensure that the residential character of the neighborhood shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 183 , § 7, 6-18-2018) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.422 which was renumbered by Ord. No. 179 . The former § 138-4.424 entitled "Office Uses in the B-4 District" was deleted by said ordinance.  
SECTION 138-4.425 - Oil and Gas Wells 
The following requirements shall apply to the location, installation, drilling and operation of any well for the commercial extraction of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons in the City: 
1.  The location, installation, drilling, operation, maintenance, completion, and abandonment of oil and gas wells shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws, regulations, rules, orders and permits. 
2.  A new oil or gas well shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from a residential dwelling or place of worship, school, hospital, child care center or public park. A new oil or gas well shall also not be located closer than 330 feet from an adjoining property line, unless the adjoining property is pooled with the well site property, and unless the location is at least 660 feet from another well. This paragraph shall not be construed to restrict or prohibit underground horizontal drilling, directional or horizontal drilling where lawfully permitted by Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the setback distance requirements in this paragraph are in addition and supplemental to the spacing and setback requirements prescribed by Michigan Statutes, Administrative Regulations and Supervisor of Wells Orders and Instructions. 
3.  Prior to drilling the owner or operator of an oil or gas well shall provide to the City a copy of the Environmental Impact Assessment filed with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality in connection with a well permit under Part 615 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 524.61501 et seq., and the administrative rules promulgated under Part 615, as amended, and a hydrogeological study. The owner or operator shall install at least one groundwater monitoring well in close proximity to, and down gradient of, the well location prior to commencing drilling. The owner or operator shall collect a water sample from the monitoring well prior to commencing drilling operations and at monthly intervals following completion of drilling operations. Water samples shall be tested for specific conductance, chloride, benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene. The owner or operator shall provide the results of the sample analysis to the City Engineer within two business days after the results are available. 
4.  An oil or gas well site shall be completely enclosed with an eight-foot high fence designed to prevent unauthorized entry during well drilling, completion and operation. 
5.  Measures deemed adequate by the City Engineer shall be implemented at the oil or gas well site to prevent or control any objectionable dust, noise, vibrations, fumes or odors from leaving the property or adversely affecting or unreasonably disturbing persons living or working in the vicinity. All operations shall be conducted in accordance with the best practices determined by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for the production of oil, gas and hydrocarbons in urban and residential areas. 
6.  Exterior lighting shall be shielded to prevent unnecessary light or glare from being directed off-site and shall comply with Chapter 2 of Article 10 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
7.  The installation, drilling, operation and maintenance of oil and gas wells shall conform to the performance standards of Section 138-10.310 of the Zoning Ordinance in regard to airborne emissions, odors, gases, noise and vibration, hazardous substances, glare, fire and explosive hazards, and waste and rubbish dumping. 
8.  The completed wellhead structure shall not exceed 22 feet in height. The temporary drilling rig shall not exceed 110 feet in height. 
9.  An oil or gas well shall include measures or controls satisfactory to the City Engineer to prevent migration, run-off or discharge of any hazardous materials, including but not limited to, any chemicals, oil or gas produced or used in the drilling or production of oil or gas, to adjoining property or to the City of Rochester Hills sanitary sewer system, stormwater system or any natural or artificial watercourse, pond, lake or wetland. There shall be no off-site discharge of stormwater except to an approved drainage system in accordance with the City's engineering requirements. 
10.  All brine, mud, slush, saltwater, chemicals, wastewater, chemical, fluids or waste produced or used in the drilling or production of oil or gas shall, under the supervision of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, be safely, lawfully and properly disposed of to prevent infiltration of or damage to any fresh water well, groundwater, watercourse, pond, lake or wetland. Injection wells for disposal of brine or chemicals from production wells or other sources are prohibited in the City. 
11.  The oil or gas well site shall be kept in a clean and orderly condition, free of trash and debris, with weeds cut. Machinery and equipment not being used in the operation of the well shall not be stored or kept at the well site. 
12.  Landscaping and screening shall be provided to limit public view of wellheads and equipment after completion of the well drilling operation. Landscaping and screening shall be in accordance with Article 12 of the Zoning Ordinance. A Type E buffer shall be required. 
13.  No drilling rigs, construction vehicles, tanker trucks or heavy equipment used in connection with the drilling or production operations of oil or gas wells in the City shall be moved over the public roads and streets under the City's jurisdiction without obtaining approval from the City's Traffic Engineer, who shall specify the streets that may be used and any conditions that may apply. 
14.  The owner or operator shall provide to the City and its emergency responders any information necessary to assist the City's emergency responders with an emergency response plan and hazardous materials survey establishing written procedures to minimize any possible hazard resulting from the operation, and shall further provide to the City and its emergency responders up-to-date contact information and a means to contact a responsible representative of the owner or operator on a 24-hour basis. 
15.  Hydraulic fracturing, as defined in Michigan Admin. Code, R324.1401 et seq. (i.e., a well completion operation that involves pumping fluid and proppants into the target formation under pressure to create or propagate artificial fractures, or enhance natural fractures, for the purpose of improving the deliverability and production of hydrocarbons), is prohibited in and under the City. 
16.  (a)  The owner or operator of an oil or gas well shall maintain written procedures to minimize the hazards resulting from an emergency. A copy of these written procedures shall be filed with the City prior to commencement of drilling. These procedures shall at a minimum provide for the following: 
(1)  Prompt and effective response to emergencies including but not limited to: 
a.  Leaks or releases that may impact public health safety or welfare; 
b.  Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of the oil or gas well; 
c.  Natural disaster; 
d.  Effective procedures and protocols to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire, police, public officials and affected residents during an emergency; 
e.  The availability of personnel, equipment, tools and materials as necessary at the scene of an emergency; 
f.  Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and probability of accidental death or dismemberment; 
g.  Emergency shut down of the well operation; 
h.  The safe resumption of operations following an emergency or incident; and 
i.  A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the implementation of corrective measures. 
(b)  Upon discovery of an oil or gas well emergency or incident, the owner or operator shall immediately communicate to the 911 system the following information: 
(1)  A general description of the emergency or incident; 
(2)  The location of the emergency or incident; 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the person reporting the emergency or incident; 
(4)  The names of the well owner and operator; 
(5)  Whether or not any hazardous material is involved and identification of the hazardous material so involved; and 
(6)  Any other information as requested by the emergency dispatcher or other such official at the time of reporting the emergency or incident. 
17.  The requirements established in Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Supervisor of Wells Instruction 1-2015 (copy attached as Appendix 1, [on file with the City]) applicable to Oil and Gas Development in high population density areas are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and shall apply to all new oil and gas wells wherever located in the City. Such requirements are in addition and supplemental to the requirements of this section. In the event a requirement of this section is deemed to conflict with a requirement of the Supervisor of Wells Instruction, then the stricter requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 2, 5-18-2015) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 173 added new provisions to be codified as § 138-4.425 and § 3 of said ordinance renumbered existing §§ 138-4.425—138-4.445 as 138-4.426—138-4.446, as set out herein.  
SECTION 138-4.426 - Outdoor Display and Sales of Goods 
For standards regulating the outdoor display and sales of goods see Section 138-4.439 Roadside Stands/Markets, Christmas Tree Sales, and Temporary Outdoor Display and Sales of Goods. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 183 , § 9, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.427 - ORT Use Standards 
All uses in the ORT district shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Noise and Vibration. All uses located in the ORT district shall be designed and operated so as to produce no sound, glare or vibration discernable at the property line in excess of the normal intensity of street or traffic noises or vibration noticeable at such points. 
B.  Retail and Restaurant Uses may only be permitted in a building containing another non-retail or restaurant use. The total area devoted to restaurant and retail uses may not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the building. Parking requirements for restaurant and retail uses shall be calculated separately from the requirements for the other uses of the building. 
C.  Special Submission Requirements. The applicant shall provide the following submissions with the site plan application for any use allowed in the ORT office, research, technology district: 
1.  A development planning analysis, by a urban planner, registered architect or registered landscape architect, which describes the relation of the proposed project to existing uses and to the overall development of the ORT district, as envisaged in the City's master plan or in other official published planning materials. The analysis shall also set forth evidence that the proposed project, and the use or combination of uses proposed, will contribute to realization of the fullest economic potential of the district and demonstrate that the intent and purpose of this ORT district (i.e., intent) has been met. The analysis should include or be accompanied by a study or analysis showing the fiscal impact of the proposed project on the City and a market study with respect to the proposed uses. If a project is proposed to be developed in stages or phases, the development analysis shall take into account the time of each stage or phase. 
2.  Traffic studies demonstrating that the anticipated maximum traffic, including pedestrian traffic that might be generated by the project can be efficiently and safely accommodated by existing, abutting major streets and walkways, or by any future street improvements planned and committed to by the City. 
3.  Concurrency of facilities analysis demonstrating availability and adequacy of public utilities and infrastructure contemporaneously with the completion of the proposed development. If there are any deficiencies in the ability of the streets and walkways to accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed development or in the public utility systems the applicant shall submit plans and evidence of finance commitment to cure such deficiencies. 
The Planning Commission may, in its sole discretion, waive any of the required submissions or portions thereof set forth in items 1—3 when it determines that it has available sufficient data to provide the necessary information or when it determines that the information is not necessary or relevant to its evaluation of the proposed project. 
D.  Underground utilities. All lines for telephone, electric, television, and other similar services distributed by wire or cable shall be placed underground entirely throughout the development area, except for major thoroughfare right-of-way, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. 
E.  Compatibility of uses, materials and signs. 
1.  Site layouts and orientation of structures shall be designed so as to minimize adverse, visual impacts on developments on contiguous ORT and R, RCD, RM-1 or RMH zoning districts. For example, blank walls should not be placed opposite from and in close proximity to windows in a building in a contiguous ORT development. The site plan should attempt to maximize light, air, and vistas, so long as such attempts do not unreasonably interfere with the proposed use. 
2.  Where lots in the ORT district and adjacent or abutting an R, RCD, RM-1 or RMH district are contiguous or in close proximity and if the Planning Commission determines that it would be beneficial to the lots as a whole and to the sound development of the district, the Planning Commission may develop and adopt standards relating to architectural treatment, materials and signage designed to achieve a compatible appearance. Such standards shall be determined based on the City's master plan, other related urban design studies, and on the particular site plan under consideration and as recommended by the City's Planning Department and/or Planning Consultant. 
F.  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
1.  Access to the development shall be provided in such locations and number so as not to create unnecessary burden or unnecessary traffic hazards on exterior roadways, considering the need to provide safe and efficient internal traffic circulation. 
2.  The site plan shall be designed to provide safe and efficient internal traffic circulation and to protect pedestrians from unnecessary exposure to vehicular safety hazards. 
3.  Where the lot is contiguous to other ORT zoned land, the Planning Commission may, if it determines that there is a likelihood of vehicular or pedestrian traffic between the lot and such other contiguous land, require that provisions be made for safe and direct traffic connection between them. 
4.  Whenever existing, abutting major streets and walkways and any planned and committed improvements will not be adequate to efficiently and safely accommodate the anticipated maximum traffic reasonably expected by the proposed development, a condition for development may be imposed to require the applicant to provide passing, deceleration and acceleration lanes on abutting roads to cure any such deficiencies. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015)  
SECTION 138-4.428 - Outdoor Dining 
Outdoor dining and table service, including but not limited to, patios and sidewalk cafes, are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  The sales and service of food outdoors shall be incidental to a similar principal use indoors and adjacent to that principal use. 
B.  Outdoor dining areas shall not obstruct the entrance to any building or sidewalk. If outdoor dining areas are located on a sidewalk in front of a building, a minimum five-foot wide clear pedestrian travelway shall be maintained on the sidewalk or pathway. 
C.  Temporary, manufactured or free standing food service providers are not considered outdoor dining uses. 
D.  Encroachment onto the public right-of-way for the purposes of displaying merchandise is not permitted. 
E.  The outside table service shall be located in a manner which will not interfere with visibility, vehicular or pedestrian mobility or access to City or public utility facilities. The determination of whether the outside table service (or any part thereof) interferes shall be made by The Planning Department at the time of application based on the characteristics of each proposed site. 
F.  The height of any barrier or installed landscaping shall not exceed three feet, six inches. Any barriers permitted in a public right-of-way shall be entirely portable. 
G.  Signs are not allowed in the outside table service area with the exception of a menu sign. Business names may be allowed on the valance of awnings and/or umbrellas. 
H.  All outside table services must be readily accessible to and useable by individuals with disabilities. 
I.  Approval of a right-of-way use permit by the agency with jurisdiction. 
J.  Use and occupation of the public right-of-way which is allowed under this ordinance may be temporarily suspended, without prior notice or hearing, when, in the discretion of the Planning Department any such use, occupation or obstruction may interfere with public safety efforts or programs, special events, street improvement activities, construction activities, cleaning efforts, or other similar activities or with the health, welfare or safety of the citizens of the City. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015)  
SECTION 138-4.429 - Outdoor Recreation, Commercial 
Commercial outdoor recreational space for amusement parks, miniature golf, golf driving ranges, athletic facilities and clubs are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
B.  Children's amusement parks must be fenced on all sides with a four-foot, six-inch wall or fence. 
C.  Rebound tumbling facilities must be fenced on all sides used for trampoline activity. Such fence shall be no less than six feet high. Pits shall not exceed four feet in depth, shall be drained at all times and shall be filled with earth to grade when the use is discontinued. All manufacturers' specifications for spacing, safety and construction shall be complied with. 
D.  No loudspeaker or public address system shall be used except by the written consent of the City Council where it is deemed that no public nuisance or disturbance will be established. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015)  
SECTION 138-4.430 - Outdoor Sales of Used Vehicles 
A.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
B.  Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
C.  An obscuring wall or fence four feet six inches in height must be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for residential use. 
D.  No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015)  
SECTION 138-4.431 - Outdoor Storage 
A.  Where Permitted. 
1.  Industrial Districts. Outdoor storage of equipment, vehicles, and/or other materials may occur on the same site as and accessory to a principal use or as a principal use. If the outdoor storage constitutes a principal use the storage area shall comply with the front and rear yard setbacks of the industrial district. 
2.  Business Districts. The outdoor storage of any equipment, vehicles and/or other materials shall only occur on the same site as and accessory to a principal use. The materials being stored shall be incidental to and related to the principal use of the site, and shall not constitute a second permitted use. 
3.  REC Districts. Outdoor storage of equipment, vehicles, and/or other materials may occur on the same site as and accessory to a principal use or as a principal use. 
B.  Screening. 
1.  Any storage shall be screened from public view from a public street and from adjoining residential properties by an enclosure consisting of a wall, opaque fence, or opaque evergreen landscape screen not less than the height of the equipment, vehicles and all materials to be stored. 
2.  Any storage shall be screened from adjacent business or office districts by an enclosure consisting of a wall, opaque fence or opaque evergreen screening not less than six feet in height. 
3.  Screening shall not be required on the interior of the industrial district where the storage area is not visible from a thoroughfare or any zoning district other than an industrial district. 
4.  The type and style of screening shall be approved by the reviewing authority. 
C.  Walls and Fences. Masonry walls or wood fences shall be repaired, maintained and kept in good condition by the owners. The maximum height for any freestanding screening wall or fence shall be eight feet, but walls may be taller if they are wing walls that attach to a building. If screening higher than eight feet is required to conceal the material or vehicles being stored, the screening shall consist of evergreen screening sufficient to form an opaque screen equal to the height of the material or equipment within three years of planting. 
D.  Dumpster and trash storage areas are subject to the requirements of Section 138-10.311. 
( Ord. No. 581, § 1, 11-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 170 , § 9, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015)  
SECTION 138-4.432 - Pet Boarding Facility 
A pet boarding facility is a business for the temporary boarding and care of common household pets generally during daytime hours, but in some cases including overnight boarding. Pet boarding facilities may provide related services such as grooming or training, but no animals may be bred or sold at a pet boarding facility unless the pet boarding facility is accessory to a principal retail use. Pet boarding facilities are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  A maximum of ten percent of the gross floor area of the building or lease space may be used for retail sales of goods related to pets. 
B.  Pets may be boarded at the facility for a maximum of 168 continuous hours (one week). 
C.  On-site vehicular circulation shall be configured to accommodate vehicles within the boundaries of the site. In no case shall vehicles awaiting drop-off or pick-up of a pet be allowed to encroach onto a public or private street. 
D.  Any pets being boarded overnight shall be confined to the building from the hours of 9;00 p.m. until 6:30 a.m. 
E.  Pet boarding facilities shall be constructed, maintained, and operated so that the sounds and smell of animals cannot be discerned outside of the building. Outdoor runs shall be maintained so that no odors are discernible from adjacent properties. 
F.  Outdoor runs where pets will be permitted either on or off-leash shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residential zoning district. The 100-foot setback notwithstanding, outdoor runs shall be located as far as practicable from any adjacent residential zoning district. Any outdoor runs where pets will be permitted off-leash shall be surrounded by a minimum 54-inch tall fence. If the fence will be visible from any adjacent residential district or road right-of-way, the fence shall be decorative in nature. 
G.  Outdoor runs shall be fully enclosed with a decorative fence. 
H.  The Planning Commission may require a landscaped buffer or solid wall to be provided between the outdoor run and any adjacent residential district if the location of the proposed outdoor run could negatively impact adjacent or nearby residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 179 added new provisions set out as § 138-4.432, therefor existing §§ 138-4.432—138-4.437 have been renumbered as §§ 136-4.433—138-4.438.  
SECTION 138-4.433 - Places of Worship; Libraries and Museums 
Churches and publicly owned and operated libraries and museums may be permitted in any zoning district subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The site shall be so located as to provide for ingress to and egress from such site directly onto a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way at least 120 feet in width as shown on the current City master thoroughfare plan. For Places of Worship, Libraries and Museums established before the adoption of this ordinance, ingress and egress onto a major or secondary thoroughfare with an existing or planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width shall meet this condition. 
B.  Buildings of greater than maximum height as allowed by Section 138-5.100 of this ordinance may be allowed, provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
C.  Steeples, bell towers, and similar architectural features are exempt from the height requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  A Landscape Buffer D shall be required in the rear and side yards. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 182 , § 3, 2-5-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.434 - Plant Material Nurseries 
A.  The property shall contain at least five acres and shall be located so as to provide all ingress and egress directly from and onto a major thoroughfare. 
B.  All required yards shall not be less than 50 feet wide when abutting an R residential district. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.435 - Private Recreational Areas 
A.  When the proposed site is not to be situated on a lot of record, the proposed site shall have one property line abutting a major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet as shown on the current master thoroughfare plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide ingress and egress directly onto such major thoroughfare. 
B.  Front, side and rear yards shall, respectively, be at least 40 feet wide and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, grass and terrace areas. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. 
C.  All lighting used to light the grounds shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from all residential lands which adjoin the site. 
D.  All parking shall be surfaced as required in Article 11 of this ordinance. 
E.  Whenever the parking plan is so laid out as to beam automobile headlights toward any residentially zoned land, an obscuring wall or fence or an obscuring coniferous planting six feet in height shall be provided along that entire side of the parking area. 
F.  Whenever a swimming pool is involved, such pool shall be provided with a protective fence six feet in height and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate or turnstile. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.436 - Privately Operated Recreational Facilities on Publicly Owned Parkland 
Privately operated recreational facilities located on publicly owned park properties, which shall be limited only to those uses set forth in the City master recreation plan, may be permitted in any zoning district subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Buildings of greater than maximum height as allowed in Section 138-5.100 may be allowed provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
B.  Front, side and rear yards shall, respectively, be at least 50 feet wide and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, grass, and terrace areas. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. Where such facility directly or indirectly abuts residentially zoned property, adequate screening in accordance with the requirements of Article 12 shall be provided. 
C.  All lighting used to light the grounds shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from all residential lands which adjoin the site. Lighting shall comply with Article 10, Chapter 2 (Exterior Lighting). 
D.  All parking shall be surfaced as required in the general provisions for off-street parking requirements. 
E.  Whenever the parking plan is so laid out as to beam automobile headlights toward any residentially zoned land, an obscuring wall or fence or an obscuring coniferous planting six feet in height shall be provided along that entire side of the parking area. 
F.  A loudspeaker or public address system may be permitted by the City Council following the procedures for a conditional use where it is deemed that no public nuisance or disturbance will be established. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 183 , § 12, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.437 - Private and Public Stables 
A.  Private stables may be permitted by the Planning Commission as an ancillary use to a private residence in a single-family district. Private stables shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Prior to granting a permit the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to receive public comment regarding the effect that establishment of a private stable will have on the surrounding neighborhood. The public hearing shall be held in accordance with the procedures of Section 138-1.203. 
2.  Two acres of land shall be provided for one horse, and for each additional horse stabled thereon one additional acre of land shall be provided. The property shall be under control or use of the permit holder with either title or lease. 
3.  Confinement areas and/or stables shall, in all instances, be located in the rear and/or side yard. Horses shall be confined to fenced pastures, paddocks or stables unless harnessed and under the direct control of a person. 
4.  Buildings or areas designated for the purpose of feeding and/or sheltering horses, excluding grazing areas, shall be located no less than 100 feet from the perimeter of the site. This 100-foot requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission if it determines the location of the building is not likely to create a sanitary or noise problem for adjacent residents. 
5.  No storage of manure or odor-producing or dust-producing substances or any activity producing odor or dust shall be permitted within 100 feet of any property line. 
6.  In each instance when the Planning Commission issues a permit for a private stable, the commission shall find that there has been compliance with the conditions of this subsection, that the activity will not or has not been a nuisance to residents in the area, is compatible with adjacent land uses and is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
B.  Public stables, riding academies, and hunt clubs, where permitted, are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The uses may be permitted on parcels of land that are at least 40 contiguous acres or more in area. 
2.  Bridle paths, and all other riding areas, shall be within the confines of the proposed property. 
3.  The stable shall be so situated on the site so as to be at least 300 feet from any residences on abutting parcels or lots. 
4.  Paddocks, instruction areas, pastures, and areas for the purpose of feeding horses shall be confined to the site and shall be located at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the site. 
5.  Ingress and egress to the stable area shall be provided solely through the parcel in question, which shall abut a public right-of-way. 
6.  Adequate off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the site, located at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the site. 
7.  Manure shall be kept in tightly covered boxes and shall be regularly sprayed or limed so as to control flies and other insects. 
8.  Floodlights or any other source of artificial lighting provided to facilitate night riding activities shall be properly shielded or directed away from residences or abutting properties. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.438 - Raising and Keeping of Animals 
A.  The keeping of the following animals will be allowed without a permit under the following circumstances in any zoning district, unless there are other sections in this ordinance which are in conflict, and the raising and keeping of such animals is not for the purpose of breeding or selling them as a source of income: 
1.  Common household pets such as dogs, cats, etc., but not including fish or marine animals less than 20 pounds, as long as there are not more than three of any one species permanently boarded or kept. The keeping of more than three common household pets of any one species shall qualify a house as a kennel, subject to the regulations of Section 138-4.418. 
2.  Livestock, as long as there are no more than three animals and the parcel or lot shall be at least two acres in area. 
3.  Poultry, if there are no more than 12 and the parcel or lot is at least one acre in area. 
4.  Litters shall be exempt from these requirements until weaned. 
B.  The keeping of the animals mentioned in subsection A., of this section shall not constitute a nuisance to persons living in the surrounding area. Upon receipt of a written complaint filed by a neighbor with the City stating the animals constitute a nuisance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing in accordance with the procedures of Section 138-1.203. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine if in fact the animals do constitute a nuisance. 
C.  If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the animals have and will likely continue to constitute a nuisance, the animals shall not be kept on the property after the date set by the Zoning Board of Appeals. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, there is reason to believe that reasonable measures will be taken to alleviate the nuisance associated with the animals, the Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a permit, renewable yearly, for the keeping of such animals with or without restrictions. If a hearing is held and a determination is made, the matter may not be reviewed again on a complaint of a neighbor unless there has been a change of circumstances. 
D.  No person shall allow animals under the person's control or ownership to constitute a nuisance. The violation of this section may be prosecuted in the district court or may be enjoined in the circuit court. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, this section shall not be a limitation on, lessen the effect of, nor interfere with any other City ordinance pertaining to animals and the enforcement of it. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-4.439 - Roadside Stands/Markets, Christmas Tree Sales and Temporary Outdoor Display and Sales of Goods 
A.  In General. 
1.  Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. 
2.  Any lighting shall be directed and controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent property owners or motorists. A permit shall be obtained from the building department before any lighting is installed. 
3.  The sale shall not require or involve the erection of any capital improvements of a permanent structural nature and shall not require or involve any outdoor storage of items not related to the sale. 
4.  Adequate sanitary facilities shall be available for persons tending to the sale. 
5.  One sign located on the premises where the sale is located shall be permitted. The sign shall be located on private property outside of the public right-of-way and shall be limited to six feet in height and 12 square feet in area. The sign shall be removed from the premises when the activity ceases. No balloons, festoons, inflatables or other similar devices designed to attract attention to the site or use shall be permitted. 
6.  An adequate trash receptacle for the disposal of refuse generated on-site shall be required and refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate on-site for more than 24-hour periods. 
7.  The sale shall not take place in the public right-of-way within the City, and adequate off-street parking and ingress and egress shall be provided and maintained in a usable and dust-free condition. 
8.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the operation shall be located on property owned or leased by the operator. 
9.  The operation must comply with all otherwise applicable laws and ordinance regulations of this Code. 
B.  Roadside Stands/Markets and Christmas Tree Sales. It is the intent of the City not to allow the establishment of permanent commercial operations in noncommercial districts. However, seasonal roadside stands and markets for the sale of produce and flowers when sold with produce and Christmas tree sales, including wreaths, boughs, grave blankets and garlands, may be permitted on a temporary basis by obtaining a permit from the building department. The permit shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Limitations. Roadside stands and markets and Christmas tree sales may be permitted in any district, subject to the following exclusions: 
a.  Christmas tree sales shall not be permitted on property that is part of a recorded residential subdivision or one-family residential detached condominium development. 
b.  Roadside stands and markets shall be permitted on property that is part of a recorded residential subdivision or one-family residential detached condominium development only if all of the produce to be sold shall be or was grown on the immediate property and there is an occupied residential dwelling on the property. 
2.  Restrictions. The following restrictions shall govern the issuance of permits: 
a.  If a portable roadside stand or market is to be located on property that is part of a recorded residential subdivision or one-family residential detached condominium development, the permit shall be restricted to the owner of that property, and the roadside stand or market shall be operated and staffed only by the owner and/or resident of that property. The permit may be issued for an initial two-month period between May 1 and October 31 within a calendar year, and it may be renewed once for one additional one-month period between May 1 and October 31 of the same calendar year. There shall be no fee for this renewal. A roadside stand or market shall not be operated on property that is part of a recorded residential subdivision or one-family residential detached condominium development for more than three months between May 1 and October 31 of a calendar year. 
b.  A permit may be issued for roadside stand or market only for the period from May 1 to October 31 of a calendar year. A permit for Christmas tree sales may be issued only for the period from November 15 to December 31 of a calendar year. Storage, display and sale of Christmas trees and associated items shall be permitted only during this period. 
c.  Any structure used for the sale of produce or Christmas tree sales shall be portable and shall be removed from the roadside upon expiration of the permit for a roadside stand or market or Christmas tree sales. If the property is undeveloped, any portable structure shall be removed from the property upon expiration of the permit. Written authorization from the owner of the property shall be required prior to the City issuing a permit. 
d.  Christmas tree sales shall not be located within 100 feet of a residential dwelling, other than a dwelling on the property on which the trees are sold. Roadside stands or markets selling any produce that was not grown on the immediate property shall not be located within 200 feet of a residential dwelling, other than a dwelling on the property on which the roadside stand or market is located. 
C.  Temporary Outdoor Display and Sales of Goods. Except as regulated in Section 138-4.439, for purposes of this section, temporary outdoor sales events, commonly referred to as "tent sales", that meet all of the following criteria are permitted on zoning lots in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts. The outdoor display and sales of goods shall require a special events permit from the Building Department. For purposes of this section, the term "temporary outdoor sales event" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 79-2 of this Code. 
1.  The temporary outdoor sales event must be accessory to an existing principal use on the same property as the event is held. 
2.  The operator of the temporary outdoor sales event must obtain a license under Chapter 79 of this Code. 
3.  The temporary outdoor sales event shall not exceed more than 14 consecutive days and a total of 28 days during any 12-month period. 
4.  The temporary outdoor sales event shall have up to five days to establish the temporary use including the erection of tents, placement of merchandise and placement of temporary signs. 
5.  A temporary outdoor sales event may include up to one primary temporary tent plus one additional temporary tent or temporary storage container or trailer. Sales and storage shall be limited to the approved tent(s) and, when provided, storage container. No tent shall exceed 2,400 square feet in area nor shall it be greater than 20 feet in height. 
6.  If a temporary outdoor sales event has a tent, storage container or trailer for the purpose of temporary storage of related merchandise, sales or a combination of storage and sales, the exterior design, appearance and color scheme of the tent and/or container/trailer shall be in keeping with the general color scheme of the surrounding development or a neutral color. For example, a bright yellow or orange tent and/or container/trailer located in a shopping center with a brick façade shall not be permitted. When both a container/trailer and tent are proposed, the container/trailer shall not be placed closer to the street than the tent. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 183 , § 10, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.440 - State Licensed Residential Facilities 
The following regulations apply to all state licensed residential facilities, as defined by this ordinance and as licensed by the State of Michigan; and to all other managed or state licensed residential facilities. 
State licensed residential facilities with fewer than seven residents include family day care homes, foster family homes, foster family group homes, and adult foster care family homes. 
State licensed residential facilities with more than six but not more than 12 residents include group child day care homes, and adult foster care small group homes. 
1.  Licensing. In accordance with applicable state laws, all state licensed residential facilities shall be registered with or licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall comply with applicable standards for such facilities. 
2.  Separation Requirements. New state licensed residential facilities with seven or more residents shall be located a minimum of 1,500 feet from any other state licensed residential facility with seven or more residents, as measured between the nearest points on the property lines of the lots in question. The Planning Commission may permit a smaller separation between such facilities upon determining that such action will not result in an excessive concentration of such facilities in a single neighborhood or in the City overall. 
3.  Compatibility with Neighborhood. Any state licensed residential facility and the property included therewith shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
4.  Group Child Day Care Homes. In addition to the preceding subsection, the following regulations shall apply to all group child day care homes (with more than six but fewer than 12 residents), as defined in this ordinance. 
a.  Outdoor Play Area. A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area shall be provided and maintained per child at the licensed capacity of the day care home, provided that the overall play area shall not be less than 1,500 square feet. The play area shall be located in the rear yard area of the group day care home premises and shall be suitably fenced and screened. 
b.  Pick-Up and Drop-Off. Adequate areas shall be provided for employee and resident parking, and pick-up and drop-off of children or adults, in a manner that minimizes pedestrian-vehicle conflicts and allows maneuvers without affecting traffic flow on the public street. 
c.  Hours of Operation. Group child day care homes shall not operate more than 16 hours per day. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 183 , § 11, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-4.441 - Temporary Construction 
A.  Temporary construction buildings and/or construction activities shall be allowed in any zone for a period of one year, if a permit is obtained from the public services department. A second year may be allowed if there appears to be no unreasonable delay in the activities and there appears to be a necessity. 
B.  Temporary construction activities with or without temporary buildings shall be defined as construction activities other than actual construction of buildings approved pursuant to a building permit. They include, but not by way of limitation, a construction yard for the development of a subdivision or multiple project, a cement- or asphalt-making operation for streets or roads in the City and other similar activities. 
C.  The public services department shall determine, before issuing a permit, whether the proposed temporary construction building and/or construction activity is necessary and if it is necessary that it should be located at the proposed location. The public services department shall also find that the proposed activity does not place excessive use on the sanitary sewer and/or water system, nor create a hazardous fire condition. In granting the approval, the public services department may set such conditions as appear necessary to minimize disturbance to the area and the surrounding land uses. As a condition of approval, the public services department shall require the posting of a cash bond, corporate surety bond or letter of credit to guarantee compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable City ordinances, standards, rules and regulations, and a proper cleanup of the site at a time indicated in the permit. The fees to be charged for the issuance of the permit and for inspections by the City shall be as set by resolution of the City Council. The applicant shall also file with the City comprehensive liability insurance in amounts of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per occurrence. 
D.  Activities allowed pursuant to this section shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  All roads used for hauling on the site or for ingress or egress, on and off the site, shall be kept dust-free by use of a method, material or substance approved by the department of public service. 
2.  Work areas shall be kept clean and clear. 
3.  Work areas shall be posted with the owner's and operator's names and phone numbers. 
4.  Work yards shall be fenced or otherwise made safe. 
5.  Truck crossings and other means of ingress and egress shall be posted 200 feet therefrom in either direction to warn motorists. 
6.  Construction or associated construction activity shall be permitted only between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, exclusive of holidays. Construction on Sunday or a holiday shall be authorized only by special written permission granted by the mayor where, in his discretion, hardship is shown. For purposes of this subsection, the term "holiday" shall mean the day on which New Year's Day, Easter, Memorial Day, July Fourth (Independence Day), Labor Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas is officially celebrated. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015)  
SECTION 138-4.442 - Utilities 
Utility and public service facilities and uses such as gas regulator stations and electrical substations, may be permitted in any zoning district when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such facilities in order to serve the immediate vicinity, and when the following conditions are met: 
A.  Adequate screening in the form of a masonry wall, redwood fence, berm or greenbelt planting shall be provided to serve as a buffer between the utility and adjacent residential area. The type and quantity of screening landscaping is subject to Planning Department approval. 
B.  All requirements of Section 138-10.310 pertaining to performance standards. 
C.  Outdoor storage yards are permitted in the I district, but are prohibited in all other zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015)  
SECTION 138-4.443 - Vehicle and Equipment Storage Yards 
Space may be rented for construction and contractor's equipment so long as all property lines shall abut land zoned I, industrial. The storage shall be enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting a public thoroughfare. The extent of such obscuring wall or fence shall be as determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of the proposed and actual usage. The wall or fence shall be subject further to the requirements of Section 138-12.104. 
(Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.438 which was renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.444 - Veterinary Hospitals or Clinics 
A.  All activities shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building. 
B.  Veterinary hospitals or clinics located in the B-2 district shall be set back at least 40 feet from any R, RCD, RM-1, or RMH zoning district with a Type C buffer provided along any common property line. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.443 which was renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.445 - Waste Lagoon Ponds 
Because waste lagoon ponds are industrially oriented and permanent in character and because of technical treatments necessary for the proper operation of lagoon ponds, they may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  In no instance shall a waste lagoon pond be closer than 500 feet to an existing or proposed street right-of-way or abutting residential district. 
B.  An eight-foot fence shall be erected around the entire site or lagoon pond, at the property owner's option, and control gates, etc., shall be installed. 
C.  In lieu of a wall or fence an earth embankment in the form of a berm with a minimum height of eight feet may be utilized at the discretion of the City Council upon recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.444 which was renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
SECTION 138-4.446 - Wireless Telecommunication Facilities 
Wireless telecommunication facilities shall conform and be subject to the following: 
A.  Wireless Telecommunicaiton Facility Support Structures. 
1.  Limitation on new support structures. It is the City's policy to minimize the proliferation of new wireless telecommunication facility support structures in favor of collocation of such facilities on existing structures. No new wireless telecommunication facility support structures shall be constructed unless the applicant for the new structure demonstrates, and the Planning Commission finds, that collocation on an existing structure is not adequate or is not reasonably feasible. 
2.  Monopole design required. All wireless telecommunication facility support structures, unless otherwise provided, shall have a monopole, unipole or similar non-lattice, single vertical structure design and shall be further designed to accommodate at least four wireless telecommunication arrays of antennas or panels. The applicant shall submit an affidavit by a design engineer registered in the state attesting that the support structure can support at least four wireless telecommunication arrays of antennas or panels. The site plan for any new support structure shall expressly state that the support structure shall be erected and available for collocation, and shall also show the proposed location of the applicant's and collocators' equipment shelters and related facilities. 
3.  Maximum height. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not exceed 185 feet in height, as measured from the average grade at the base of the support structure to the top of the antenna or panel. In no case shall the height exceed any applicable height limitation established by county, state or federal regulations. 
4.  One support structure per lot. Except in the I zoning district, not more than one wireless telecommunication support structure may be located on a single lot. 
5.  Location on lot. If located on the same lot as another permitted use, a wireless telecommunication facility shall not be located in a front yard or side yard abutting a street, except that the Planning Commission may approve a support structure utilizing camouflage or stealth design for location in a front or side yard abutting a street if the Planning Commission determines that location will better facilitate a satisfactory and harmonious relationship with existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhood. 
6.  Setbacks. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be set back from the lot line a distance not less than one-half of its height or 65 feet, whichever is greater. However, when wireless telecommunication facilities are located on premises which abut a lot that is residentially zoned, the minimum setback from the lot line abutting the residentially zoned lot shall be equal to the height of the facility. All setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the facility. 
7.  Maintenance and removal. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance with manufacturers' specifications and the building code. Upon discontinuance or cessation of use, the facility shall be removed by the owner thereof. 
8.  Signs. No sign shall be attached to or displayed on a wireless telecommunication facility. No signals or lights or other means of illumination shall be permitted on a facility unless required by state or federal law or regulation. The facility shall have a neutral color intended to blend with the surroundings. 
9.  Equipment shelters. If the wireless telecommunication facility is located on a site which is already improved with another building or structure, and an equipment shelter is proposed, the equipment shelter shall be constructed with exterior facade materials similar to the principal building or structure on the site. 
B.  Collocation. 
1.  Existing structures. Wireless telecommunication antennas or panels may be installed on existing buildings or structures provided such antennas or panels, and their supporting structure, do not exceed the height limitation set forth in subsection A.3. of this section. 
2.  Exemption from setbacks. Any wireless telecommunication antenna or panel mounted on an existing building or structure which does not increase the height of the building or structure shall be exempt from the setback requirements of subsection A.6. of this section. 
C.  Wireless telecommunication facilities located in one-family residential zones shall meet one of the following requirements: 
1.  Existing nonresidential building. The wireless telecommunication facility shall be mounted directly onto an existing, nonresidential building in a manner that does not increase the height of the building. The facility shall consist of material or color which is compatible with the exterior treatment of the building; 
2.  Existing nonresidential structure. The wireless telecommunication facility shall be located on an existing, nonresidential support structure, pole or tower such as a public or private utility tower, pole or structure, but not on a building. Such facility shall consist of a material or color which is compatible with the tower, pole or structure. Antennas or panels may extend above the top of the tower, pole or structure not more than 30 feet; however, the height to the top of the antenna or panel may not exceed 165 feet; or 
3.  New support structure on public property. The wireless telecommunication facility shall be located on a new support structure situated on public property. Any facility located on public property which is used for passive recreation shall be designed to minimize the conspicuousness of the facility (e.g., utilizing camouflaged or stealth designed poles or existing environmental features as screening). All such facilities located on public property shall meet the setback requirements of subsections A.6. and B.2. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 173 , § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 1, 8-8-2016) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 138-4.445 which was renumbered by Ord. No. 179 .  
ARTICLE 5 - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 1. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 
 
SECTION 138-5.100 - Schedule of Regulations 
Table 6. Schedule of Regulations - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
District 	Minimum Lot 	Maximum 
Building Height A 	Minimum Yard Setback (feet) 	Min. 

Floor Area 

(sq. ft.) 	Max. Lot Coverage 
(all 
buildings) 
	Area 
(sq. ft.) 	Width (ft.) 	Stories 	Feet 	Front 	Side 
(each) 	Side 
(total) 	Rear 		
RE 	43,560 	120 	2 	35 	40 B 	15 C, D 	30 D 	35 T 	1,500 	25% 
R-1 	20,000 	100 	2 	35 	40 B 	15 C, D 	30 D 	35 T 	1,500 	25% 
R-2 	15,000 	100 	2 	35 	40 B 	15 C, D 	30 D 	35 T 	1,400 	25% 
R-3 	12,000 	90 	2 	30 U 	30 B 	10 C, D 	20 D 	35 T 	1,200 	30% 
R-4 	9.600 w 	80 w 	2 	30 u 	25 BJ 	10 C, D 	20 D 	35 T 	912 	30% 
RM-1 	See Article 6, Chapter 1 for multiple family district regulations 
RCD 	See Article 6, Chapter 2 for one-family residential cluster district regulations 
RMH 	See Article 6, Chapter 4 for manufactured housing park district regulations 
MR 	See Article 6, Chapter 5 for mixed residential (overlay) district regulations 
 
Table 7. Schedule of Regulations - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
District 	Minimum Lot 	Maximum 
Building Height 	Minimum Yard Setback (feet) 	Min. 

Floor Area 

(sq. ft.) 	Max. Lot Coverage 
(all 
buildings) 
	Area 
(sq. ft.) 	Width (ft.) 	Stories 	Feet 	Front 	Side 
(each) 	Side 
(total) 	Rear 		
B-1 	(E) 	(E) 	2 	30 	25 N 	0 F, N 	50 N 	50 I 	— 	— 
B-2 	(E) 	(E) 	2 	30 	50 N 	0 F, N 	50 N 	50 I 	— 	— 
B-3 	5 acres E 	400 E 	2 	30 	75 N 	25 F, N 	50 N 	75 H, I 	— 	— 
B-5 	(E) 	(E) 	2 	30 	25 J, N, S 	0 G, J, N, S 	50 J, N 	50 I, J 	— 	— 
O-1 	(E) 	(E) 	3 V 	42 V 	35 	0 F 	50 	35 	— 	— 
ORT 	(E) 	(E) 	3 V 	40 V 	30 J 	0 P, R 	0 P, R 	30 P, R 		
I 	(E) 	(E) 	3 	42 	50 L, N, O 	50 M, N, O, P, Q 	100 N, O, P 	50 N, O, P, Q 	— 	— 
SP 	(E) 	(E) 	2 	30 	50 	50 	100 	50 	— 	— 
CI 	See Article 6, Chapter 3 for commercial improvement district regulations 
FB 	See Article 8 for flex business (overlay) district regulations 
REC 	See Article 6, Chapter 6 for regional employment center district regulations 
 
* Superscript text: see footnotes following this section. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 6, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 581, § 6, 11-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 170 , § 10, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 174 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 2, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-5.101 - Footnotes to the Schedule of Regulations 
A.  Building Height Measurement. In the R-1 through R-4 and RE districts, building height shall be measured from the average grade on the front façade of the building. 
B.  Average Front Setback. If there are existing homes within 200 feet of a subject lot, on the same side of the street, that have an average setback that differs from the front setback as required within this ordinance by more than ten feet, then the average front setback shall be used as the required front setback, provided, however, that in no instance shall a front yard setback be reduced to less than 20 feet. 
C.  Corner Lots. For corner lots, the side street yard shall not be less than 15 feet in the R-3 and R-4 district and 25 feet in the R-1, R-2, and RE districts. 
D.  Reduced Side Yard on Narrow Lots. If the lots or parcel is less than 60 feet in width, one side yard may be reduced to five feet providing the total of the two side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet, except as denoted in Section 138-5.101.C above. 
E.  Nonresidential Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be determined by the use meeting all minimum yard requirements and all other requirements of this ordinance. In B-3 districts, parcels with less area or width than the minimum requirement may be permitted provided all of the following exist: 
1.  The parcel is part of a larger cohesive development. 
2.  The parcel is accessed through existing access points. Additional access points may only be constructed upon approval by the Planning Commission. 
3.  A covenant restriction prohibiting additional ingress/egress drives from abutting public thoroughfares without Planning Commission approval, shall be recorded at Oakland County. 
4.  Cross access easement(s) must be provided to neighboring parcels. 
5.  Any parcel created as a result of this ordinance shall not be entitled to a separate freestanding monument sign. 
F.  Side Yard Setbacks. Side yards shall comply with the following: 
1.  If walls of structures facing interior side lot lines contain windows or other openings, the minimum yard requirements in the schedule of regulations shall be met. 
2.  Where B-1 and B-2 districts abut R, RCD, RM-1 and MH districts, the minimum side yard requirement shall be 50 feet. This requirement shall not apply to the CI district. 
3.  Where a B-3 district abuts R, RCD, RM-1, MH, SP and CI districts, the minimum side yard shall be 75 feet. 
4.  Where an O-1 district abuts an R, RCD, RM-1 or MH district, the minimum side yard requirement shall be 30 feet. 
5.  In B-1, B-2 and O-1 districts, a 25-foot setback is required for a side street yard on a corner lot and for the exterior side of parcel or lot on the exterior of the district. 
6.  In the B-3 district a front yard setback shall be required on any street frontage and from any adjacent parcel not zoned B-3. 
G.  Side Yard Setbacks Adjacent to a Residential District. Where a B-5 district abuts R, RCD, RM-1 or MH districts, the minimum side yard requirement shall be 50 feet. 
H.  Rear Yard Setback Adjacent to a Residential District. Where a B-3 district abuts an R, RCD, RM-1 or MH district, the minimum rear yard shall be 100 feet. The rear yard may be reduced to 50 feet with the approval of the Planning Commission after a public hearing in accordance with Section 138-1.203 and submittal of a plan which ensures there will be no significant negative impacts on the adjacent property as a result of the rear yard reduction. 
I.  Rear Yard Setback Adjacent to a Nonresidential District. Where a B district abuts a B, O-1, I (industrial) SP or CI districts, the rear yard may be reduced to ten feet with the approval of the Planning Commission, upon its determination that the requested reduction will allow for better development and will be compatible with adjoining properties. 
J.  Front Building Gas Stations are permitted, and shall comply with the design requirements of Section 138-4.404.B. The design standards and dimensional requirements of Section 138-4.404.B shall take precedence over the standard setback requirements for the B-5 district contained in Table 6. 
K.  Front Yard Parking Prohibited. Parking is prohibited in the required front yard setback area in the ORT zoning district. 
L.  Reduced Front Yard Setback. The required front yard setback may be reduced to 30 feet on internal streets in industrial subdivisions, provided there is no front yard parking. The front yard, except for areas approved for parking as provided for in this ordinance, shall be landscaped or planted in lawn, and the entire front yard shall be kept in a neat condition. 
M.  Reduced Side Yard Setback. The side yard in the interior of an industrial district may be reduced to 15 feet where there are no openings or windows, except for means of egress required by the building code, in the wall paralleling the side lot line, but where there are other openings or windows, the side yard shall not be reduced to less than 25 feet. 
N.  Building Spacing. When there is more than one principal commercial or industrial building on a lot or parcel, or a combination of parcels included in a unified development, the minimum spacing between buildings shall be 25 feet unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance. On all corner lots in I (Industrial) districts, the setbacks from the right-of-way lines shall be 50 feet, except as allowed in footnote L with both frontages to be considered as the front yard setback. On corner lots in the B-5 district, the setback from the right-of-way line shall be 25 feet, with both frontages to be considered as the front yard setback. 
O.  Large Buildings. In industrial districts, buildings in excess of 300 feet in length along any one side shall receive the approval of the Planning Commission, which approval shall be based upon compatibility with surrounding properties and buildings in reasonable attendance. 
P.  Parking in Required Side and Rear Yards. Parking and loading spaces may be located in required side and rear yards in the I (industrial) and ORT districts subject to Planning Commission approval. The Planning Commission shall approve such parking or loading only if sufficient access is provided to the building and that the location of the parking or loading spaces will not imperil the health, safety or welfare of employees in the building. Loading spaces that are thusly located and will be visible from a public thoroughfare or any adjacent property not zoned I or ORT shall be screened. Such screening shall be opaque to a minimum height of six feet. 
Q.  Outdoor Use Areas in the I (Industrial) District. Required side yards may be used for loading, unloading, and storage provided that in such instances the Planning Commission shall review the plans for such area to ensure sufficient access to the building or any storage or related areas to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of employees in the building. Dumpster and trash areas are subject to the requirements of Section 138-10.311. Storage areas are subject to the requirements of Section 138-4.430. 
R.  Yard Requirements when Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts. Any yard abutting an R, RCD, RM-1, or RMH zoning district shall be as established by the Planning Commission, depending on the similarity of the proposed use to uses permitted on the O-1 and I (industrial) zoning districts. In addition, a Type D landscaping buffer yard shall be provided in such yards in accordance with the requirements of Section 138-12.300. 
S.  Freestanding Canopies. In the B-5 district, freestanding canopies may be permitted within the required front yard and/or within the required side yard adjacent to a public right-of-way subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Canopies shall be located not less than ten feet from a right-of-way or side lot line, and not less than 20 feet from a rear lot line. The amount of lot area covered by canopies shall not exceed 40 percent. 
2.  Canopies shall not exceed 17-1/2 feet in height, and a minimum clearance of 14 feet from grade shall be maintained. 
3.  Canopies shall not be attached to any other building or structure. 
4.  Canopies shall be of a type readily demountable not requiring unusual demolition procedure. 
5.  Canopies shall be supported by columns and shall not be supported or enclosed by walls. Canopy columns shall be faced in decorative materials such as brick. 
T.  Rear Yards Adjacent to Parks or Open Space. The minimum rear yard setback requirement may be reduced to 30 feet on lots that border on land permanently dedicated for park, recreation, and/or open space purposes, provided that the dimension of the park, recreation, and/or open space land shall not be less than 100 feet measured in a straight line not more than 20 degrees off of perpendicular to the rear lot line of such lot. 
For purposes of this footnote, permanently dedicated open space shall be determined as provided in Section 138-5.201 for open space option subdivisions. As to other residentially zoned property, dedicated open space shall be land dedicated for park, recreation and/or open space within an approved planned unit development (PUD) by way of recorded plan, easement, agreement or other satisfactory evidence, that the open space use is intended to be permanent. 
U.  Increased Building Height. In the R-3 and R-4 districts, the maximum building height may be increased up to 35 feet when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The building site shall contain at least 13,500 square feet of lot area. 
2.  Minimum side yard setbacks, including the total of two, shall be increased by one-half-foot for each one foot or part thereof by which the proposed building height is in excess of 30 feet. 
3.  If an increase in building height is proposed on a lot which shares a common side yard with a lot occupied by an existing dwelling, the increased height of the proposed dwelling shall not be more than 190 percent of the height of a dwelling on a lot sharing a common side yard. 
V.  Increased Building Height. The maximum height for buildings in the O-1 and ORT districts may exceed the maximum noted in Section 138-5.100 in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Height modifications for projects located on sites with less than five acres shall require conditional use approval in accordance with the procedures of Article 2, Chapter 3 (Conditional Use Approval). 
2.  Height modifications for projects located on sites with five or more acres of land are subject to Planning Commission approval. 
3.  For those buildings with a pitched roof, the maximum height may not exceed 55 feet as measured to the mid-point of the roof system. 
4.  Any structure in the O-1 or ORT district abutting land planned for one-family residential land uses on the Master Land Use Plan Future Land Use Map shall increase the required yard abutting the residential district by two feet for every foot in height above 30 feet as measured to the top of the highest beam for flat roof systems or to the mid-point of pitched roofs. 
W.  Reduced Minimum Lot Width and Area in the R-4 District. Where a proposed parcel is located within a plat where the underlying platted lots are less than the minimum lot width required in the R-4 district and where the resultant lot width would be consistent with the character of the existing one-family neighborhood the minimum lot width may be reduced to the width of the underlying platted lot or 60 feet, whichever is greater. When a reduced lot width is permitted the minimum lot area shall be 7,000 square feet. Buildings on such reduced lots shall comply with the minimum setbacks and all other requirements not involving lot width or area otherwise applicable in the R-4 district. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 7, 3-19-2012; ; Ord. No. 581, §§ 2, 5, 7, 11-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 174 , § 2, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 179 , § 2, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 182 , § 4, 2-5-2018)  
CHAPTER 2. - SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS 
 
SECTION 138-5.200 - Lot Size Variation 
The intent of this subsection is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in Section 138-5.100 for each R-1, R-2, R-3 R-4, and RE one-family district. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
A.  Lot Width. In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten percent below that area or width required in the schedule of regulations and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. 
B.  Density. In determining the maximum number of lots permitted, all calculations shall be predicated upon the districts having the following net densities (including roads): 
District 	Net Density
(dwelling units per acre) 
RE 	0.8 
R-1 	1.7 
R-2 	2.3 
R-3 	2.9 
R-4 	3.4 
 
C.  Phasing of Final Plat Approval Prohibited. The technique of averaging minimum lot size shall be acceptable only when the entire preliminary plat, which has received City Council approval, is carried through a final plat and is then recorded in its totality. Recording of portions of a preliminary plat shall not be acceptable under this option. 
D.  Average Lot Area Requirement. All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. Such computations shall include the dimensions and area of each lot proposed on the preliminary plat, the total square foot lot area in all proposed lots, and the resultant average square foot area per lot. The average square foot area per lot shall not be less than the minimum lot size and area as required in this Article or elsewhere in this ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is located. 
E.  Exclusive Development Option. The modifications permitted under this subsection pertaining to average lot sizes shall not be applied in conjunction with the modifications permitted Section 138-138-5.201.  
SECTION 138-5.201 - Subdivision Open Space Plan Option 
The intent of this subsection is to permit one-family subdivisions to be planned as a comprehensive unit allowing, therefore, certain modifications to the standards as outlined in Section 138-5.100 to be made in the one-family residential districts. Development of a subdivision under these provisions shall be considered an option requiring the approval of the City Council, after recommendation of the Planning Commission, at or before tentative approval of the preliminary plat. The procedure and requirements for approval shall be as set forth in this section and as are provided for in Article III of Chapter 122 of the Code of Ordinances. The modifications to the standards may be made only when they shall comply with the following conditions: 
A.  Sanitary Sewer Required. The open space plan technique shall be permitted only when public sewers are provided for the proposed subdivision. 
B.  Lot Area Reduction. The lot area may be reduced up to 25 percent in the RE, R-1 and R-2 districts and up to 20 percent in the R-3 and R-4 districts, provided that the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for each one-family district under Section 138-138-5.100. 
C.  Maximum Density. All calculations shall be predicated upon the one-family district having the following gross densities: 
District 	Net Density (dwelling 
units per acre) 
RE 	0.8 
R-1 	1.7 
R-2 	2.3 
R-3 	2.9 
R-4 	3.4 
 
D.  Lot Width. In accomplishing the lot area reductions indicated in this subsection, lot widths shall not be less than the following: 
District 	Width 
RE 	100 feet 
R-1 	85 feet 
R-2 	80 feet 
R-3 	75 feet 
R-4 	70 feet 
 
The overall dimensions of each lot shall be sufficient to accommodate the proposed single-family dwelling unit and accessory buildings in addition to the minimum required yards as set forth in this subsection. Approval of a plat for the open space plan shall not permit a subsequent variance from the requirements of this section. 
E.  Yard Requirements. Each lot shall have at least the following minimum yards: 
Zoning District 	Front 	Sides 	Rear* 
		Least One 	Total Two 	
RE 	30 	10 	25 	35 
R-1 & R-2 	30 	10 	20 	35 
R-3 & R-4** 	25 	7 	15 	35 
R-3-OS 	25 	10 	20 	35 
R-4-OS 	25 	10 	20 	35 
 
*Rear yards may be reduced to not less than 30 feet when such lots border on land dedicated for park, recreation, and/or open space purposes as indicated in subsection G.2., of this section, provided that the width of such dedicated land shall not be less than 100 feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of such lot measured in a straight line not more than 20 degrees off of perpendicular to the rear lot line of such lot. 
**Subdivisions in the R-3 and R-4 residential zoning districts receiving tentative approval of the preliminary plat under this section after January 23, 1980 shall be developed according to the requirements of R-3-OS if zoned R-3, and R-4-OS if zoned R-4, and shall be designated on the current zoning map as R-3-OS if zoned R-3, and R-4-OS if zoned R-4. Minimum yard setbacks and maximum percentage of lot coverage by all buildings requirements as set forth in this section for R-3-OS and R-4-OS shall apply. 
F.  Lot Coverage. The maximum percentage of lot coverage by all buildings in the RE, R-1, R-2, R-3-OS and R-4-OS districts shall not exceed 25 percent. 
G.  Open Space Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Area. For each square foot of land gained under subsection B., of this section within a residential subdivision, through the reduction of the lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in this section and Section 138-5.100, equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision, and there shall be provisions ensuring adequate maintenance of areas. Dedication provisions and maintenance provisions shall be in a manner approved by the City. These dedications shall be retained as open space for park, recreation, and/or related uses. 
2.  Use of Open Space. The common area shall be dedicated only for park and/or recreation purposes. Each subdivision shall have at least one common area of at least four acres in size and shall be in a location and shape approved by the City Council in the first phase of a multiphase subdivision. When a subdivision is developed in phases, the common area required to reduce the lot sizes in any particular phase shall be in the plat to be recorded or already dedicated in an earlier phase. The four-acre requirement shall be on a one-time requirement for a phased development. Such land areas shall not include as a part of their minimum land area bodies of water, swamps, or excessive grades making the land unusable for recreation, and shall be so graded and developed as to have natural drainage. Fifty percent of the required open area may, however, be in the floodplain. A separate plan shall be submitted and approved before tentative approval of the preliminary plat for proposed open space areas depicting natural preservation areas, retention and detention areas and active recreation spaces, including what they might be used for such as playground equipment, etc. Common areas shall be generally distributed throughout the subdivision and shall be easily accessible from all parts of the subdivision. Any area to be used as common area which will be used for water retention shall be designed so that it will not be needed or used for holding water for more than a temporary basis 24 hours immediately after a rainstorm. 
3.  Open Space Layout. Where the area to be dedicated to the common use of the subdivision consists of more than one separate parcel, at least one of these separate parcels shall contain not less than four acres in area, provided that no single park area shall be less than one acre. A parcel divided by a river or stream shall be considered as one parcel. 
4.  Access to Open Space. Access shall be provided to areas dedicated for the common use of the subdivision for those lots not bordering on such dedicated areas by means of streets or pedestrian accessways of at least 20 feet in width. 
H.  Approval Criteria. In approving an open space development, the City Council shall review the application for compliance with the following goals and objectives: 
1.  Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, lakes, floodplains, hills and similar natural assets. 
2.  Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas. 
3.  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable use of open areas while recognizing a reduction in development cost, and by allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles. 
4.  Encourage the provision of open space in all parts of the subdivision, and within reasonable distance of all lot development of the subdivision, and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities and areas. 
I.  Development Option. This plan for reduced lot sizes shall be permitted only if mutually agreeable to the City Council and the subdivider or developer. This open space technique is offered as an alternate to the requirements of minimum lot size specified in this subsection. The modifications permitted under this subsection shall not be applied in conjunction with the modifications permitted by Section 138-5.200 (average lot sizes). 
J.  Open Space Dedication Required. Under this subdivision open space plan approach, the developer or subdivider shall dedicate the total park area as set forth in this subsection at the time of filing of the final plat on all or any portion of the plat.  
SECTION 138-5.202 - Height Exceptions 
A.  Exempt Structures. The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles, or public monuments; provided, however, that the City Council may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a conditional use or as a use not otherwise included within a specific use district. The City Council shall only give approval if the total height is not adverse to the character of the area; detrimental to the use and/or value of the surrounding properties; and not injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the City. In addition, any height requirement, variance, or waiver in excess of 70 feet shall require mandatory approval of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
B.  Municipal and school buildings with height greater than the maximum allowed in Section 138-5.100 (schedule of regulations) may be allowed, provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
C.  Mechanical Equipment Rooms. With Planning Commission approval, mechanical equipment rooms such as penthouses may be permitted to exceed the height limitation by up to 12 feet. The architectural features shall be approved by the Planning Commission, which shall also determine the increase in height is not incompatible or detrimental to surrounding properties or the character of the area. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 13, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-5.203 - Permitted Encroachments 
A.  Terraces. An open, unenclosed paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 
B.  Projections into yards. Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than four inches for each one foot of width of such side yard, and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet. Architectural features shall not include those details which are normally demountable from the structure such as gutters. 
C.  Overhangs. Overhangs of 24 inches or less, not including the gutter, may encroach into a required yard. When the overhang exceeds 24 inches, not including the gutter, the overhang must comply with setback requirements and setback measurements shall be taken from the edge of the overhang to the property line.  
SECTION 138-5.204 - Corner Clearance 
No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of 30 inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection, or within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any nonresidential driveway and a street right-of-way line at a distance along each line of 15 feet from the point of intersection between the driveway and the right-of-way. Canopy trees may be located in the corner clearance area provided that the first branch is a minimum of eight feet above grade level.  
SECTION 138-5.205 - Standard Methods of Measurement 
A.  Required yards. Attached accessory garages and other structures, and enclosed porches, patios, terraces and decks shall be deemed a part of such main building for the purpose of determining compliance with the yard requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  Lot coverage. Accessory garages and other structures, open and enclosed porches, patios, terraces and decks shall be deemed a part of such main building for the purpose of determining compliance with the lot coverage requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  Buildable lot area, open space and recreation area calculations. 
1.  Lakes, ponds, state or federally regulated wetlands, utility easements, public street right-of-ways and private road easements are excluded from area calculations for buildable lot area. 
2.  No area which, for the purpose of a building or dwelling group, has been counted or calculated as part of a side yard, rear yard or front yard building setback required by this ordinance may be counted or calculated to satisfy any open space or recreation area requirement of this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-5.206 - Frontage and Access Required 
No building permit shall be issued for any construction located on any lot or parcel of land in the City that does not abut an approved public or private street, or that does not meet the minimum lot width requirement along an approved public or private street. All access to public or private streets shall be hard surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material, and shall meet the requirements of this ordinance and all other City ordinances.  
SECTION 138-5.207 - Building Grades 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall alter an established surface drainage grade to the extent that normal surface drainage is materially obstructed. 
B.  Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. The balance of yard spaces shall be graded and adequate drainage provided where necessary to deflect proper drainage of surface waters from the said premises toward appropriate drainage collection systems. 
C.  When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner to prevent surface water from flowing onto the adjacent properties. 
D.  Grading may be restricted by the Steep Slope regulations of this ordinance. Refer to Article 9, Chapter 2.  
SECTION 138-5.208 - Lots Adjoining Alleys 
In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins a dedicated alley or lane, for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this ordinance, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot.  
SECTION 138-5.209 - Yards 
When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, as in the case of a planned development in the multiple-family district, or where their application cannot be determined on lots existing and of record on the effective date of this ordinance, and on lots of peculiar shape, topography, or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals by the granting of a variance.  
ARTICLE 6 - SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT STANDARDS  
CHAPTER 1. - RM-1 - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
The following standards shall apply to all attached unit buildings and two-family (duplex) buildings in RM-1, Multiple-Family Residential Districts. 
 
SECTION 138-6.100 - Density 
A.  Two-family (duplex) units. Where development is exclusively of a two-family residential structure, there shall be provided a minimum lot area of at least 6,000 square feet of gross area for each unit (or 12,000 square feet per two-family residential structure). 
B.  Attached dwelling units. The following minimum lot area per dwelling unit type shall be required in all RM-1 residential districts: 
Dwelling Unit Type 	Area Per Unit (square feet) 
Efficiency 	5,200 
One-bedroom 	5,600 
Two-bedroom 	6,000 
Three-bedroom 	6,400 
Four-bedroom 	7,000 
 
Plans presented that include a den, library, or extra room shall have such extra room counted as a bedroom for purposes of this ordinance. 
C.  Natural features. In RM-1 districts, land which is within a floodplain, watercourse, floodway, drainage course and/or wetlands, as defined and/or delineated as such by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, City Consultants, and/or official City maps adopted pursuant to this ordinance and the City floodplains, watercourse and wetland protective ordinances, and subaqueous land as is not otherwise delineated shall be counted for density computations on the basis of only 50 percent of such land. 
In no event shall the development upon the remaining part of any parcel exceed an average density of 167 percent of the average density allowed in the schedule of regulations per remaining acre.  
SECTION 138-6.101 - Minimum Lot Standards 
A.  Two-family (duplex) units. Two-family (duplex) units shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet for each unit (or 100 feet per two-family residential structure). 
B.  Attached dwelling structures. No attached unit structure (three or more dwelling units) shall be erected on a lot or parcel of land which has an area of less than one-half acre, or has a lot width of less than 150 feet.  
SECTION 138-6.102 - Setbacks 
For the purpose of yard regulations, all attached unit buildings shall be considered as one building occupying one lot, and each attached unit building located on a parcel of land shall comply with each of the following setback requirements. 
A.  Perimeter setbacks. 
1.  Front yard. The minimum front yard setback is 30 feet. 
2.  Rear yard. The minimum rear yard setback is 30 feet. 
3.  Side yard. A minimum side yard setback of 30 feet shall be provided along each side property line. The side yard shall be increased by one foot for each ten feet or part thereof by which length the multiple structure exceeds 40 feet in overall dimension along the adjoining plot line provided that no attached unit structure shall exceed 180 feet in length along any one face of the building or 250 feet in total length. 
4.  Any yard abutting a major thoroughfare in RM-1 districts shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet. 
5.  Where any yard abuts an RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RCD, RMH or SP district , the minimum distance shall be 35 feet unless a larger setback is required by this Chapter. 
B.  Building separation. The following minimum separation shall be provided between buildings in the RM-1 districts. 
Building Relationship 	Overall Distance Between Buildings
(Exclusive of Parking Area) 
Front to side 	45 feet 
Front to front 	50 feet 
Front to rear 	60 feet 
Rear to rear 	60 feet 
Rear to side 	45 feet 
Side to side 	30 feet 
Corner to corner 	30 feet 
 
The front and rear of an attached unit structure shall be considered to be the faces along the longest dimension of such structure, with the front of the attached unit building being the direction faced by the living rooms of the dwelling units in such building, the rear of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the direction faced by the service entrance of the dwelling unit in such building, and the side of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the face along the narrowest dimension of the such building. Attached unit buildings may be considered to have two or more front façades and no rear façade if living rooms or building entrances are located on more than one façade of the building.  
SECTION 138-6.103 - Minimum Floor Area 
The minimum floor area for units in an attached unit building is as follows: 
A.  Efficiency unit. The term "efficiency unit" shall mean a dwelling unit containing not over 500 square feet of floor area, and consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. Any efficiency unit with an area greater than 500 square feet shall be considered a one-bedroom unit for the purposes of compliance with the density requirements for attached unit buildings. 
B.  One-bedroom unit. The term "one-bedroom unit" shall mean a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 600 square feet per unit, consisting of not more than two rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
C.  Two-bedroom unit. The term "two-bedroom unit" shall mean a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 700 square feet per unit, consisting of not more than three rooms in addition to kitchen, dining, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
D.  Three or more bedroom unit . The term "three or more bedroom unit" shall mean a dwelling unit wherein for each room, in addition to the three rooms permitted in a two-bedroom unit, there shall be provided an additional area of 150 square feet to the minimum floor area of 700 square feet. 
E.  Two-family (duplex) units. Where two-family units are constructed within an RM-1 district the minimum floor area requirements of the R-4 one-family residential district shall be adhered to for each unit of the two-family structure. 
F.  Unit mixture. In the RM-1 multiple-family districts, not more than ten percent of the total number of units shall be of the efficiency type. In no instance shall the number of one-bedroom units exceed 30 percent of the total number of units in the RM-1 districts.  
SECTION 138-6.104 - Design Standards 
A.  Building Height. The maximum building height for any structure in an RM-1 district shall be 2.5 stories and 30 feet. 
B.  Architectural details. Walls visible from a street or other residential uses shall include windows and architectural features similar to the front facade of the building, including, but not limited to awnings, cornice work, edge detailing or other decorative finish materials. All buildings shall have pitched roofs, which may include functional dormer windows and varying lines customary with gable or hip style roofing. Standing seam metal roofing is prohibited. 
C.  Garage Orientation. Where attached unit buildings contain attached or detached garages that are accessory to the dwelling unit, no more than 25 percent of all garage doors may be located at or in front of the front building wall of the building, with all other garage doors being located at least ten feet behind the front building wall of the unit or facing the side or rear of the unit. There is no limitation on the number or orientation of parking areas, garages and any other accessory structure or uses that may be located within the established rear yard, with access provided by an alley or access drive. 
[D.]  Front Door Orientation. For attached dwelling types that have individual entrances directly to the exterior of the building (such as townhouse and stacked flat buildings), a minimum of 75 percent of the main entrances to the individual dwellings shall be located on the front façade of the building, and all shall include a front porch or stoop that is at least six feet in width and depth with a minimum area of 36 square feet. The front porch or stoop may encroach into the front yard setback area provided that it remains unenclosed. 
[E.  ] Street design and vehicular circulation. Street connections shall be provided to adjacent neighborhoods and parcels in residential districts. Ingress and egress from the public streets shall be designed to minimize congestion and interference with normal traffic flow. All interior roads, drives, and parking areas within a multi-family development shall be hard surfaced and provided with curbs and gutters. Roadway drainage shall be appropriately designed such that stormwater from the roadway will not drain onto the adjacent lots. 
[F.]  Pedestrian circulation. Minimum five-foot wide concrete sidewalks shall be provided to connect parking areas, public sidewalks and recreation areas to all building entrances. Minimum six-foot wide concrete sidewalks shall be provided along collector roads and streets within the development. Sidewalks or minimum eight-foot wide asphalt pathways shall be provided along streets adjacent to the development in accordance with adopted City plans and policies. 
[G.]  Parking. 
1.  On-street parking on interior streets shall count towards the minimum parking requirement. Where on-street parking is permitted, the street shall have a minimum clear circulation lane of 16 feet and parking stalls shall have a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum length of 22 feet. 
2.  All off-street parking spaces must be screened from view of any public road, pedestrian path, or adjacent single-family residential dwelling unit in compliance with Section 138-12.205.B. (Landscape Requirements). 
3.  Off-street parking lots may occupy up to 50 percent of a required front yard and 75 percent of a required rear yard, provided that no portion of the parking lot is located closer than 15 feet to a perimeter property line. 
[H.]  Recreation areas. Passive or active recreation areas (including but not limited to seating areas, playgrounds, swimming pools, walking paths and other recreational elements in accordance with the intended character of the development) shall be provided at a ratio of at least five percent of the gross area of the development. The minimum size of each area shall be not less than 5,000 square feet, and the length to width ratio of each area, as measured along the perimeter, shall not exceed four to one (4:1). Such areas shall be centrally and conveniently located to be physically and visibly accessible to residents, and shall not be located within any required yard setbacks or building separations. 
[I.]  Utilities. All multiple-family dwellings shall be connected to the public sewer and public water system.  
CHAPTER 2. - RCD - ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DISTRICTS 
 
SECTION 138-6.200 - Permitted Development 
At the property owner's option, development in the RCD one-family residential cluster district may be according to the provisions and requirements of the R-3 residential district, or according to the provisions and requirements of this Chapter 2. If part or all of the property is developed according to the R-3 residential district requirements, the density of limitations and the other provisions of the R-3 residential requirements shall apply for that part of the property so developed.  
SECTION 138-6.201 - Attachment 
No more than four units may be located in an attached unit building in the RCD district.  
SECTION 138-6.202 - Yards 
Yard requirements in the RCD one-family residential cluster district shall be as follows: 
A.  Front yards shall not be less than 25 feet. 
B.  At least 20 feet of combined side yards shall be provided between buildings in an RCD district. 
C.  Rear yards to one-family attached units shall be at least 35 feet.  
SECTION 138-6.203 - General Requirements 
A site plan submitted under the RCD one-family residential cluster district shall comply with the following: 
A.  All units that abut major thoroughfares of 120-foot right-of-way, or greater, shall have a rear yard or side yard relationship to such thoroughfares of at least 50 feet. 
B.  A landscaped berm, at least five feet high, shall be provided along the entire property line abutting the major thoroughfare. 
1.  This berm may be included within a required side or rear yard. 
2.  The berm shall be landscaped with a minimum of one evergreen tree per 15 lineal feet and one deciduous canopy tree per 50 lineal feet. 
3.  The slopes of such berms will be gentle enough so as not to erode when planted in grass and be suitable for mowing and typical lawn and landscaping maintenance. 
4.  The design of the berm, as it relates to street intersections, will be such that the horizontal view of oncoming traffic is not obscured. 
5.  The berm requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission if existing vegetation to be preserved will be sufficient to provide equal or greater screening than the berm. 
C.  Street ingress and egress to the major thoroughfare shall be kept to a minimum, and, further, all main collector streets shall be dedicated road rights-of-way. 
D.  Any area to be dedicated to the City for public park, recreation or open space purposes as a result of the application of this cluster approach shall be subject to the approval of the City Council, after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, for minimum size, shape, location, access, the character of any improvements and assurance of the permanence of the open space and its continued maintenance. 
E.  All other requirements of Section 138-2.103.C., pertaining to site plan review.  
SECTION 138-6.204 - Change of Land 
If the physical characteristics and the natural terrain and features which bring a parcel of land within the intent and provisions of this division are destroyed or substantially changed, the property shall not be developed according to the RCD provisions, but shall only be developed according to the provisions and requirements of the R-3 residential district. If such physical characteristics and natural terrain and features are destroyed and/or changed after the approval of a site plan, a stop work order may be issued by the City to all interested parties. At the written request of the property owners, the City Council shall hold a hearing to review the matter and to ascertain factually whether there was justification for the stop work order. The City may, at its option, apply to the circuit court for an injunction to prohibit further development pursuant to the approved site plan.  
SECTION 138-6.205 - Ancillary Uses 
Ancillary uses in the RCD one-family residential cluster district are home occupations under the terms and conditions as set forth under Section 138-4.414.  
SECTION 138-6.206 - Floodplains, Subaqueous Areas or Wetlands 
In RCD one-family residential cluster districts, other than a platted subdivision, land which is within a floodplain, watercourse, floodway, drainage course, and/or wetland, as defined and/or delineated as such by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and/or official City maps adopted pursuant to this ordinance and the City floodplains, watercourse and wetland protective ordinances, and subaqueous lands as are not otherwise delineated, shall be counted for density computations on the basis of only 50 percent of such land. In no event shall the development of the remaining part of any parcel exceed an average density of five units per remaining acre.  
SECTION 138-6.207 - Area and Bulk Requirements 
In the RCD one-family residential cluster district, all other requirements pertaining to height, bulk, and any other site improvements shall be controlled according to the requirements for the R-3 district set forth in Section 138-5.100 Schedule of Regulations.  
CHAPTER 3. - CI - COMMERCIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 
 
SECTION 138-6.301 - Principal Uses Permitted 
In the CI commercial improvement district, no building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected except for one or more of the uses permitted in the FB-2 district as set forth in Section 138-8.200. 
(Ord. No. 169 , § 1, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-6.302 - Conditional Uses 
Conditional uses permitted in the FB-2 district as set forth in Section 138-8.200 may be permitted as conditional uses in the CI district. 
(Ord. No. 169 , § 2, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-6.303 - Required Conditions 
Except as permitted by Section 138-8.200, all business, servicing, storage and processing, except for off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 169 , § 3, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-6.304 - Area, Bulk and Development Requirements 
In the CI commercial improvement district, there shall be compliance with all of the regulations pertaining to the B-2 district as contained in Article 5, Schedule of Regulations, except as modified as follows: 
A.  Minimum yard setbacks. 
1.  Front yard. The minimum front yard building setback is 0 feet and the maximum front building setback is ten feet. The Planning Commission may approve a larger maximum setback provided that the larger setback is necessary to accommodate the intended use or is justified by conditions on or adjacent to the site. 
For buildings existing prior to April 4, 1986 architectural features such as canopies, awnings, false roofs or overhangs may project beyond the front of the building provided such features do not project more than three feet beyond the front building wall of the building and a minimum of eight-foot clearance is maintained between the sidewalk and the bottom of the projection. 
2.  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall not be less than 25 feet, provided that a roof overhang may extend up to four feet into the required rear yard. 
3.  Side yards. No side yard setback is required in the CI district. 
B.  Site Plan. A site plan shall be submitted and be approved, unless any of the conditions given in subsection C., of this Section 138-6.304 are not met. The detail and requirements for the site plan may be determined on a case-by-case basis by the City Planning and Development Director depending on the degree of site improvement or alteration proposed or required. 
The City Planning and Development Director shall provide a written determination to the person who wishes to make the improvement or alteration. If a disagreement occurs with the determination provided by the Planning and Development Director, the determination may be appealed in writing to the City Council. There shall be no fee for this appeal, provided that the appeal is filed within ten days of the date of the determination. If the City Council finds that the determination provided by the City Planning and Development Director contains one or more requirements that the City Council determines to be inconsistent with the purpose and objectives of the CI commercial improvement district, namely encouraging desirable improvement of and growth in the district, especially if the proposed improvement or alteration might not occur should the determination be upheld, the City Council may modify or overrule the determination provided by the City Planning and Development Director. Site plan approval shall not be granted until there is compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable City ordinances. 
C.  Site Plan Not Required. No site plan shall be required if one or more of the following conditions are met, provided there is compliance with all other requirements of this ordinance. 
1.  The proposed improvement or alteration will not change the use of an existing building and will not increase the floor area of that existing building by more than 25 percent. 
2.  The proposed improvement or alteration will change the use of an existing building from a nonconforming use or any conforming use to a principal permitted use allowed in the CI commercial improvement district, provided that the new use will not require more parking spaces than currently exist on the site and the proposed improvement or alteration will not increase the floor area of that existing building by more than 25 percent. 
D.  Site Plan Required for Existing Buildings. For properties with existing buildings and when a site plan is required, the following shall apply: 
1.  Only the total number of parking spaces that may be laid out on the site shall be required for site plan approval. A new use that requires more parking than the previous use shall not occur unless sufficient parking can be provided based on the requirements for the new use pursuant to Section 138-8.600 pertaining to off-street parking requirements. No additions to existing buildings shall be allowed if the number of parking spaces that can be provided is less than required for the intended use of the property pursuant to Section 138-8.600. 
2.  Surfaces for parking shall not be required to be paved. If surfaces are not paved, the surface shall contain gravel as specified and shall be constructed as required according to standards and specifications adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
E.  Parking Spaces. For all properties in the district, parking space size requirements may be reduced to nine feet by 18 feet and maneuvering lane width may be reduced to 22 feet for 90-degree parking. 
F.  New Development. New developments shall provide the number of parking spaces required by Section 138-8.600, based on intended use. 
G.  Loading/Unloading. For all properties in the district, no loading/unloading zone shall be required. 
H.  Landscaping. Whenever a site plan is required, the front yard provided and the area between the existing and proposed rights-of-way shall be planted in lawn and/or landscaped except in areas where sidewalks or parking areas are located. 
I.  Building Design. Buildings shall comply with the building design standards of Section 138-8.502. Renovations or expansions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements of Section 138-8.502 as much as is reasonably practical. 
(Ord. No. 169 , § 4, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 182 , § 5, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 183 , § 14, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-6.305 - Signs 
Signs shall be allowed in the CI commercial improvement district as permitted for the B-2 general business district, provided that for buildings located within one foot of or in the proposed right-of-way, a sign may be mounted on the vertical face of a building or on an architectural feature. In this case, the sign shall be parallel to the face of the building or architectural feature and shall not extend more than 12 inches beyond the vertical face of the building or architectural feature.  
CHAPTER 4. - RMH - MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 165, § 12, adopted Mar. 19, 2012, repealed ch. 138, art. 6, ch. 4, §§ 138-6.400—138-6.416, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
SECTION 138-6.400 - Relation to Manufactured Housing Commission Rules 
The regulations established by state law (Michigan Public Act 96 of 1987, as amended) and the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules govern all manufactured home parks. When regulations in this Chapter 4 of Article 6 exceed the state law or the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules they are intended to insure that manufactured home parks meet the development and preliminary plan standards established by this Ordinance for other comparable residential development and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the City's residents. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.401 - Operation of a Community 
A manufactured housing community owner shall operate the community according to the standards established and referenced in the Act and Manufactured Housing Commission Rules. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.402 - Permitted Uses 
A.  Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the RMH district: 
1.  Manufactured home parks. 
2.  Municipal buildings and uses. 
3.  Primary and secondary schools (public, private and parochial). 
4.  Publicly owned and operated parks and recreational facilities. 
5.  Home occupations, in accordance with the requirements of Section 138-4.414. 
6.  Utilities, in accordance with the requirements of Section 138-4.441. 
B.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted following conditional use approval: 
1.  Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care centers, in accordance with the requirements of Section 138-4.422. 
2.  Places of worship, in accordance with the requirements of Section 138-4.431. 
3.  Wireless telecommunication facilities, in accordance with the requirements of Section 138-4.444. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.403 - Development Standards 
Manufactured home parks shall be subject to all the rules and requirements as established and regulated by Michigan law including, by way of example, Act 96 of 1987, as amended, and the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules and, in addition, shall satisfy the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Flood Areas. A manufactured home shall not be placed in a designated floodway, as determined by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
B.  Minimum Site Area. A manufactured housing community shall be developed with sites averaging 5,500 square feet per manufactured housing unit. The 5,500 square foot average may be reduced by twenty percent (20%) provided that each individual site shall be equal to at least 4,400 square feet. For each square foot of land gained through the reduction of the average site below 5,500 square feet, at least an equal amount of land shall be dedicated as open space. This open space shall be in addition to that required under Rules R125.1946, R125.1941, and R125.1944, and this Chapter. 
C.  Maximum Height. In the RMH manufactured home park district, all structures shall comply with the height requirements applicable in the R-1 zoning district. Refer to Section 138-5.100 (Schedule of Regulations). 
D.  Setbacks from Perimeter Property Lines. 
1.  Homes, permanent buildings and facilities, and other structures shall not be located closer than 20 feet from the property boundary line of the community. 
2.  Homes, permanent buildings and facilities, or any other structures that abut a public right-of-way shall be set back at least 50 feet from the property line. If the property line runs through the center of the public road, then the 50 feet shall be measured from the road right-of-way line. This setback does not apply to internal roads dedicated for public use. 
E.  Required Distances Between Homes and Other Structures. 
1.  A home shall be in compliance with all of the following minimum distances, as measured from the wall/support line or foundation line, whichever provides the greater distance: 
a.  Ten feet from an attached or detached structure or accessory of an adjacent home that may not be used for living purposes for the entire year. 
b.  For a home sited parallel to an internal road, 15 feet from an adjacent home, including an attached structure that may be used for living purposes for the entire year if the adjacent home is sited next to the home on and parallel to the same internal road or an intersecting internal road. 
c.  Ten feet from an attached or detached structure or accessory of an adjacent home that may not be used for living purposes for the entire year. 
d.  Fifty feet from permanent community-owned structures, such as clubhouses or maintenance and storage facilities. 
e.  One hundred feet from a baseball or softball field. 
f.  Twenty-five feet from the fence of a swimming pool. 
2.  Attached or detached structures or accessories that may not be used for living purposes for the entire year shall be a minimum distance of 10 feet from an adjacent home or its adjacent attached or detached structures. 
3.  Any part of a home or an accessory structure, such as steps, porches, supported or unsupported awnings decks, carports or garages, or similar structures shall be set back the following minimum distances: 
a.  Seven feet from the edge of the back of the curb or the edge of an internal road paving surface. 
b.  Seven feet from a parking space on an adjacent home site or parking bay off a home site. 
c.  Seven feet from a common sidewalk. 
d.  Twenty-five feet from a natural or man-made lake or waterway. 
4.  A carport shall be in compliance with both of the following setbacks if it is completely open, at a minimum, on the two long sides and the entrance side: 
a.  Support pillars that are installed adjacent to the edge of an internal road shall be set back four feet or more from the closest edge of the internal road and two feet or more from the closest edge of a common sidewalk, if provided. 
b.  Roof overhang shall be set back two feet or more from the edge of the internal road. 
5.  Steps and their attachments shall not encroach into parking areas more than 3½ feet. 
6.  A home sited on one side of the dividing line between a community constructed under a previous act and an expansion of the community constructed in compliance with the requirements of the act shall be a minimum of 13 feet from a home sited on the other side of the dividing line. 
F.  Landscaping and Screening. Manufactured housing communities are subject to the landscaping requirements of R125.1945. 
G.  Open Space. 
1.  Open space shall be provided in any manufactured housing community containing fifty (50) or more manufactured home sites. A minimum of two percent (2%) of the park's gross acreage or 25,000 square feet of contiguous space, whichever is greater, shall be dedicated to well drained, usable open space complying with the drainage standards in State Rule R125.1714. 
2.  Required property boundary setback areas may not be used in the calculation of open space. 
3.  Optional improvements shall comply with state construction codes and applicable laws and ordinances pertinent to construction, including obtaining appropriate state or local permits for the facility or structure being built. 
4.  If provided, recreational or athletic areas shall comply with the safety and setback standards of Rules R125.1705 and 125.1941(1), respectively. 
H.  Lighting. Except in a seasonal manufactured housing community, all internal street and sidewalk systems within a manufactured housing community shall be lighted as follows: 
1.  Access points shall be lighted. If the public thoroughfare is lighted the illumination level shall not be more than the average illumination level of the adjacent illuminated thoroughfare. 
2.  At all internal road intersections and designated pedestrian crosswalks the minimum illumination shall be not less than .15 footcandles. 
3.  Internal roads, parking bays, and sidewalks shall be illuminated at not less than .05 footcandles. 
4.  Lighting fixtures for site-built buildings shall comply with the state electrical code. 
I.  Swimming Pools. Swimming pools in manufactured housing communities shall comply with Michigan Administrative Code Rules R325.2111 [et seq.,] Public Act 368 of 1978, and Rule R125.1941(1)(f). 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.404 - Streets, Driveways, and Parking Areas 
All streets, driveways, and parking areas in manufactured housing communities shall comply with the following design requirements: 
A.  Access. 
1.  The community's internal roads shall have access to a public thoroughfare or shall be connected to a public thoroughfare by a permanent easement. 
2.  An additional access shall be provided to a public thoroughfare to allow a secondary access for emergency vehicles. A boulevard entrance extending to the first intersection of a community road shall satisfy this requirement. 
B.  Composition and Surfacing. All internal roads shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous asphalt and supported by a suitable subgrade in compliance with the standards of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AAASHTO), pursuant to Rule R125.1922. Roads shall be maintained in a reasonably sound condition, as required under Rules R125.1924 and 1925(2)(b). 
C.  Curbing. If provided, internal road curbing shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt. Access to curbed sidewalks connecting to internal roads shall comply with Rule R125.1928 (a). (Rule R125.1923) 
D.  Parking spaces; Streets. All internal roads shall be two-way and have driving surfaces that are not less than the following widths: 
1.  Two-way, no parking 21 feet[.] 
2.  Two-way, parallel parking, one side 31 feet[.] 
3.  Two-way, parallel parking, two sides 41 feet. 
E.  Road Configurations. An internal road that has no exit at one end shall terminate with a minimum turning radius of 50 feet. Parking shall not be permitted within the turning area, which shall be posted within the turning area. A safe-site distance of 250 feet shall be provided at all intersections. Offsets at intersections or intersections of more than two internal roads are prohibited. 
F.  Road Widths, Street Names, Addresses [and] Traffic Control. 
1.  All entrances to new communities or new entrances to expanded communities shall be a minimum of 33 feet in width. The entrance shall consist of an ingress lane and a left and right egress turning lane at the point of intersection between a public road and the community's internal road, and shall be constructed as indicated below in subsections 2 through 4. 
2.  All turning lanes shall be a minimum of 11 feet in width and 60 feet in depth, measured from the edge of the pavement of the public road into the community. 
3.  The turning lane system shall be tapered into the community internal road system commencing at a minimum depth of 60 feet. 
4.  The ingress and right egress turning lanes of the ingress and egress road shall connect to the public road and shall have a radius determined by the local public road authority having jurisdiction. The intersection of the public road and ingress and egress road shall not have squared corners. 
5.  Appropriate speed and traffic control signs shall be provided on all internal roads, and a regulation stop sign shall be installed at the point of intersection with a public road, unless a traffic control device is provided. 
6.  School bus stops, if provided, shall be located in an area that is approved by the school district. 
7.  Improved hard-surface driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for convenient access to service entrances of buildings, and at delivery and collection points for fuel, refuse, and other materials, and elsewhere as needed. The minimum width of driveways shall be ten feet. The entrance to the driveway shall have the flare or radii, and horizontal alignment for safe and convenient ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.405 - Sidewalks 
A.  Common sidewalks shall be installed along one side of all internal collector roads within the community to the public right-of-way and to all service facilities including central laundry, central parking, and recreation areas. 
B.  Common sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
1.  Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of 3 feet and shall be constructed in compliance with Public Act 8 of 1973, an act that regulates barrier-free sidewalk access. 
2.  All common sidewalks shall meet the standards established in Rule R125.1928. 
3.  Except in a seasonal community, an individual sidewalk shall be constructed between at least one entrance, or patio, porch, or deck, if provided, and the parking spaces on the home site or parking bay, whichever is provided, or common sidewalk, if provided. 
C.  An individual site sidewalk with a minimum width of 3 feet shall be constructed to connect at least one entrance to the home, patio, porch, or deck and the parking spaces serving the home or a common sidewalk. These sidewalks shall meet the standards shall meet the standards established in Rule R125.1928. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.406 - Parking 
A.  Resident Parking. A minimum of two hard-surfaced parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home site. Parking may be either on or off the individual home site. 
1.  If the two resident vehicle parking spaces required by this section are provided off the home site, the parking spaces shall be adjacent to the home site and each parking space shall have a clear parking width of ten feet and a clear length of 20 feet. 
2.  If parking spaces are provided for resident vehicle parking, they shall contain individual spaces that have a clear parking width of ten feet and a clear length of 20 feet. 
3.  If vehicle parking is provided on the home site it shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  The parking space shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous asphalt and supported by a suitable subgrade compliant with the standards of AASHTO. 
b.  The parking spaces may be either in tandem or side-by-side. If spaces are tandem, the width shall not be less than ten feet and the combined length shall not be less than 40 feet. If spaces are side-by-side the combined width of the two parking spaces shall not be less than 20 feet and the length shall not be less than 20 feet. 
B.  Visitor Parking. A minimum of one visitor parking space shall be provided for each three home sites. 
1.  Visitor parking shall be located within 500 feet of the sites it is intended to serve, as measured along a road or sidewalk. 
2.  Individual visitor parking spaces shall have a clear width of ten feet and a clear length of 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.407 - Utilities 
The following utility standards apply to all manufactured home communities: 
A.  Connections and Lines. All electric utilities shall be underground and installed and serviced by a licensed electrician. All local distribution lines for utilities (telephones, electric service, and cable television) shall be placed entirely underground throughout the manufactured housing community. Main lines and perimeter feed lines existing on a Section or Quarter Section Line may be above ground if they are configured or installed within the state codes. 
B.  Drainage. 
1.  All drainage outlet connections shall be subject to review and approval by the Drain Commissioner. 
2.  Drainage systems shall be reviewed and approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, in accordance with MDEQ Rules R325.3341 to R325.3349, pursuant to the Act. 
3.  Drain utility connections shall comply with Rule R125.1603(c). 
C.  Electricity. Electrical systems shall be installed, maintained, operated and serviced according to the standards established in Rules R125.1603(d), R125.1603(e), R125.1603(f); R125.1708; R125.1710(2); R125.1932; R125.1933; and MDEQ Rule R325.3373(2)(c). 
D.  Fuel and Gas Heating Service. The installation, maintenance, operation and service of manufactured housing community fuel and gas heating systems and connections shall comply with the standards contained and referenced in Rules R125.1603(b), R125.1710(1), R125.1934 through R125.1938, R125.1940(3) and MDEQ Rule R325.3373(2)(d). 
E.  Telephone Communication Lines. All telephone systems shall be installed in accordance with standards approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission or utility provider, pursuant to Rule R125.1940(2), as applicable. 
F.  Television. Television service installation shall comply with requirements of Rule R125.1940(1). 
G.  Water and Sewage. All lots shall be provided with public water and sanitary sewer service, or water and sanitary services that shall be approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, pursuant to MDEQ Rules R325.3321 and R325.3331 through R325.3335. Water line connections shall meet the specifications contained in Rule R125.1603(a) and MDEQ Rule R325.3373. Water system meters shall comply with MDEQ Rule R325.3321 and Rule R125.1940a. 
H.  Utility Cabinets. Public utility (water, sewer, electrical, etc.) cabinet design shall be approved by the City prior to development. Utility cabinets shall be deigned, located, and screened in a manner which minimizes their visibility and appearance, and which will not create sight-line conflicts for motorists or pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.408 - Disposal of Garbage and Trash 
Each manufactured home site shall use approved garbage/rubbish containers that meet the requirements of Part 5 of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Health Standards, Rules R325.3351 through R325.3354. The containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. It shall be the responsibility of the community operator to ensure that all garbage/rubbish containers do not overflow and that all areas within the community are free of garbage/rubbish. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.409 - Emergency and Safety 
A.  Fire Protection. All manufactured homes built, sold, or brought into this state shall be equipped with at least one fire extinguisher approved by the national fire protection association and one smoke detector approved by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes. The homeowner of a manufactured home brought into this state for use as a dwelling shall have 90 days to comply with this requirement under Public Act 133 of 1974, as amended. The manufactured housing community shall provide its residents with written notification of this requirement, which may be published in the community rules. 
B.  Disaster and Severe Weather. Each manufactured housing community shall provide each community resident immediately upon occupancy with written information indicating whether the local government provides a severe weather warning system or designated shelters. If a warning system or shelter is provided, the information shall describe the system and nearest shelter location. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.410 - Required Conditions 
A.  In-Community Home Sales. New or pre-owned manufactured homes which are to remain on-site in the manufactured housing community may be sold by the resident, owner, or licensed retailer or broker, provided that the manufactured housing community management permits the sale, as established in Section 28a of Public Act 96 of 1987, as amended, and Rules R125.2001a, R125.2005, R125.2006 and R125.2009(e). 
B.  Installation and Anchoring. Manufactured homes shall be installed with anchoring systems designed and constructed in compliance with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (24 CFR 3280.306) and approved for sale and use within Michigan by the Michigan Construction Code, pursuant to Rules R125.1605 and R125.1607. The installation of manufactured housing on each site within a community shall conform to the requirements of Rules R125.1602 and R125.1602a. 
C.  Utility Connections. All utility connections within the community shall comply with the requirements of Rule R125.1603. No manufactured home shall be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is placed on a site or lot and connected to water, sanitary sewer, electrical, and other facilities as may be necessary. 
D.  Storage. 
1.  A manufactured home site shall be kept free of fire hazards, including combustible materials under the home. 
2.  One storage shed that complies with the Michigan Residential Code may be placed upon any individual manufactured home site for the storage of personal property, if permitted by management. Storage sheds shall be constructed with durable weather and rust-resistant materials and shall be maintained to reasonably preserve their original appearance. 
a.  Storage sheds that are attached to homes shall consist of materials similar to that of the home and shall have a fire-rated wall separation assembly in accordance with the Michigan Residential Code. 
b.  A detached storage shed shall be at least 10 feet from all adjacent homes. 
c.  All storage sheds shall be securely anchored in accordance with the Michigan Residential Code. 
3.  Towing mechanisms shall be removed from all homes at the time of installation and stored so as not to be visible. Towing mechanisms, including axles, may, however, be stored under manufactured homes within a community. 
E.  Skirting. 
1.  Skirting to conceal the underbody of the home shall be installed around all manufactured homes, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall be installed within 60 days of placement of the home on the site unless weather prevents compliance with this schedule. In the event that installation is delayed by weather, a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued pursuant to Section 13 of Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended. 
2.  Skirting shall be vented as required by Rule R125.1604. 
3.  Skirting shall be installed in a manner to resist damage under normal weather conditions and shall be properly maintained by the resident. 
4.  Skirting shall be aesthetically compatible with the appearance of the manufactured home. All skirting shall meet the requirements established in the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules. 
F.  Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  If recreational vehicle storage is provided within the manufactured housing community, it should include, but not be limited to: class A, B, and C motor homes; fifth wheel travel trailers; travel trailers; folding tent campers; trailered boats; trailered all-terrain vehicles; trailered personal watercraft; historic vehicles; and seasonal equipment. The storage area shall be adequately locked, fenced, and permanently screened, using the same standards of screening provided at the property's perimeter, and surfaced in accordance with Rule R125.1922. 
2.  The storage area shall be limited to use by the residents and management of the manufactured housing community. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-6.411 - Licenses and Permits 
A.  Site Plan Review Required for Community. The City shall review the preliminary plan for the manufactured housing community pursuant to Section 12 of the Act and Rules R325.33851-3385 of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's Mobile Home Park Health Standards. 
B.  License. No manufactured housing community shall be operated without a license issued by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, pursuant to Section 16 of the Act. 
C.  Occupancy. Occupancy shall not occur until after local inspections, permit, and certificate of occupancy approvals, pursuant to Public Act 230 of 1972, the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act. 
[D.]  Site-Constructed Buildings. Site constructed buildings erected within the community, such as community buildings or laundries, but not including manufactured homes and their accessory storage buildings, shall be examined by the municipality for compliance with all appropriate inspection and permit requirements, pursuant to Public Act 230 of 1972, the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act. 
[E.]  Individual Homes. Site plan review is not required for individual homes in a manufactured housing community. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12, 3-19-2012)  
CHAPTER 5. - MR - MIXED RESIDENTIAL OPTION 
 
SECTION 138-6.500 - Applicability 
The mixed residential development standards are a development option that may be exercised by a landowner or developer in areas zoned MR - Mixed Residential Overlay District. A proposed development using the mixed residential development standards shall be reviewed following the same procedures applicable to development of the site as permitted by the underlying zoning district.  
SECTION 138-6.501 - Permitted Uses 
A.  Principal Uses Permitted. Any use permitted by right in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted by right in the MR district. 
B.  Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted in the MR district subject to conditional use approval by the City Council: 
1.  Any use listed as a conditional use in the underlying zoning district. 
2.  Attached unit buildings. 
3.  Nursing homes, convalescent homes and assisted living facilities, subject to the requirements of Section 138-4.423.  
SECTION 138-6.502 - General Requirements 
The following requirements apply to all development in a MR district: 
A.  Parcel Area. Development using the mixed residential option may only occur on a parcel with a minimum area of ten acres located in a Mixed Residential Overlay District, unless the minimum area requirement is modified by the Planning Commission (see Section 138-6.507 below). 
B.  Density. The maximum net density in the MR district is based on the underlying zoning district, and shall not exceed the following: 
District 	Net Density (dwelling 
units per acre) 
RE 	0.95 
R-1 	2.05 
R-2 	2.75 
R-3 	3.45 
R-4 	4.25 
 
C.  Perimeter Setbacks. The minimum setback requirements for buildings in a MR development from a perimeter lot line or a perimeter street are as follows: 
Building Type 	Front 	Side 	Rear 
	Street 	Other 		
One-Family Detached 	30 	35 	15 	60 
Attached Unit 	20 	40 	25 	60 
 
D.  Interior Setbacks. The minimum setback requirements for buildings in a MR development from an interior street, interior lot line, or other building within a MR development are as follows: 
Building Type 	Front 	Sides 	Rear 
		Least One 	Total Two 	
One-Family Detached 	20 	5 	15 	35 
Attached Unit 	15 	10 	20 	35 
 
E.  Lot Area. There is no minimum lot area or width requirement for detached dwelling units in a MR development. 
F.  Building Height. The maximum building height in a MR development is 2.5 stories and 30 feet. 
G.  Garages. A minimum one car garage shall be provided accessory to each dwelling unit. No more than 25 percent of all garage doors may be located at or in front of the front building wall of the building. All other garage doors shall be located at least ten feet behind the front building wall of the unit, or shall face the side or rear of the unit. There is no limitation on the number or orientation of parking areas, garages and any other accessory structure or uses that may be located within the established rear yard with access provided by an alley or access drive. 
H.  Unenclosed front porches. Unenclosed front porches that have an area of 80 square feet or greater and a roof may encroach up to eight feet into a required front yard setback.  
SECTION 138-6.503 - Attached Unit Building Design Standards 
All attached unit buildings in a MR development shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Individual Entrances Required. All dwelling units shall have entrances that are directly accessible from the exterior of the building that include a minimum 30 sq. ft. unenclosed porch. No unit shall gain access from an interior hallway within a building. The primary exterior entrance to all units shall have a connection leading from the roadside sidewalk to the front entrance of the building. 
B.  Maximum number of units. No attached unit building shall contain more than four dwelling units. 
C.  Stacked Flats Prohibited. In no case shall stacked flats be permitted in a mixed residential development. All attached units shall be separated by common vertical walls. In no case shall dwelling units be separated by a common horizontal wall. 
D.  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area required for any attached dwelling unit in a MR development shall be 1,250 square feet. 
E.  Design Features. Any street-facing façade that is visible from a public right-of-way or private road easement shall include features such as, but not limited to columns, cornices, pediments, articulated bases, and fluted masonry covering a minimum of ten percent of the exterior wall area. 
F.  Architectural Requirements. 
1.  All walls that face a street other than an alley shall contain a minimum of 25 percent of the wall area in windows or doors (gabled roof areas are excepted). 
2.  Windows shall be provided with trim detailing or shall be recessed. Windows shall not be flush with the exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb. 
3.  Exterior finishes shall primarily consist of natural, durable materials such as brick or stone. Wood or vinyl siding may not consist of more than 33 percent of the wall area of any façade elevation (including gable ends). EIFS or stucco may not cover more than ten percent of the area of any façade elevation.  
SECTION 138-6.504 - One-Family Dwelling Design Standards 
A.  Design Features. One-family structures shall include a minimum of three of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front façade of the building: 
1.  Dormers. 
2.  Gables. 
3.  Recessed entries, a minimum of three feet deep. 
4.  Unenclosed front porches with a minimum area of 50 sq. ft. and a roof. 
5.  Architectural pillars or posts. 
6.  Bay window with a minimum projection of 24 inches. 
B.  Entry Feature. Each one-family dwelling shall have a primary entrance feature such as a front door or front porch facing the street. The garage door shall not be the main entrance feature, and at a minimum, the front door should have the same prominence as the garage door. 
C.  Garage Doors. Garage doors may not protrude more than 6 feet closer to the street than the front door of the house.  
SECTION 138-6.505 - Open Space Required 
A.  Formal or active open space. A minimum of five percent of the gross lot area shall be dedicated to planned open space designed to complement the development. The planned open space may be in the form of a formal green or plaza, or may be designed as a park containing active recreational activities. Areas covered by bark, mulch, and other ground covers that do not provide a suitable surface for human use may not be counted towards the open space requirement. 
B.  Passive open space. Any natural features determined by the Planning Commission to be of significant aesthetic or natural value that are located on the site shall be preserved as part of the MR development. If evidence is presented that such natural features were willfully destroyed or impaired prior to development being proposed using these MR standards, development on the site shall be disqualified from using the MR standards and shall comply with the requirements of the underlying zoning district.  
SECTION 138-6.506 - Landscaping and Screening 
Development in a MR development shall comply with all applicable requirements of Article 12, and the following specific buffer requirements: 
A.  A type C buffer shall be provided between any attached unit building and an adjacent one-family residential zoning district or use. 
B.  A type B buffer shall be provided between any detached unit and an adjacent one-family residential zoning district or use. 
C.  All other buffers shall be as required by Section 138-12.300 for the underlying zoning district.  
SECTION 138-6.507 - Modification of Standards 
The Planning Commission may modify the dimensional requirements of this Article 6, Chapter 5 if it finds that another standard would be more reasonable due to existing site or neighborhood conditions, or because the site cannot physically comply with one or more of the requirements listed herein. In making a determination that a modification is warranted, the Planning Commission shall review the proposed development against the standards for approving a conditional use listed in Section 138-2.302.  
CHAPTER 6. - REC - REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT CENTER 
 
SECTION 138-6.600 - Setback Requirements 
Table 8. Schedule of Regulations - REC Districts 
District 	Minimum Lot 	Maximum Building Height 	Minimum/Maximum Yard Setback (feet) 
	Area
(sq. ft.) 	Width
(ft.) 	Feet 	Front (min.) 	Front (max.) 	Side
(min.) 	Rear
(min.) 
REC-W 	— 	— 	42 	10 A 	— 	25 B 	30 
REC-C 	— 	— 	80 C 	10 A 	— 	25 B 	30 
REC-I 	— 	— 	80 C 	5 	80 	0 	25 
REC-M 	— 	— 	42 	0 	10 D 	0 	25 E 
 
Notes to Table 8: 
A.  When any building in the REC-W that is expanded or redeveloped to have a setback less than 30 feet, a sidewalk shall be provided across the entire street frontage of the property. 
B.  For properties along Leach Road, the minimum side yard setback shall be 15 feet. 
C.  Buildings that exceed 80 feet in height may be approved by the Planning Commission provided that the building is set back at least 500 feet from any one-family dwelling. 
D.  The front yard setback may be increased to 80 feet by the Planning Commission for sites in the REC-M district with a depth of greater than 180 feet. 
E.  Cross-access easements that allow for the interconnection of parking areas behind buildings in the REC-M district shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 11, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-6.601 - Street Layout and Design 
A.  Street Layout. Development or redevelopment in the REC districts shall provide for the street connections as shown on the Development Plan map in the M-59 Corridor Plan. 
B.  Street Design. 
1.  Internal streets in the REC districts should be designed with on-street parking. Buildings within the REC district should be located along these internal streets to create an internal circulation system that creates a walkable environment. 
2.  All internal streets within the REC district shall have sidewalks. Existing sites on internal streets that do not have sidewalks shall not be required to construct sidewalks unless a building expansion that reduces the front yard setback to less than 30 feet or that increases building area by more than 25 percent is proposed. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 11, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-6.602 - Cross-Referenced Standards 
Development in the REC district shall meet all applicable standards within this Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Review and Approval Process. Refer to Section 138-2.200 for the type of site plan review and approval process required in the REC districts. 
B.  REC District Purpose Statements. Refer to Article 4, Chapter 2 for the purpose statements for the REC-I, REC-W, REC-C, and REC-M districts. 
C.  Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 138-4.302. 
D.  Supplemental Provisions and Exceptions. Refer to Article 5, Chapter 2. 
E.  General Provisions. Refer to Article 10. 
F.  Parking and Loading. Refer to Article 11. 
G.  Landscaping. Refer to Article 12 for landscaping requirements. For the purposes of required landscaping calculations, the REC-W and REC-C districts shall meet the same requirements applicable in the I district, while the REC-I and the REC-C districts shall meet the requirements for the B districts. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 11, 6-16-2014)  
ARTICLE 7 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT  
CHAPTER 1. - NEW PUD PROJECTS 
 
SECTION 138-7.101 - Purpose and Applicable Regulations 
A.  The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Option is intended to permit, with City Council approval subject to Section 138-7.106, private or public development which is substantially in accordance with the goals and objectives of the City's Master Land Use Plan. 
B.  The development permitted under this Article, planned unit development option, shall be considered an optional means of development only upon terms agreeable to the City. The provision of this option imposes no obligation on the City to encourage or foster its use. The decision whether to approve the use of this option shall be at the sole discretion of the City Council. 
C.  The PUD option permits flexibility in the regulation of land development by encouraging innovation through an overall development plan to provide variety in design layout; to achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy and the provision of public services and utilities; to encourage the creation of useful open spaces particularly suited to the needs of the parcel(s) in question; and to provide appropriate housing, employment, service and shopping opportunities. 
D.  It is further intended that the PUD option may be used to permit nonresidential uses of residentially zoned areas; to permit residential uses of nonresidential zoned areas; to permit densities or lot sizes that are different from the applicable district(s) and to permit the mixing of land uses that would otherwise not be permitted; provided that other objectives are met and the resulting development will promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
E.  It is further intended that the development will be laid out so that the various land uses and building bulk will relate to each other and to adjoining existing and planned uses in such a way that they will be compatible, with no material adverse impact of one use on another.  
SECTION 138-7.102 - Definition 
The term "planned unit development" means a specific parcel of land or several contiguous parcels of land, for which a comprehensive physical plan meeting the requirements of this Article, establishing functional use areas, density patterns, a fixed system of streets (where necessary), provisions for public utilities, drainage and other essential services and similar factors necessary or incidental to development has been approved by the City Council and which has been, is being, or will be developed in accordance with the approved final plan.  
SECTION 138-7.103 - Criteria for Qualification 
The PUD option may be used in any zoning district classification; however, in order to qualify for the PUD option, it must be demonstrated that all of the following criteria will be met: 
A.  The PUD option shall not be used for the sole purpose of avoiding applicable requirements of this ordinance. The proposed activity, building or use not normally permitted shall result in an improvement to the public health, safety and welfare in the area affected. 
B.  The PUD option shall not be utilized in situations where the same land use objectives can be accomplished by the application of conventional zoning provisions or standards. 
C.  The PUD option may be used only when the proposed land use will not materially add service and facility loads beyond those contemplated in the master land use plan. The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the added loads will be accommodated or mitigated by the applicant as part of the PUD. 
D.  The PUD shall meet as many of the following objectives as may be deemed appropriate by the City: 
1.  To preserve, dedicate or set aside open space or natural features due to their exceptional characteristics or their environmental or ecological significance in order to provide a permanent transition or buffer between land uses, or to require open space or other desirable features of a site beyond what is otherwise required in this ordinance. 
2.  To guarantee the provision of a public improvement that would not otherwise be required to further the public health, safety or welfare, protect existing uses or potential future uses in the vicinity of the proposed development from the impact of a proposed use, or alleviate an existing or potential problem relating to public facilities. 
3.  To promote the goals and objectives of the master land use plan and other applicable long range plans such as the master thoroughfare plan. 
4.  To facilitate development consistent with the Regional Employment Center goals, objectives, and design standards in the City's master land use plan. 
5.  To preserve and appropriately redevelop unique or historic sites. 
6.  To permanently establish land use patterns that are compatible with or will protect existing or planned uses. 
7.  To provide alternative uses for parcels that can provide transition or buffers to residential areas and to encourage redevelopment of sites where an orderly transition or change of use is desirable. 
8.  To enhance the aesthetic appearance of the City through quality building design and site development.  
SECTION 138-7.104 - Uses Permitted 
A.  A land use plan shall be submitted for the area within the PUD. The land use plan shall be defined by the districts of the zoning ordinance that are to apply to the components of the PUD area. 
B.  Principal uses permitted and special land uses permitted in the zoning ordinance shall be allowed within the districts identified on the PUD plan, except that City Council may prohibit some uses from districts designated on the PUD plan. The City Council may also permit uses not otherwise permitted in the district if specifically noted on the PUD plan. Conditions applicable to principal uses permitted and special land uses permitted shall be used as guidelines for design and layout. Conditions may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission provided that such waivers or modifications are indicated on the PUD plan.  
SECTION 138-7.105 - Height, Bulk, Density, and Area Standards 
The height, bulk, density and setback standards of each zoning district shall be applied to each specific district area designated on the PUD plan, except as specifically modified and noted on the PUD plan.  
SECTION 138-7.106 - Submittal, Review and Approval Process 
The submittal, review and approval process shall consist of the following two steps: 
A.  Step One: PUD option application and preliminary plan. 
1.  Authorized applicant. A person owning or controlling the land may request consideration of the PUD option. The applicant shall submit a request for a determination as to whether the parcel qualifies for the PUD option under the criteria set forth below in subsection [2.]c., Planning Commission Review. 
2.  Submittal of proposed PUD preliminary plan. Application shall be made to the Planning Department for review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. The application shall include the following: 
a.  A certified boundary survey of the exact acreage being requested prepared by a registered land surveyor (scale: not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet). 
b.  A topographic map of the entire area at a contour interval of not more than two feet. This map shall indicate all major stands of trees, bodies of water, wetlands and unbuildable areas (scale: not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet). 
c.  A proposed project land use plan identifying the following items of information. The project land use plan shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet: 
i.  Land use areas requested in the PUD option and identified or defined by the proposed zoning districts. 
ii.  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including major drives, the location of vehicular and pedestrian access points, non-motorized and pedestrian pathways, and cross sections and public or private streets. 
iii.  Transition treatment, including minimum building setbacks from property lines and land use boundaries within the PUD. 
iv.  The general location of nonresidential buildings and parking areas, estimated floor areas, building coverage, number of stories, building height, and proposed building facade elevations. 
v.  The general location and density of proposed residential unit types, including lot width and lot area for detached single-family residences. 
vi.  The general location of all woodlands, wetlands, water bodies and watercourses and proposed stormwater management facilities. 
vii.  The boundaries of open space areas that are to be preserved and reserved and an indication of the proposed ownership thereof. 
viii.  A schematic landscape treatment plan for open space areas, streets and border/transition areas within the PUD and along perimeter property lines. 
ix.  A preliminary grading plan, identifying the extent of grading and any areas that are not to be graded or disturbed. 
x.  A preliminary utility plan, including a contemplated water distribution, storm and sanitary sewer plan. 
xi.  Any deed restrictions or restrictive covenants associated with the property. 
xii.  All easement locations. 
xiii.  A written statement explaining in detail the applicant's full intentions under the PUD option including the type of dwelling units or uses contemplated and resulting population, floor area, parking and supporting documentation, including the intended schedule of development. 
d.  Written verification from the owner of the property that the applicant is authorized to pursue a PUD. 
3.  Planning commission review and public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 138-1.203, report its findings and make a recommendation to the City Council concerning the PUD option application and preliminary plan. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed PUD preliminary plan for compliance with the following objectives and requirements: 
a.  The proposed PUD promotes the land use goals and objectives of the City. 
b.  All applicable provisions of this Chapter shall be met. Where provisions of this Chapter conflict with any other sections of this ordinance, the provisions of this Chapter shall control and apply to the lands within a PUD area. 
c.  There is, or will be at the time of initial development, adequate means of disposing of sanitary sewage and supplying the development with water, and the road system and stormwater drainage system are adequate. 
4.  City Council review. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, City Council shall review the PUD option application and preliminary plan and make the final determination on the applicant's fulfillment of the above-stated objectives and requirements. 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Once an application for PUD and the preliminary plan have been approved by the City Council, no development or other use may take place on the property within the PUD except in accordance with the approved preliminary plan or in accordance with an approved amendment thereto. 
c.  No approved plan shall be terminated except with the approval of the City Council and the applicant, its successor or assign. 
B.  Step Two: Submission of final site plans and schedule for completion of the approved PUD. 
1.  If City Council approves the application, it shall require the applicant to prepare a PUD agreement, conforming to [Section 138-7.108] below, setting forth the conditions upon which the City's approval is based. After review and recommendation by the City attorney, Planning Commission and subsequent approval by the City Council, the agreement shall be executed by the City and the applicant. Approval shall be granted only if the City Council determines all provisions of this ordinance have been met and that the proposed development will not adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of any permits for activity within the PUD area, final site plans and open space plans for a project area shall be submitted to the planning department for review and recommendation by the Planning Commission and final City Council approval based on the following: 
a.  Review and approval of site plans shall comply with this section except as otherwise modified in the approved PUD plan. Review and approval of plats shall comply with Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended, and applicable ordinances of the City. 
b.  Before approving any final plan, the Planning Commission shall determine that: 
i.  All portions of the project area shown upon the approved plan for the PUD for use by the public or the residents within the PUD have been dedicated to such use in the PUD agreement; 
ii.  The final site plans are in conformance with the approved PUD agreement and PUD plan; 
iii.  In accordance with the PUD agreement, provisions have been made to guarantee open space and common area improvements shown on the final plan, and that maintenance of such improvements is assured in accordance with the PUD agreement. 
3.  Plans for tree removal permit and wetland permit review shall be submitted at the time of step two review. 
4.  Final site plans for the PUD area must be submitted and approved within two years of the execution of the PUD agreement, or such other period of time stated in the PUD agreement. If such plans have not been submitted and approved within the prescribed time, the right to develop under the approved plan may be terminated by the City. 
5.  If development of approved final site plans is not substantially completed in three years (or such other period of time stated in the PUD agreement) after approval, further final submittals under the PUD shall cease until the development of part in question is completed or cause can be shown for not completing same. An applicant may request up to two one-year extensions of PUD approval subject to City Council approval. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 15, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-7.107 - Fees 
Fees for review of PUD plans under this ordinance shall be set forth in City Code Chapter 110.  
SECTION 138-7.108 - PUD Agreement 
The PUD agreement shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
A.  The permitted uses of the property. 
B.  The permitted density and/or intensity of use. 
C.  Dimensional provisions, including but not limited to, building floor areas, setbacks, and building height. 
D.  Provisions for reservations or dedications of land for public purposes, if applicable. 
E.  Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements on which approval is based, including phasing requirements, requirements for on-site or off-site improvements and contributions to improvements to public facilities. 
F.  A timeframe for commencement and completion of improvements associated with the PUD, including both public infrastructure improvements and internal site improvements, along with the means of ensuring that all public improvements are constructed and maintained. 
G.  A statement indicating that, except as otherwise provided by the agreement, regulations governing permitted uses of land, density, design, improvement and construction standards and specifications applicable to development of the property shall be the regulations in force at the time. The PUD agreement shall not prevent the City from applying new or amended regulations that do not conflict with the PUD agreement. 
H.  A requirement that if changes in federal or state laws or regulations enacted after the agreement has been executed operate to prevent compliance with parts of the agreement, or render compliance impractical or unreasonably difficult, the inconsistent provisions of the agreement shall be modified, deleted or suspended as necessary to conform to such changes in federal or state law. 
I.  Procedures for amending the PUD agreement. 
J.  Penalties for violating the PUD agreement or failing to complete improvements included in the PUD. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 16, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-7.109 - Amendments to PUD Plan 
Proposed amendments or changes to an approved PUD plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposed modification is minor in nature and does not to violate the area and density requirements or materially affect the overall character of the PUD plan. In such case, the Planning Commission may approve or deny the proposed amendment. If the Planning Commission determines the proposed amendment is material in nature, the amendment must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council in accordance with the procedures applicable to final approval of the planned unit development.  
CHAPTER 2. - EXISTING PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 
 
SECTION 138-7.200 - Continuation 
Only planned neighborhood development projects which were approved and not rescinded, vacated or denied, and which were actually in the process of construction under provisions of Ordinance No. 36, which ordinance was repealed on May 29, 1975, may continue to completion under the provisions of this Article.  
SECTION 138-7.201 - Procedure for Completion 
A.  Effect of preliminary approval. 
1.  No development may take place in any area approved under Ordinance No. 36, before its repeal, except in accordance with the plan approved or in accordance with a City Council approved amendment thereto. 
2.  After the preliminary approval, the development shall progress without any unreasonable delay. If, in any one-year period, there is no filing of a final plan, and there is land which has not yet received final approval, the City Council may request a conference with the developer regarding the progress of the development. If it appears, after a hearing, for which notice shall be given to the developer, there is no reasonable likelihood the project will continue, the board may terminate the approvals previously given. 
B.  Submission of final plans. Before any building permits shall be issued for buildings and structures within the area of planned neighborhood development, a final plan for any given project area of not less than 50 acres shall be submitted to the City Council for review following a recommendation by the Planning Commission. If the open space for the entire planned neighborhood development has been irrevocably committed to that purpose, a final plan need not contain an area of at least 50 acres. The City Council may consider and approve a site plan of less than 50 acres if it appears in the best interest of the development and the objectives of this ordinance and if to do otherwise would cause a hardship. A final plan shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  A detailed site plan, fully dimensioned, showing a fully scaled plan view of all buildings other than detached single-family, all public roads rights-of-way and private streets, boundaries and acreage of each zone district and the proposed ultimate density thereof, parking areas, utilities, churches, schools and areas to be set aside for the use of the public or by residents within the development (scale: 1" = 50'). 
2.  The proposed topography (contour interval of at least two feet) shall be superimposed on all site plans (scale: 1" = 50'). 
3.  Typical floor plan for all principal buildings and structures, other than single-family detached dwellings, with a schedule of building types to be included in the final plan. 
4.  Approval of each functional use area within a project area shall be based on the area meeting the standards of this ordinance as to density. To accomplish this standard, open space and/or common areas of adequate size shall be shown with each project area being presented. This total land area shall then be used to compute density. Subaqueous or submerged bottomland of lakes or streams shall be excluded in computing the area of a parcel except that where the lands abutting such lakes or streams are developed in park or open space for the use of residents of the neighborhood, the surface area of such lakes or streams may be used to compute density. 
5.  The term "open space" shall be defined as areas without buildings other than those incidental to recreational activities having a nature of a park. The term "common areas" shall be those areas designated as such which are set aside for use, in common, by the residents of the project which shall include community centers, swim clubs, etc. 
C.  Approval of final submittal by City Council. Approval of each project area shall be effective for a period of three years. If development is not completed in this period, further submittals under this planned neighborhood development approach shall cease until the project in question is completed or sufficient cause can be shown to the City Council for not completing the development. In reviewing and approving the final plans, the following conditions shall be set forth: 
1.  Approval shall be granted by the City Council only after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. Public hearings shall not be required. 
2.  A dedication of all main collector roads shall be made so as to cause continuity of public access between the adjacent major thoroughfare and ingress and egress to all private development within the plan. 
3.  Before approving any final plan, the City Council shall determine that: 
a.  All areas shown upon the comprehensive plan for the entire planned neighborhood development area for use by the public or the residents of land within the planned neighborhood development, in common, have been irrevocably committed to such uses by dedication, restrictive covenants or in some other manner satisfactory to the City Council. 
b.  The final plan is in general conformity with the original plan previously approved. 
4.  Provisions, satisfactory to the City Council, have been made to provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the plan for open spaces and common areas which are to be provided by the applicant and that maintenance of such improvements is ensured by a means satisfactory to the City Council. 
5.  Proceeding with a planned neighborhood development should be permitted only if it is mutually agreeable to the City Council and the developer or sponsor.  
SECTION 138-7.202 - Limits on Height, Bulk, Density, and Area by Land Use 
A.  Boundary Strip. All of the standards of the schedule of regulations which were in effect at the time of the original approval of the project, for the applicable one-family district shall be applied to a strip at least 360 feet in depth around the outer boundaries of the area proposed for a planned neighborhood development where such area abuts a one-family district. Development of this strip shall be in complete conformity with the zoning requirements of the abutting one-family district and shall be developed only with one-family detached residential structures, provided that the strip may be penetrated by park, golf course, or other related open space, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. All other uses permitted in the one-family districts shall be prohibited from this strip. The City Council may vary or eliminate this 360-foot requirement when the parcel in question cannot be practicably developed at this depth, due to topography, existing or proposed abutting development, or abutting heavily traveled major thoroughfares, existing or proposed. It may also be waived when the abutting land use does not require a buffer of single-family homes. 
B.  Density. The overall maximum permitted density within any planned neighborhood development (PND) shall not exceed the following density: 
1.  In those use districts zoned R-1-A or R-1-B one-family residential prior to approval of a plan was approved under section 1402(3) of Ordinance No. 36, the maximum density of the PND shall not exceed 3.9 dwelling units per acre, subject to subsection B.3. of this section. 
2.  In those use districts zoned R-1-C or R-1-D one-family residential prior to approval of a plan that was approved under section 1402(3) of Ordinance No. 36, the maximum density of the PND shall not exceed 5.6 dwelling units per acre, subject to subsection B.3. of this section. 
3.  The overall density of the PND shall be averaged for the entire PND area included within the proposed plan. Nonresidential use areas and subaqueous or submerged bottom land of lakes or streams, except as provided in Section 138-7.201.B.4. shall be excluded in computing the area of the parcel and, therefore, the related density. Areas where a public or semipublic use is located or placed shall be included for density computation on the basis of 67 percent of the area. A semipublic use shall be defined as a use involving a major office or headquarters of a recognized charitable organization, a YMCA, church, etc. 
C.  One-family dwellings required. Not less than 65 percent of the area planned for residential development must be devoted to single-family detached dwellings; however, the board, after the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may vary this when the parcel in question cannot practically be developed on this basis. 
D.  Common areas. On the final development plan of any one project area, the common areas and open spaces shown on the plan may be used to maintain the average density as required under subsection B. of this section. 
E.  Yard requirements. Except as set forth for the 360-foot strip around the outer boundary of the planned neighborhood development, all yards for one-family development may be reduced from the requirements of the schedule of regulations as follows subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission: Front yards may be reduced by ten feet. At least 20 feet of combined side yards shall be provided between buildings. 
F.  Multiple family. Only areas zoned for multiple-family residential on May 29, 1975 shall be developed under the schedule of regulations in effect at the time of the original approval of the project, with the inclusion of the open space and common areas in the computations of density. Any new areas rezoned to multiple-family residential after May 29, 1975, shall be developed under the schedule of regulations in effect at the time of development. Land area once used in computing density for one project shall not again be used to compute density in another. Where one-unit and two-unit structures are proposed, there shall be compliance with the following: 
1.  A property owner desiring to develop land zoned multiple-family residential with one-family and/or two-family dwelling units, other than as a subdivision which meets the requirements of the regulations for the R-4 single-family residential district, shall first obtain the approval of the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission. Approval under these provisions shall allow the property owner certain latitude for innovative designs and concepts as an alternative to the normal setback requirements, etc. Therefore, special provisions for regulation of the development are necessary in order to ensure a harmonious development and the avoidance of potential problems after the project is completed. 
2.  Before tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall be given, a site plan shall be presented and approved which meets the requirements of Article 2, Chapter 2 pertaining to site plan review. 
3.  Before approval shall be given, the property owner of the total area approved for a planned neighborhood development and the City shall agree to the number of dwelling units allowed for the total planned neighborhood development, which shall include the designation of density limitations for specific areas of the development. The property owner and the City shall agree to a specific reduction in density for an area zoned multiple-family residential which is developed under these provisions for one-family and two-family dwelling units. Once an area is so developed under these provisions, another area of the planned neighborhood development may not be increased in density to compensate for the allowable units not used in the areas developed under these provisions for one-family and/or two-family dwelling units. 
4.  No more than 5.6 dwelling units per gross acre on the average of the acres with lots located thereon may be allowed for any area designated in a site plan and developed under these specific provisions for one-family and/or two-family dwelling units. 
5.  Before approval the property owner shall provide and the City Council shall approve a written agreement which will be recorded and will be binding upon and run with the land that will provide for an association which will be continuous and have the authority to enforce deed restrictions and/or covenants, and will ensure restrictions and/or covenants containing at least the following: 
a.  Prohibition of any accessory buildings. 
b.  Prohibition of swimming pools in any area except common areas. 
c.  Prohibition of any dwelling unit, once built, from being converted to any multiple-family building without the expressed written approval of the City. 
6.  With reference to Ordinance 36, section 1401, subsection E. shall be modified to allow a reduction in the side-to-side minimum distance between buildings in accordance with the following formula but not less than "X." 
Y (LA + LB) 
T = 2 Where T equals the required minimum horizontal area between the sidewall of building A and the sidewall of building B. 
LA and LB as defined in subsection E. 
X and Y shall be defined as follows and determined from the following table: 
X = The minimum permissible distance, in any instance 
Y = The average distance 
Side-to-Side Relationship (in stories) 	X (in ft.) 	Y (in ft.) 
One to one 	6 	13 
One to more than one 	8 	14 
More than one to more than one 	10 	15 
 
Where building distance formula are not applicable, the minimum distance may be reduced to 20 feet. 
The minimum distance between windows in adjacent buildings shall be 13 feet. 
7.  The minimum floor area for a single level dwelling unit shall be 912 square feet. The minimum first floor area of multilevel, one-family and two-family dwelling units shall be 650 and 575 square feet, respectively. If a basement is not provided, an additional 100 square feet shall be added to the minimum required first floor area for utilities. 
8.  The platting of lots shall be permitted. Minimum yard setbacks, as stated in the schedule of regulations, need apply only to the peripheral bounding lot lines of the planned development, except where boundary lines are contiguous to planned open space, a 15-foot minimum setback shall be required; the intent is to allow flexibility in the placement of all lot lines within the site, provided the required minimum distances between buildings is maintained. Furthermore, the maximum percentage of lot coverage by all buildings, as stated in the schedule of regulations, shall apply to the entire planned development so platted and need not apply to individual lots. In locations where building walls are less than five feet from lot lines, wall openings shall not be permitted and an easement provided so that a minimum of five feet is available for maintenance access.  
SECTION 138-7.203 - Scheduling of Construction 
A.  Under this Article, the entire neighborhood area shall be fully developed and/or platted and recorded within a period not to exceed ten years from the date of approval of the initial project area plan with the granting of subsequent one-year extensions by the Planning Commission being permissible. 
B.  In the development of any planned neighborhood development, the percentage of platted and recorded single-family lots at any given time in relation to the number of multiple-family dwelling units approved for building permits shall be at least in proportion to the ratio between the total number of single-family units and the total number of multiple-family units planned for the entire development.  
ARTICLE 8 - FLEX BUSINESS OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
CHAPTER 1. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
SECTION 138-8.100 - Intent 
The Flex Business (FB) Overlay Districts are designed to foster vital, lively, and sustainable development that creates an imageable neighborhood identity for the various portions of the City located in one of the FB overlay zoning districts. The FB districts are adopted to implement the vision of the Master Land Use Plan. 
These form-based zoning regulations are at a basic level similar to traditional use-based zoning techniques because they regulate the same characteristics of development. Both traditional use-based zoning regulations and the form-based regulations regulate four major components of development - use, site design, building design, and management. The difference between the form-based regulations and traditional use-based regulations is the emphasis and specificity of regulation placed on each of the four elements. Where traditional use-based zoning regulations emphasize the regulation of uses and contain much less specificity about design, the form-based regulations emphasize design and permit greater flexibility in use. 
The intent of the form-based regulations is to create proper physical form through simple and clear regulations for the design of new development or redevelopment. For the purposes of this Article 8, proper physical form means development that permits a mixture of land uses in close proximity; streets that serve the need of pedestrians, bicyclists and motor vehicles equitably; provides places for informal social activity and recreation; and creates building frontages that define the public space of streets. With proper urban form, a wide range of uses within the building may be comfortably and naturally accommodated.  
SECTION 138-8.101 - Flex Business Overlay Districts Established 
The FB overlay districts are optional overlay districts. Any land that is located within the boundaries of a FB overlay district will have two zoning designations, the FB Overlay and the standard underlying zoning district as shown on the Zoning Map. 
Property in a FB overlay district may continue to be used as permitted by the standard zoning district. Any new development or major redevelopment in a FB overlay district may be accomplished following either the requirements of this Article 8 or the regulations applicable in the underlying zoning district. 
Minor redevelopment of existing buildings and uses developed in accordance with the standards of the underlying zoning district may be permitted to redevelop according to the dimensional standards of this Article 8, even if those dimensional standards may violate the dimensional standards applicable in the underlying zoning district. In the case of such minor redevelopment, the Planning Commission shall determine which regulations of this Article 8 shall apply based on the size, scale, and location of the proposed minor redevelopment.  
SECTION 138-8.102 - Instructions 
A.  Application of Requirements. The provisions of this Article 8 are activated by "shall" or "must" when required, "should" or "encouraged" when recommended, and "may" when optional. 
B.  Conflict. Wherever there appears to be a conflict between the regulations of this Article 8 and other sections of the Zoning Ordinance (as applied to a particular development), the requirements specifically set forth in this Article 8 shall prevail. For development standards not addressed in this Article 8, the other applicable sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall be used as the requirement.  
SECTION 138-8.103 - Approval Process 
Any proposed development using the FB overlay option shall require only site plan approval unless a use or design characteristic that requires conditional use approval as identified in this Article 8 is proposed as part of the development. 
A.  Site Plan Approval. Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with the requirements of Article 2, Chapter 2. The type of site plan review required shall be as identified in Section 138-2.200 and the site plan review process shall follow the procedures of Section 138-2.202. Site plans must contain all of the information required by Section 138-2.208. 
B.  Conditional Use Approval. For any proposed development or establishment of use in a form-based district that requires conditional use approval, the application shall be reviewed following the procedures and review criteria of Article 2, Chapter 3. 
C.  Site Condominium and Subdivision Development. Any proposed site condominium or subdivision in a form-based district shall be approved following the procedures contained in the City's site condominium or subdivision control ordinance with the exception that any design requirement contained in this Article 8 shall take precedence over any similar design requirement contained in the condominium or subdivision control ordinance.  
SECTION 138-8.104 - Permitted and Optional Regulations 
Wherever in this Article 8 reference is made to permitted and optional improvements, permitted improvements shall be permitted by right, while optional improvements shall require the approval of the reviewing body. An optional improvement or layout may be permitted by the reviewing body if it is consistent with the following criteria: 
A.  The requested option is consistent with the intent of the form-based district as established in Section 138-8.100. 
B.  The requested option is consistent with existing or planned development on adjacent or nearby parcels. 
C.  The requested option will not negatively impact the potential of adjacent parcels to develop in accordance with the standards of this Article 8. 
D.  The requested option will, in the opinion of the reviewing authority, result in a superior site design or layout than would a permitted improvement or layout.  
SECTION 138-8.105 - Existing Development in the Flex Business Overlay Districts 
A.  Any development activity in the FB overlay districts that requires administrative or sketch plan review, or does not require development review per Section 138-2.200 may be reviewed following the requirements of this Article 8. Site or building improvements shall be consistent with the provisions of this Article 8 to the greatest extent possible; however, complete compliance with the provisions herein is not required. 
B.  Any development activity in the Flex Business Overlay districts that requires site plan approval shall comply with all of the requirements herein, except as may be modified per Section 138-8.604.  
CHAPTER 2. - PERMITTED USES 
 
SECTION 138-8.200 - Permitted Uses 
The following Table 9 lists the uses that are permitted as principal, conditional, and accessory uses in the FB overlay districts. If a use is not listed in the following table, it is not permitted in the FB overlay districts. Refer to Section 138-8.700 for a description of the uses in Table 9. 
Table 9. Permitted Uses in Flex Business Districts 
Key:      P: Permitted Use      C: Conditional Use      [—]: Use Not Permitted 
Use 	FB-1 	FB-2 	FB-3 
Residential Uses 
Dwelling unit in a mixed-use building 	P 	P 	P 
Live/work unit 	P 	P 	P 
Multiple-family dwelling unit 	P 	P 	P 
One-family detached dwellings 	P 	C 	— 
State licensed residential facilities (all types) 	P 	P 	P 
Lodging Uses 
Bed and breakfast 	P 	P 	P 
Inn 	C 	C 	P 
Hotel 	— 	C 	C 
Commercial Uses 
Alcoholic beverage sales (for on-premises consumption) accessory to a permitted use 	C 	C 	C 
Drive-through facility accessory to a principal use 	C 	C 	C 
Entertainment and recreation 	— 	P 	P 
General commercial 	— 	P 	P 
Open air retail 	— 	C 	C 
Place of assembly 	— 	P 	P 
Restaurant 	C 	P 	P 
Office Uses 
Office 	P 	P 	P 
Civic Uses 
Childcare center 	P 	P 	P 
Community facility 	P 	P 	P 
Place of worship 	C 	P 	P 
Recreational facility 	P 	P 	P 
Essential services 	P 	P 	P 
Public parking 	P 	P 	P 
Transit facilities 	P 	P 	P 
Education Uses 
Learning center 	P 	P 	P 
Research facility 	P 	P 	P 
School 	P 	P 	— 
Special training/vocational 	P 	P 	P 
 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 175 , § 3, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 183 , § 17, 6-18-2018)  
CHAPTER 3. - STREET DESIGN STANDARDS 
This Chapter establishes the street design parameters applicable in the Flex Business Overlay Districts. 
 
SECTION 138-8.300 - Street Types 
Each street in and adjacent to a form-based zoning district shall be assigned one of the following street functions. The street function will determine what kinds of buildings and uses can be located along that street, and how buildings will look and be placed along the street. 
The following Table 10 describes the street types and their intended function. Perimeter streets are meant to carry large volumes of traffic and are primarily intended to serve the needs of vehicular traffic. Perimeter streets are major roads that already exist in the City and are defined as principal or minor arterials in the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan. Interior streets are intended to carry vehicular traffic and to promote pedestrian activity, and will be new streets that are constructed within the development or existing collector or local roads. 
For the purposes of determining building frontage and placement, along with street design standards for new streets, a development plan in a FB overlay district shall designate all streets using one of the following four categories: 
Table 10. Street Types in the FB Overlay Districts 
  	STREET TYPE 	FUNCTION 
PERIMETER 

STREETS 	FREEWAY 	Long-distance, high-capacity, high-speed roadway traversing the City. M-59 is the only Highway located in Rochester Hills. 
	ARTERIAL 	Any principal or minor arterial, as defined in the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan 
INTERIOR STREETS 	MAIN STREET 	A "main street" within a development. A main street will typically be a new street that is not an arterial as defined in the City's Master Land Use or Master Thoroughfare Plan. However, a main street may be a collector street as defined in City's Master Thoroughfare Plan. 

Main streets are intended to serve as the principal interior streets in the FB overlay districts. If a development has interior streets, it must have at least one main street. 
	MINOR STREET 	Minor streets provide access to parking and service areas. Minor streets fill out the street network and form blocks, and may be upgraded to major streets in the future. Major circulation aisles in parking lots should be designed as minor streets. 
 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-8.301 - Street Network and Blocks 
Development in the FB overlay districts must provide an interconnected network of streets, drives, or other public passageways. 
A.  Blocks. The street network in a form-based zoning district need not form an orthogonal grid, however, sufficient intersections shall be provided to create walkable and pedestrian scale development. 
1.  Block Perimeter. The maximum block perimeter in a FB overlay district is 2,200 feet. 
2.  Block Length. The portion of any block between intersecting streets may not exceed 500 feet without a dedicated pedestrian pass-through providing access through the block to another street. 
3.  Pedestrian Pass-Throughs. Pedestrian pass-throughs shall have a minimum width of eight feet, shall be designed so they cannot be enclosed or locked, and shall be designed to be safe and interesting for pedestrians. Security lighting sufficient to maintain a minimum light level of one footcandle measured one foot above grade level shall be provided in pedestrian pass-throughs. 
4.  Interior Streets. Interior streets are not required to intersect at ninety degree angles, and may be bent or curved, but must connect to other streets. Jogs or centerline offsets shall be at least 100 feet for interior streets. 
B.  Stub Streets and Culs-de-Sac. 
1.  Stub Streets may be provided to facilitate continuation of the street network on adjacent developed or undeveloped parcels. A stub street intended to connect to future development shall not be considered a cul-de-sac if it is less than 200 feet in length. 
2.  Culs-de-sac are not permitted in a form based zoning district except as an optional improvement where physical or natural boundaries such as freeways or protected natural areas create no practical expectation that the street network will be continued in the future. 
C.  Perimeter Street Intersections. Intersections of interior streets with an arterial street shall be separated by at least 330 feet along the perimeter street. 
D.  General Requirements. 
1.  Street Connectivity. Street connections for the continuation of the street network onto adjacent properties shall be provided when the potential exists for the continuation of those streets on adjacent parcels. A minimum of one future street connection shall be provided for each 600 feet or fraction thereof of common property line between two parcels. 
2.  Public and Private Streets. Internal streets in the form-based districts should be dedicated to the public to ensure connectivity between adjacent parcels. Accordingly, public streets are permitted while private streets are an optional improvement. See Section 138-8.104 for approval procedures for optional improvements. 
3.  Cross-Access. If private streets are proposed, blanket cross-access easements shall be provided for all private streets in a development to ensure that the internal street system may connect to the internal street system on adjacent parcels. The blanket cross-access agreement shall provide for reciprocal cross-access for connection to streets on adjacent parcels without limitation. 
4.  Public Transit Nodes. Area shall be set aside to accommodate a public transit node every 1,500 feet along a perimeter street to accommodate future transit service. 
5.  Pedestrian Circulation Network. Development in the form-based districts shall incorporate a pedestrian circulation network that connects all portions of the site with the regional pathway network via dedicated sidewalks or pedestrian pathways.  
SECTION 138-8.302 - Street Design 
A.  General Standards Applicable to All Internal Streets. 
1.  Design Speed. Internal streets in the form-based districts shall be designed with a maximum design speed of 25 miles per hour. In cases where an internal street is intended to serve as a collector street, has a length exceeding 2,640 feet and provides access to more than one perimeter street the design speed may be raised to 35 mph. 
2.  Alleys and Rear Access Lanes. Alleys and lanes that provide access to the rear of buildings are permitted. The intersection of alleys and rear access lanes with an interior street shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the centerline intersection of any two streets. Alleys and rear access lanes may only intersect with a street having a right-of-way of 66 feet or less. 
 
Figure 1. Clear Vision Area 
3.  Clear Vision Area. A clear vision area shall be maintained at all street intersections. The clear vision area shall be kept free of any objects or structures located between a height of two and eight feet, and no parallel parking spaces may be located within a clear vision area. The clear vision area is defined as any area that is located in the right-of-way or road easement area of more than one interior street. (See Figure 1 at right.) 
4.  Curbs. Vertical curbs with a minimum height of six inches are required along all interior streets (except where an alternate treatment is permitted or recommended by this Article 8). 
5.  Curb Radius. 
a.  Interior Streets in the FB Overlay Districts. The curb radius at the intersection of two interior streets in the Flex Business districts shall not exceed 15 feet (or 25 feet, if a corner bump-out is provided). 
b.  Intersections with Perimeter Streets. The curb radius at the intersection of an interior street and a perimeter street shall not exceed 30 feet unless a larger radius is required by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission for Oakland County, as is applicable. 
6.  Effective Turning Radius. A service and emergency vehicle circulation plan that shows the effective turning radius for large vehicles at all corners shall be provided to demonstrate that the effective turning radius at all corners is sufficient to accommodate service and emergency vehicles. The street design standards listed in this section may be modified as necessary to provide emergency vehicle circulation routes through the development. 
7.  Sidewalks at Driveway Crossings. When a sidewalk crosses a vehicle driveway, the driveway shall retain the elevation of the sidewalk. The appearance of the sidewalk shall be maintained across the driveway to indicate that the sidewalk remains part of the pedestrian zone and that pedestrians have the right-of-way. 
8.  Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be distinguished in the parking and vehicle travelway zones through the use of pavement striping or a contrasting type of pavement (such as brick pavers or integrally colored scored concrete). 
9.  Traffic Calming Measures. The use of raised intersections, lateral shifts, and traffic circles are encouraged as alternatives to more conventional traffic calming measures such as speed bumps. If a raised intersection is proposed, bollards or other protective measures shall be used to separate vehicular and pedestrian areas in the intersection. 
B.  Street "Zones." Streets consist of three zones - the travelway zone, the parking zone, and the pedestrian zone. The elements that are included in each street zone are as follows (see Figure 2 on following page): 
1.  Travelway Zone. The travelway zone accommodates vehicles in transit, and consists of vehicle travel lanes, left turn lanes, public transit infrastructure (such as dedicated rapid bus lanes or light rail tracks) and boulevard medians. 
2.  Parking Zone. The parking zone accommodates vehicles at rest and includes on-street parking lanes. The parking zone can also accommodate public transit elements by replacing some parking spaces with transit stops. 
3.  Pedestrian Zone. The pedestrian zone is located between the curb and the edge of the right-of-way or road easement. The pedestrian zone is further separated into four sub-zones (see Figure 3 on following page): 
a.  Edge Area. The edge area is the space adjacent to and including the curb. The edge area is necessary to allow the doors of cars parked along the street to open and close freely, and must have a width of 2.5 feet. In general the edge area shall remain clear of obstructions, but streetscape elements such as parking meters, light posts, traffic control signs, and tree grates may be located in the edge area. 
b.  Furnishings Area. The furnishings area accommodates amenities such as street trees, planters, and sidewalk furniture. The furnishings area can be paved (with street trees located in tree grates), or it may be landscaped with a street lawn. Outdoor eating areas or other similar uses associated with a use in an adjacent principal building may be located in a furnishings area. 
c.  Walkway Area. The walkway area is the basic sidewalk area where pedestrians walk. The walkway area must remain clear of obstructions at all times to allow free pedestrian travel. No permanent structures or uses are permitted in the walkway area. 
d.  Frontage Area. The frontage area is the portion of the pedestrian zone adjacent to the edge of the right-of-way or road easement when a building is located at the lot line. When the building is set back from the lot line, the pedestrian zone will not have a frontage area, and any frontage area will serve as walkway area. The frontage area is intended to accommodate door openings, window shoppers, and the tendency of people to shy away from walls higher than waist height. The frontage area may also be used for outdoor eating areas or other similar accessory uses associated with a use in the adjacent principal building. 
 
Figure 2. Street Zones 
 
Figure 3. Pedestrian Zone 
C.  Interior Street Design Guidelines. Interior streets in a form-based district shall comply with the guidelines in the following Table 11. The guidelines are designed to create streets that are compatible with the street function and building placement requirements of this Article 8. 
Table 11. Interior Street Design Guidelines 
STREET TYPE 	MAIN STREET 	MINOR STREET 
Character	Main Street 	Residential or Parking Lot Access 
Total Right-of-Way	76—100 feet 	58—76 feet 
Vehicle Zone	20-54 feet 	20-22 feet 
Total Traffic Lanes Permitted 	2—4 	2 
Traffic Lane Width 	10—11 feet 	10—11 feet 
Left Turn Lane 	Optional 	Optional 
Center Median 	Optional, 14—18 feet wide 	Not permitted 
On-Street Parking Zone	Required 	Required 
Type of Parking Permitted 	Parallel, Angled 	Parallel 
Parallel Parking Lane Width 	8 feet 	7-8 feet 
Pedestrian Zone (Each Side)	12—13 feet 	11—12 feet 
Edge Area 	2.5 feet 	2.5 feet or tree lawn 
Furnishings Area 	3.5—6 feet 	3.5—6 feet or tree lawn 
Walkway Area 	6—8 feet 	5—8 feet 
Frontage Area 	0—2.5 feet 	2—3 feet 
Street Tree Requirement	35 feet o/c in tree grates 	35 feet o/c in tree lawn or tree grates 
 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014)  
CHAPTER 4. - DIMENSION AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
SECTION 138-8.400 - In General 
A.  Lot Design Standards. The lot design standards set forth where buildings, parking, and other improvements shall be placed on a lot. The lot design standards are based on the type of street (see Section 138-8.300) upon which the lot has frontage. 
B.  Building Entrances. Buildings located on corner lots or lots that front upon two or more streets shall be required to have a principal entrance onto each street or a corner entrance oriented toward the intersection of the two streets. 
C.  Density. There are no maximum or minimum density standards for residential dwelling units in the form-based overlay districts. The number of dwelling units that may be developed will be determined by lot design requirements such as the maximum height and minimum parking requirement for buildings.  
SECTION 138-8.401 - Setback Requirements 
Buildings in the FB overlay districts shall comply with the following minimum and maximum setback requirements. When there is a minimum and a maximum requirement for a setback, the building must be located within the build-to area that is created by the minimum and maximum setback requirement. 
The setback requirements for a building are based on what kind of street the lot has frontage on. If a lot has frontage on more than one kind of street, such as a corner lot at the intersection of a main street and an arterial street, the setback requirement shall be based on the type of street each side of the lot faces. Any frontage that faces a street shall be considered a front yard. 
Table 12. Setback Requirements in the FB Overlay Districts 
Yard Type 	Setback Requirement 	Minimum 
Building 
Frontage in 
Build-To Area 
	Minimum 	Maximum 	
Front Yard along Arterial Street       permitted 
optional 	15 ft. 
70 ft. 	25 ft. 
none 	40% 
Front Yard along Main Street 	0 ft. 	7 ft. 	90% 
Front Yard along Minor Street 	5 ft. 	20 ft. 	70% 
Side Yard       interior 
perimeter 	none 
25 feet 	none 
none 	n/a 
Rear Yard       interior 
perimeter 	none 
50 feet 	none 
none 	n/a 
 
Notes to Table 12: 
•  Interior Yards are yards adjacent to a lot line that abut land located in the FB overlay district with a nonresidential underlying zoning district. 
•  Perimeter Yards are yards adjacent to a lot line that abus land not located in the FB overlay district or land located in the FB overlay district that has a residential underlying zoning district. 
•  Building Frontage in Build-To Area is the width of the front façade of the building that is located in the build-to area (the area between the minimum and maximum setback requirements) divided by the lot width at the minimum setback line. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-8.402 - Front Yard Landscaping Requirements 
All landscaping requirements of Article 12 shall apply in the form-based districts, with the exception that the front yard layout landscaping requirements shall supersede any conflicting requirement of Article 12. The front yard landscaping requirements of the following Table 13 shall be required between the property line and the building, and are in addition to any street tree planting requirements. 
Table 13. Front Yard Landscaping Requirements in the FB Overlay Districts 
Front Yard Along 	Minimum Buffer 
Width 	Deciduous Trees per 100 
linear feet 	Ornamental Trees per 100 linear feet 	Shrubs per 100 
linear feet 
Arterial Street 
(15-25' setback) 	10 feet 	2 	4 	12 
Arterial Street 
(70' or greater setback) 	15 feet 	3 	4 	15 
Main Street 	None 	None 	None 	None 
Minor Street 	5 feet 	None 	3 	8 
 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014)  
CHAPTER 5. - BUILDING STANDARDS 
 
SECTION 138-8.500 - Private Frontage Requirements 
This Section 138-8.500 establishes private frontage standards for buildings in the FB overlay districts. The private frontage is the area between the building façade and the front property line. The design and treatment of the building façade and the private frontage area define the character of the building and how that building relates to the street. This, in turn, defines the character and context of the street itself. By way of example, when buildings are set back from the street with a lawn between the building and the street it creates a more residential feel along the street. 
Buildings in the FB overlay districts shall comply with the requirements of one of the following private frontages. Note that any specific dimensional requirements included in this section are in addition to any other dimensional requirements of this Article or Ordinance. 1 
A.  Shopfront Frontage. 
DESCRIPTION 
A frontage where the building façade is located close to the front lot line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. This frontage type is suitable for nonresidential uses on the first floor. 	ILLUSTRATION 
section view:       plan view:   
 
STREETS PERMITTED ALONG 
- Main Street 
- Minor Street 	REQUIREMENTS 
	1.  Setback. The building shall be set back a maximum of 7 feet from the front lot line. 
	2.  Access and Entry. Each unit or building subdivision, including upper story units or areas, shall have an entrance facing the street. A common ground floor entrance that serves many residential dwelling units is acceptable. Secondary entrances facing side streets or parking areas may also be provided. 
	3.  Building Width. Buildings shall be subdivided into bays not greater than 40 feet in width along the building's axis facing the street. Building bays shall be defined by vertical articulations such as changes in wall plane, vertical projections, materials, or other methods. Each bay shall have a minimum of one building entrance and building entrances shall be spaced not more than 50 feet apart. 
	4.  Residential Dwelling Units. Residential dwelling units shall be located on floors above nonresidential uses. No nonresidential use may be located on a floor above a residential dwelling use, and residential and nonresidential uses located on the same floor shall be designed such that the hallways or entrances providing access to the different use areas of the building are physically separated. 
	5.  Ground Floor Uses along a main street shall include retail or restaurant uses or other uses that generate pedestrian traffic throughout the day. Office or institutional uses should not be located on a ground floor along a main street. 
	6.  Parking. Off-street parking shall be located underneath or behind the building, or in a parking structure. 
 
B.  Courtyard Frontage. 
DESCRIPTION 
A frontage where a portion of the building façade is close to the front lot line with an interior portion set back from the front lot line. The courtyard may accommodate tree plantings or a vehicle drop-off area. This frontage is suitable for any building use, from residential units to corporate offices. 	ILLUSTRATION 
section view:       plan view:   
 
STREETS PERMITTED ALONG 
- Arterial Street 
- Main Street 
- Minor Street 	REQUIREMENTS 
1.  Setback. The building shall be set back a maximum of 20 feet from the front lot line. 
2. Building Frontage. The courtyard area shall be considered part of the front building façade for the purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of Table 10 on page 130. 
3.  Maximum Floorplate. Buildings shall have a maximum floor plate of 25,000 sq. ft. 
4.  Parking. Surface off-street parking shall be set back at least 40 feet from the front building façade, or located underneath the building or in a parking structure. 
5.  Ground Floor Uses along a main street shall include retail or restaurant uses or other uses that generate pedestrian traffic throughout the day. Office or institutional uses should not be located on a ground floor along a main street. 
 
C.  Stoop Frontage. 
DESCRIPTION 
A frontage where the first floor is elevated above the sidewalk to provide privacy for first floor windows. The exterior entrance is usually from an exterior stair and landing. This frontage is suitable for ground-floor residential units in an attached building. 	ILLUSTRATION 
section view:       plan view:   
 
STREETS PERMITTED ALONG 
- Minor Street 	REQUIREMENTS 
1. Setback. The building shall be set back a minimum of 7 feet from the front lot line. The stoop or porch area shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from the front lot line. 
2. Access and Entry. The principal entrance to each unit shall be located at ground level and shall face a street. Secondary entrances facing the side or rear of the building are permitted. 
3. Exposure to Light and Air. Each unit in a stoop frontage building shall have at least 2 sides exposed to the outdoors. 
4. Unit Disposition. Units in a stoop frontage building may only have common sidewalls. In no case may one dwelling unit be located above another dwelling unit, although portions of units may be located above parking areas. 
5. Parking. Garage doors may only face a secondary street or rear yard area, and all dedicated off-street parking shall be located behind the building. 
 
D.  Lawn Frontage. 
DESCRIPTION 
A frontage where the building is set back from the street with a landscaped front yard area. This frontage is suitable for any building use, but is most commonly used for prototype retail buildings, large format retail buildings such as big box stores, apartment buildings, and for detached single-family dwelling units. 	ILLUSTRATION 
section view:       plan view:   
 
STREETS PERMITTED ALONG 
- Arterial Street 
- Minor Street 	REQUIREMENTS 
1. Setback. The building shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line. Unenclosed front porches shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the front lot line. 
2. Access and Entry. The principal entrance to the building shall be located at ground level and shall face a street. Secondary entrances facing the side or rear of the building are permitted. 
3. Maximum Floor Plate. The maximum floor plate for a lawn frontage building along a minor street is 20,000 sq. ft. There is no maximum floor plate for a building of this type along an arterial street. 
4. Parking. Parking may be located between the building and the street when a building of this type is used solely for retail purposes along an arterial street, and when the building is set back more than 70 feet. Refer to Table 10 (on page 130) for setback requirements. 
5. Garages shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet behind the primary street facing façade of the building. 
  
SECTION 138-8.501 - Building Height 
Permitted building heights in the FB overlay districts are as follows: 
A.  FB-1 District. Two stories or 30 feet. 
B.  FB-2 District. Two stories or 30 feet. The maximum building height shall be three stories or 45 feet for development or redevelopment in FB-2 areas with at least 100 feet of frontage on Rochester Road, provided that buildings exceeding two stories in height are set back at least 100 feet from any single-family residential zoning district located outside of a form-based overlay district and 50 feet from any other conventional zoning district located outside of a form-based overlay district. 
C.  FB-3 District. Three stories or 45 feet. The maximum building height shall be four stories or 60 feet for development or redevelopment in FB-3 areas along Rochester Road, provided that buildings exceeding Three stories in height are set back at least 125 feet from any single-family residential zoning district located outside of a form-based overlay district and 75 feet from any other conventional zoning district located outside of a form-based overlay district.  
SECTION 138-8.502 - Building Design Standards 
A.  Façade Transparency. Buildings in the FB overlay districts shall maintain a minimum level of transparency on the ground and upper stories. All windows must be transparent, non-reflective glass. 
1.  Ground Floor Nonresidential Uses shall maintain a minimum of 70 percent façade transparency, measured between two feet and eight feet above the sidewalk. 
2.  Upper Floor Nonresidential Uses shall maintain a minimum of 30 percent façade transparency measured from floor to floor. 
3.  Ground Floor Residential Uses shall maintain a minimum of 25 percent façade transparency measured from exterior grade level to the second story floor level. 
4.  Upper Floor Residential Uses shall maintain a minimum of 20 percent façade transparency measured from floor to floor. 
B.  Building Materials. Exterior materials that may be used on buildings in the FB overlay districts fall into two categories, primary and accent building materials. The building material requirement is based on the exterior wall surface area, excluding windows and doors. Primary building materials shall cover a minimum of 60 percent of the exterior wall surface area, while accent materials may be used on up to 40 percent of the exterior wall surface area. 
1.  Primary Building Materials include: 
a.  Durable natural building materials such as brick, stone, and other similar materials. 
b.  Exposed logs, timbers, or wood trim. 
c.  Any durable, relatively low-maintenance material that convincingly matches the appearance of the above natural building materials. 
2.  Accent Building Materials include: 
a.  Decorative precast concrete block. 
b.  Metal panels and trim. 
c.  Glass. 
d.  Vinyl siding and non-durable building materials such as EIFS may be used as accent materials, but may cover a maximum of ten percent of any exterior building façade's wall area. 
e.  Any other material except those specifically prohibited by the following subsection 3. 
3.  Prohibited Building Materials include: 
a.  Plain concrete block (both painted and unpainted). 
b.  Plywood or T-111 panels. 
c.  Vinyl and aluminum siding. 
4.  Compliance with LEED-NC Standards. LEED certification for new buildings is encouraged. Absent certification for the entire building, compliance with the following building material credits is encouraged: MR 4.1 or MR 4.2, MR 5.1 or MR 5.2, MR 6, and MR 7. 
C.  Ground Level Finished Floor Height. The maximum ground floor finished floor height for a nonresidential building or building use area in the FB overlay districts shall be six inches. Residential buildings should have a minimum ground floor finished floor height of 18 inches to provide privacy from people walking by on the sidewalk. 
D.  Ground Floor Ceiling Height. Nonresidential buildings or building use areas shall have a minimum ground floor ceiling height of 12 feet, with a height of 15 feet being preferred. Residential buildings or building use areas shall have a minimum ground floor ceiling height of ten feet. 
E.  Encroachments. Certain building elements may encroach into a setback area or right-of-way area. Building elements that may encroach into setback or right-of-way areas are as follows: 
1.  Balconies. Balconies on upper stories may encroach up to six feet into any required setback area and up to four feet into any right-of-way area. 
2.  Porches. Unenclosed covered front porches with a minimum depth of eight feet may encroach into a front yard setback area, provided that the front porch maintains a minimum setback of five feet from any right-of-way line. 
3.  Stoops. Unenclosed and uncovered front stoops may encroach up to five feet into a front yard setback area, provided that the stoop maintains a minimum setback of five feet from any right-of-way line. 
4.  Awnings. Ground-story awnings may encroach up to ten feet from the face of the building into a setback or right-of-way area. Awnings shall have a minimum of eight feet clear space between the sidewalk and the bottom of the awning or any awning support structure. If an awning projection of ten feet would conflict with the placement of any street lighting or street tree, the awning projection shall be reduced to resolve the conflict. 
5.  Bay Windows. Bay windows on the ground story may encroach up to three feet into any required setback area, but shall not encroach into a right-of-way area. Bay windows on upper stories may encroach up to three feet into a setback or right-of-way area. 
6.  Eaves. Roof eaves may encroach up to three feet into any setback or right-of-way area. 
F.  Service Areas. All service areas, including utility access, above ground equipment, and dumpsters shall be located in side or rear yards and shall be screened from view from an internal or perimeter street.  
CHAPTER 6. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
SECTION 138-8.600 - Parking 
The following parking requirements are applicable in the form-based districts, and replace similar requirements set forth in Article 11. Any requirement of Article 11 that is not superseded by one of the following parking requirements shall remain in effect in the form-based districts. 
A.  Minimum Parking Required. 
1.  1.5 parking spaces per residential dwelling unit. 
2.  1 parking space per 400 square feet of nonresidential building space. 
B.  Maximum Parking Permitted. The maximum surface parking requirement shall be 200 percent of the minimum parking requirement. The maximum parking requirement may be modified by the reviewing authority if the applicant can submit evidence that additional parking will be required to accommodate maximum parking demand on a typical day. 
Parking spaces in parking garages are exempt from the maximum parking standard. 
C.  On-Street Parking shall be counted toward the minimum parking requirement. 
D.  Parking Lot Layout. Parking lot layout, maintenance, and construction shall comply with all of the requirements of Article 11. 
The Planning Commission may modify the dimensional requirements of Article 11 based on evidence submitted by the applicant indicating that the modification will result in superior site design, will achieve the same purpose as if the parking lot were designed according to conventional standards, and will function in a safe and efficient manner. 
E.  Parking Lot Access. Parking lots or parking structures may only be accessed from a minor street. 
F.  Parking Structures. Parking structures are permitted in the form-based districts, provided that they comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Setback from Arterial and Main Streets. The parking structure and all parking spaces within shall be set back a minimum of 80 feet from any Arterial or Main street. If liner shops are located on the ground floor of a parking structure located along a main street, the building shall not be considered a parking structure, but rather shall be considered a shopfront building subject to the requirements of Section 138-8.500.A. 
2.  Setback from Minor Streets. Parking structures shall be set back a minimum of seven feet from any minor street. 
3.  Height. Parking structures may be no taller than any adjacent building located within 20 feet of the structure. Stand alone parking structures set back 20 or more feet from any adjacent building may not exceed the maximum height permitted for a building at that location within a form-based district, or the height of the tallest building within 150 feet of the parking garage, whichever is lower. 
4.  Design Guidelines. Any parking structure façade that will be visible from a perimeter or interior street, civic/open space, or building shall comply with the following design guidelines: 
a.  The façade shall comply with the building material requirements of Section 138-8.502. 
b.  The parking structure shall have the appearance of a flat-roofed building with a parapet cap type. 
c.  The ground floor of the structure shall be differentiated from upper floors through the use of a horizontal expression line. 
d.  Exterior elevator towers or stair wells shall be open to public view, or enclosed with transparent glazing. 
e.  Views into the parking structure shall be minimized. Facades of parking structures shall be designed without continuous horizontal parking floor openings. Decorative trellis work or another architectural element that will screen the view of parked cars in the structure shall be provided on all exterior openings. 
G.  Loading Space. There are no specific loading requirements in the FB overlay districts; however, buildings and sites shall be designed such that trucks and large delivery vehicles may be accommodated on the site without encroaching onto a perimeter or interior street. Further, loading facilities such as truck docks shall be located and screened such that they are not visible from any perimeter or interior street.  
SECTION 138-8.601 - Outdoor Amenity Space 
A.  Outdoor Amenity Space Required. All developments in the FB overlay districts shall provide outdoor amenity spaces with a minimum area of two percent of the gross land area of the development. The size and disposition of the amenity space shall be proportionate to the size and scale of the development. The emphasis of the amenity space requirement is on the quality rather than the quantity of the space. 
B.  Stormwater Management Facilities. All stormwater management facilities in FB overlay districts shall be attractively designed as a site amenity. However, stormwater management facilities may not be used to satisfy the amenity space requirement. The area of a stormwater management facility is defined as any area within 25 feet of the freeboard elevation of a detention pond.  
SECTION 138-8.602 - Landscaping and Buffering 
All landscaping requirements of Article 12 shall apply in the FB overlay districts, with the exception that the front yard layout landscaping requirements in Table 11 shall supersede any conflicting requirement of Article 12.  
SECTION 138-8.603 - Signs 
Exterior signs in the FB overlay districts shall be governed by the sign requirements of Article VI of Chapter 134 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rochester Hills. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 11, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 182 , § 6, 2-5-2018)  
SECTION 138-8.604 - Modification of Dimension and Design Standards 
A.  Intent. The requirements of this Article 8 are comprehensive in scope and detailed in nature. The regulations have been designed to establish specific design criteria for new development in the form-based districts while still allowing for flexibility in site layout and design, architecture, and landscaping. However, unique site conditions or other factors may justify modifications from the dimensional standards of this Article 8. It is the intent of this Section 138-8.604 to establish a procedure by which the reviewing authority may modify the dimensional standards of Article 8, and the procedure by which those dimensional standards may be modified. 
Relief from any standard or provision of this ordinance not specifically identified as a modifiable standard shall require a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals following the procedures of Article 3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Modification Procedure. The reviewing authority shall determine that all of the following apply prior to approving a requested modification: 
1.  The proposed development will still meet the purpose and intent of the form-based districts as identified in Section 138-8.100 if the requested modification is approved. 
2.  The applicant shall submit evidence demonstrating that compliance with the strict standards of this Article 8 makes development impractical on the site, and that the modification is necessary to develop in accordance with the standards of this Article 8. 
3.  The requested modification will not make further development on the site or adjacent or nearby sites according to the standards of this Article 8 impossible or impractical. 
4.  The requested modification is the smallest modification necessary. If the proposed development could be constructed in a substantially similar manner with a smaller modification, the smaller modification may be approved. 
5.  The modification will permit innovative design. 
C.  Modifiable Standards. Only the standards and regulations specifically identified below may be modified. If the reference refers to a subsection, only the identified standards of that subsection may be modified. If the reference refers to an entire section, any standard in the entire section may be modified. 
1.  Street network and block requirements (Section 138-8.300). 
2.  Design standards applicable to interior streets (Section 138-8.302.C). 
3.  Setback requirements (Section 138-8.401). 
4.  Private frontage requirements (Section 138-8.500). 
5.  Building design standards (Section 138-8.502). 
6.  Minimum and maximum parking requirements (Section 138-8.600.A and Section 138-8.600.B) 
7.  Parking layout standards (Section 138-8.600.D). 
8.  Parking lot access standards (Section 138-8.600.E). 
9.  Parking structure requirements (Section 138-8.600.F).  
CHAPTER 7. - DEFINITIONS 
 
SECTION 138-8.700 - Use Definitions 
The following is a description of the characteristics and type of uses listed in Table 7. 
A.  Residential Uses. 
1.  Dwelling unit in a mixed-use building. A dwelling unit located in a building with nonresidential land uses. Such units may not be located on the ground floor of the building. 
2.  Live/Work unit. A dwelling unit that contains a commercial component. 
3.  Multiple-family dwelling unit. A unit in a building used exclusively for residential purposes containing two or more residential dwelling units. A multiple-family structure where units are available for lease or rent for periods of less than one month shall be considered a lodging use. 
4.  One-family detached dwelling unit. A detached building containing one dwelling unit. 
5.  State licensed residential facility. See definition in Article 13. 
B.  Lodging Uses provide sleeping accommodations occupied on a rental basis for limited periods of time. Lodging uses are measured based on the number of lodging units provided. A lodging unit is a furnished room of a minimum 200 square feet that includes sanitary facilities and may include limited kitchen facilities. 
1.  Bed and breakfast. A group of ten or fewer lodging units that may provide services for dining, meeting, or recreation. 
2.  Inn. A group of 25 or fewer lodging units that may provide services for dining, meeting, or recreation. 
3.  Hotel. A group of more than 25 lodging units that may provide services for dining, meeting, or recreation. 
C.  Commercial Uses. Commercial uses include retail, services, entertainment, or recreational establishments. 
1.  Bar, tavern, or other alcohol service establishment. A place of business selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, and where the sale of food may be incidental to the sale of such beverages. This includes any establishment in receipt of a valid alcoholic beverage license from the state which permits the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as a principal use. Examples of such uses include, but are not limited to bars, taverns, cocktail lounges, or nightclubs. 
2.  Drive-through facility accessory to a principal use. See definition in Article 13. 
3.  Entertainment and recreation. A place of business providing entertainment or recreation services such as bowling alleys, health or sports clubs, movie theatres, billiards parlors, dance halls, or video arcades. 
4.  General commercial. A place of business providing for the sale and display of goods or sale of services directly to the consumer, with goods available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. General commercial services include, but are not limited to barber shops, beauty salons, travel agencies, retail dry cleaning, express delivery service, photographic and art studios and galleries, funeral homes, animal clinics, and repair service establishments (excluding vehicle service). Commercial goods include, but are not limited to clothing, food, furniture, pharmaceuticals, books, art objects, and the like. 
5.  Open air retail. A retail sales establishment operated substantially in the open air, including but not limited to vending carts, kiosks, farmers or flea markets and the like. Not included are car sales, equipment sales, boat sales, and home and garden supplies and equipment. 
6.  Place of assembly. A commercial facility for public assembly including, but not limited to arenas, auditoriums, conference facilities, convention centers, exhibition halls, and theatres and performing arts centers. 
7.  Restaurant. A place of business dedicated to the preparation and sale of food and beverage for immediate consumption on or off site. 
D.  Office Uses. An office is a room or group of rooms used for conducting a business, profession, service, or government. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, offices of attorneys, engineers, architects, physicians, dentists, accountants, financial institutions, real estate companies, insurance companies, financial planners, or corporate offices. Offices exclude manufacturing activities. 
E.  Civic Uses include land uses for community-oriented purposes or objectives, including those of not-for-profit dedicated to arts and culture, education, recreation, religion, government, and the like. 
1.  Childcare center. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents are not immediately available to the child. 
2.  Community facility. A non-commercial facility for the benefit of and service to the general public, including, but not limited to community centers, cultural facilities such as libraries or museums, police and fire stations, and municipal and government uses. 
3.  Place of worship. A facility used for regular organized religious worship and related activities. 
4.  Recreation Facility. A non-commercial recreational facility consisting of primarily open space including, but not limited to parks, playfields and playgrounds, and golf courses. 
5.  Essential Services. See definition in Article 13. 
6.  Major facility. A large facility of institutional nature including, but not limited to hospitals, non-educational research facilities, shelters, and the like. 
7.  Public parking. A parking facility available to the general public for parking motor vehicles, including parking lots or structures. 
8.  Transit facilities. A facility providing accommodations by public, private, and non-profit entities for the conveyance of persons from one place to another by means of a transportation system, including but not limited to bus and rail terminals. 
F.  Education Uses. 
1.  College/university. A facility for post-secondary education that grants associate, bachelor, master, or doctoral degrees and that may include research functions or professional schools. 
2.  Learning center. A facility offering training, tutoring, or instruction in subjects such as languages, music, fine arts, or dance. This may include provision of electronic testing or distance learning. 
3.  Research facility. A facility for research and development that does not involve the use of human testing, animal husbandry, incinerators, heavy equipment, mass manufacturing, fabrication, processing, or sale of products. Any facility involving human testing, animal husbandry, or incinerators shall be considered a Major Facility. 
4.  School. A facility offering instruction at the pre-school to high school level. 
5.  Special training/vocational. A facility offering instruction or training in trades or occupations such as secretarial, paralegal, business, beauty, barber, bartender, acupuncture, massage, design, or other similar vocations. This classification excludes training and education in any activity that is not otherwise permitted in the zone.  
SECTION 138-8.701 - General Definitions 
This section provides definitions for terms that are used in this Article 8 that are technical in nature or that might not otherwise reflect a common usage of the term. Where a definition in this section conflicts with a definition provided in Article 13, the definition presented in this section shall prevail for the purposes of administering the form-based regulations. If a term is not defined in this section, the Planning and Development Director shall determine the correct definition of the term. 
BALCONY: An open portion of an upper floor that extends beyond or indents into a building's exterior wall. 
BLOCK: The aggregate of private lots, pedestrian pass-throughs, rear lanes and alleys, the perimeter of which abuts perimeter or internal streets. 
BLOCK PERIMETER: The linear distance around a block measured along the right-of-way line or road easement. 
BUFFER: An area of land, including landscaping, walls, and fences located between land uses of different characters and which is intended to mitigate negative impacts of the more intense land use on the less intense land use. 
BUILD-TO ZONE: An area at the front of the lot in which a front building façade must be located. 
 
Figure 4. Effective Turning Radius 
EFFECTIVE TURNING RADIUS: The minimum radius appropriate for turning from a through or turning lane on an approach street to an appropriate lane on the receiving street. See Figure 4 at right. 
FLOOR PLATE: The total indoor floor area of the first floor of a building, measured to the exterior of the wall. 
FRONTAGE LINE: The lot line that coincides with the public right-of-way or edge of a space dedicated for public use. Building facades parallel to frontage lines define public space and are therefore subject to a higher level of regulation than the elevations that face other lot lines. 
GROUND FLOOR FINISHED LEVEL HEIGHT: The vertical distance between the sidewalk (or other common reference point) and the top of the finished floor on the ground level. 
GROUND FLOOR CEILING HEIGHT: The vertical distance between the finished floor and the ceiling on the ground floor of a building. 
HABITABLE SPACE: Building space that involves human presence with direct view of the enfronting streets or public or private open space. Habitable space does not include parking garages, storage facilities, warehouses, and display windows separated from retail activity. 
LINER SHOP or LINER BUILDING: A building or part of a building with habitable space specifically designed to enfront a public space while masking a function without the capacity to monitor public space such as a parking garage, storage facility, or large building exceeding the building width limitations of this Article. 
ORTHOGONAL GRID: A grid system where the intersecting lines are perpendicular to each other, and intersect at 90-degree angles. 
PERIMETER YARD: A yard area on the edge of a form based zoning district where the form-based district abuts a conventional zoning district. 
TREE LAWN: A grassed or landscaped area located between the sidewalk and the curb of the street intended to accommodate street tree plantings.  
ARTICLE 9 - NATURAL FEATURES  
CHAPTER 1. - NATURAL FEATURES SETBACK 
 
SECTION 138-9.100 - Intent 
It is the intent of this section to require a minimum setback from natural features and to regulate the use of property within the setback in order to prevent physical harm, impairment and/or destruction of or to natural features. It has been determined that, in the absence of a minimum setback, intrusions in or onto natural features would occur, resulting in harm, impairment and/or destruction of natural features contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare.  
SECTION 138-9.101 - Nonapplicability to Parcels Planned Before January 1, 1990 
This section shall not apply to property for which a site plan or condominium plan has been approved or for which a preliminary subdivision plat has received tentative approval or any subsequent approvals prior to January 17, 1990, provided the site plan, condominium plan or plat remains in effect and in good standing.  
SECTION 138-9.102 - Natural Features Setback 
Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 138-9.103, a minimum setback of 25 feet from a natural feature, as defined in this ordinance, shall be observed, and any filling, land balancing, dredging, construction or any deposit, installation or removal of any material, including structures, soils, minerals, and/or vegetation, within a natural feature setback is prohibited. Any land located within a natural features setback is intended to be kept in a natural state.  
SECTION 138-9.103 - Reduction of Setback 
The minimum setback may be reduced upon application by the property owner and determination by the official or body responsible for review and approval of the proposed construction, activity or operation that such construction, activity or operation is not likely to endanger or materially and adversely affect the natural feature. Incidental to the consideration of an application to reduce a natural feature setback, the City may require, at the applicant's expense, an investigation to determine the nature, location and boundaries of the natural feature. In determining whether to authorize a reduction of the minimum setback, the official or body responsible for review and approval of the proposed construction, activity or operation shall consider the following criteria: 
A.  The nature, environmental sensitivity and size of the natural feature. 
B.  The nature, necessity and economic value of the proposed construction, activity or operation. 
C.  The feasibility of alternatives. 
D.  The probable impact of the proposed construction, activity or operation on the natural feature and the cumulative effect of other existing and anticipated activities on the natural feature. 
E.  The probable impact on fish and wildlife and their habitats. 
F.  The maintenance of historic, scenic, ecological and recreational values, and the character of the area.  
SECTION 138-9.104 - Exemptions 
The following activities shall be exempt from regulation under this section, although other sections of this ordinance may apply: 
A.  Beach sanding. 
B.  Installation of a dock, seawall or fence. 
C.  Lawn maintenance. 
D.  Grading and filling required by the City. 
E.  Construction, maintenance and improvement of public streets, highways, roads or pedestrian-bicycle pathways within an existing right-of-way or a public easement, in such a manner as to minimize adverse effect on a wetland or watercourse, provided, except in emergencies, that: 
1.  Prior written notice is given to the City engineer and written consent is obtained from the City engineer prior to commencement of work; 
2.  The work is conducted using good management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of wetlands are not impaired; and 
3.  Any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
F.  Installation, maintenance, repair or operation of utilities, including water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage systems and facilities, and electric, gas, telephone and cable television lines, in such a manner as to minimize adverse effect on a watercourse or wetland, provided that, except in emergencies: 
1.  Prior written notice is given to the City engineer and written consent is obtained from the City engineer prior to commencement of work; 
2.  The work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of wetlands are not impaired; and 
3.  Any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
G.  Maintenance, repair, cleaning and upgrading of any natural and humanmade drainage course, watercourse, drain, pipe, ditch, stream, creek, swale, detention and retention basin and pond which serves to transport or hold stormwater runoff, provided that, except in emergencies: 
1.  Prior written notice is given to the City engineer and written consent is obtained from the City engineer prior to commencement of work; 
2.  The work is conducted using good management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of wetlands are not impaired; and 
3.  Any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
H.  Activities that are authorized on state- or City-regulated wetlands without a state or City permit under section 30305 of Public Act No. 59 of 1995 (MCL § 324.30305, MSA § 13A.30305) or section 126-502 of the City's code of ordinances are specifically authorized in the natural features setback.  
SECTION 138-9.105 - Protective Barrier 
The City may require that a suitable protective barrier be erected and maintained along the perimeter of the natural feature setback area to prevent construction or development activity from encroaching into the natural feature setback, and to maintain the natural feature setback area in a natural and undisturbed state in perpetuity after construction is completed. 
A.  Permanent Barrier Required. Protective barriers shall be permanent and not easily removed. Barriers should also be decorative and highly visible to discourage encroachments into the natural features setback area. Boulder walls are an example of a permanent and visible barrier. 
B.  Signs delineating the perimeter of the natural features setback area are easily removed and therefore are not sufficient by themselves to fulfill the intent of this section. However, signs are encouraged in conjunction with a permanent barrier.  
CHAPTER 2. - STEEP SLOPES 
 
SECTION 138-9.200 - Findings and Purpose 
A.  Findings. The City Council of the City of Rochester Hills finds that: 
1.  The establishment of regulatory and conservation practices to prevent disturbance of steep slopes is needed to protect public health, safety and general welfare. Experience has demonstrated a need for effective protection of steep slopes, including careful review and regulation and the implementation of stringent mitigation measures where, in the opinion of the reviewing authority, no practical alternative to such disturbance exists. However, in all cases where the reviewing authority determines that total avoidance of steep slopes is not practical, such disturbance should constitute the minimum disturbance necessary to ensure the property owner a reasonable use of the property. 
2.  The disturbance of steep slopes can aggravate erosion and sedimentation beyond rates experienced in natural processes. Erosion and sedimentation often include the loss of topsoil, a valuable natural resource, and can result in the disturbance of habitats, degradation of surface water quality, degradation of wetlands, alteration of drainage patterns, gullying of land, obstruction of drainage structures, intensification of flooding both on and off the subject site, failure of slopes and the mass movement of earth and danger to the natural environment, man-made structures and the safety of persons. 
3.  Steep slopes, including stabilizing deep-root vegetation located thereon, are important environmental features that contribute significantly to the natural beauty of the City. Over-development of or improperly managed disturbance to these steep slopes is detrimental to the environment and the overall character of nearby areas. 
4.  Regulation can allow the reasonable use of private property by encouraging flexible development design so as to avoid disturbance of steep slopes. Regulation can also permit limited disturbance of steep slopes that are conducted in accordance with acceptable engineering practices and will not negatively impact the integrity of the steep slope or other nearby environmental features. 
B.  Purpose. These regulations are adopted with the intent of providing a reasonable balance between the rights of the individual property owners and the public interest in preserving the valuable functions of steep slopes. The purpose of these Steep Slope regulations are to: 
1.  Provide qualitative and quantitative development controls in order to preserve, protect and conserve steep slopes within the City of Rochester Hills. 
2.  To maintain and protect the natural terrain and its vegetative features, wetlands, water bodies and watercourses. 
3.  Prevent flooding, protect important scenic views and vistas, preserve areas of wildlife habitat, and provide safe building sites. 
4.  Protect property within the City by preventing erosion, creep and sudden slope failure.  
SECTION 138-9.201 - Applicability 
Steep slope areas fall into three categories: a Moderate Steep Slope is a slope equal to or greater than one vertical on five horizontal 20 percent but less than one vertical on four horizontal 25 percent and with a vertical elevation change of ten feet or greater. A Very Steep Slope is a slope equal to or greater than one vertical on four horizontal 25 percent but less than one vertical on 2.5 horizontal 40 percent and with a vertical elevation change of ten feet or greater. A Bluff Slope is a slope greater than or equal to one vertical on 2.5 horizontal 40 percent with a vertical elevation change of 15 feet or greater. The provisions of this Section shall apply to lands defined and/or designated as steep slope areas. 
A.  Regulated Slopes. 
1.  Slopes Located Within 200 feet of a Watercourse. Any Moderate Steep Slope, Very Steep Slope, and/or Bluff Slope that is located within 200 feet of the Clinton River, Paint Creek, Sargent Creek, Stony Creek, or a tributary of any of the aforementioned watercourses shall be considered a regulated slope. 
2.  Slopes Not Located Within 200 feet of a Watercourse. Any Very Steep Slope and/or Bluff Slope that is not located within 200 feet of the Clinton River, Paint Creek, Sargent Creek, or Stony Creek shall be considered a regulated slope. 
B.  Steep Slope Inventory. The City shall prepare an inventory map of regulated steep slopes within the City. 
C.  Presumption. A steep slope inventory map indicates the location of known steep slopes within the City. Steep slopes may also exist that are not indicated on the map. Such slopes not indicated on the map are regulated by the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Exemptions. 
1.  The reviewing authority may waive the requirements of this Article 9, Chapter 2 for activities on or near slopes that are demonstrated to be man-made. Examples of slopes that are man-made include but are not limited to spoils piles, embankments for roads or railroads, berms, etc. The applicant must demonstrate that construction activity near or on the slope, including the possible removal or elimination of the steep slope area, will not impact or cause to be impacted a nearby natural feature or destroy views or alter the appealing aesthetic character of the area near the man-made slope if requesting an exemption. 
2.  Moderate and Very steep slopes covering a horizontal area of 5,000 sq. ft. or less are exempt from the provisions of this Article 9, Chapter 2. For the purposes of this exemption, where a steep slope is located on two or more contiguous parcels the area of the entire steep slope shall be used to calculate if the area exemption applies.  
SECTION 138-9.202 - Permitted and Regulated Activities 
A.  Allowable Activities Outside of a Steep Slope Setback Area. Any activity that does not impact a steep slope or is located outside of a steep slope setback area shall not be subject to the requirements of this Article 9, Chapter 2. 
B.  Allowable Activities on a Steep Slope or in a Steep Slope Setback Area. The following activities are permitted on a steep slope between the toe of slope and top of slope and within a steep slope setback area without a steep slope permit: 
1.  Normal ground maintenance that does not require disturbance of existing terrain. Normal ground maintenance includes customary best management practices for deep root vegetation and the mowing, trimming, or pruning of non-deep root vegetation. Normal ground maintenance activities do not include regrading or disturbing the soil surface, and must comply with all other applicable laws and regulations. 
2.  The planting of vegetation that does not require the removal of existing deep-root vegetation and does not disturb the natural contour of the land. 
3.  Fence construction in accordance with all other applicable laws and regulations. 
4.  The disturbance to steep slopes under temporary emergency conditions, as determined by the City's Engineering Services Department, where such disturbance is necessary to protect persons or property from present and imminent danger. 
5.  Maintenance and repair of existing roads, driveways, walkways and retaining walls. 
6.  Construction or expansion of roads in a public right-of-way. 
7.  Public health and safety activities and emergency uses by or on behalf of a public agency. 
C.  Regulated Activities. The following activities involving the creation of a new steep slope, alteration or disturbance to an existing steep slope between the toe of slope and top of slope, a manmade change to the land within a steep slope setback area, or any other activity not specifically listed as an allowable activity in Section 138-9.202.B., above, shall not be permitted unless a Steep Slope Permit is issued by the proper reviewing authority: 
1.  Constructing, operating, or maintaining any use or development. 
2.  Erecting or installing buildings or other structures, improvements, or utilities (exception: fence construction or maintenance, which is a permitted activity). 
3.  Depositing or removing material. 
4.  Land balancing or other grading. 
5.  Removal of deep-root vegetation. 
6.  Constructing, operating, or maintaining a stormwater outlet sewer. 
D.  Steep Slope Setback. Regulated activities identified in Section 138- 9.202.C., above, may not occur in the steep slope setback area unless a steep slope permit is issued. The steep slope setbacks are defined based on the type of steep slope, and are defined as follows: 
1.  A 15-foot setback is required from the top of a moderate steep slope with a ratio of one vertical to five horizontal (20 percent slope or greater). 
2.  A 25-foot setback is required from the top of a very steep slope with a ratio of one vertical to four horizontal (25 percent or greater). 
3.  A 50-foot setback is required from the top of a bluff slope with a ratio of one vertical to 2.5 horizontal (40 percent or greater). 
4.  A 15-foot setback is required from the toe of any steep or very steep slope. A 25-foot setback is required from the toe of any bluff slope. 
E.  Measurement of Steep Slope Setback. Many slopes will qualify as two or more types of steep slope due to changes in topography and the grade of the slope. In such a case, the setbacks defined in subsection D., above, shall be measured parallel to the top of slope and any transition contour lines where the grade of the slope changes and the slope changes to a different type of slope (i.e. moderate steep slope to a very steep slope). 
The steep slope setback line shall be defined as the setback line that is farthest from the top of slope. Refer to the illustrations on the following page for a graphic representation of a transition contour. 
 
Section View 
 
Plan View  
SECTION 138-9.203 - Review Criteria 
In reviewing any request for a steep slope permit, the reviewing authority shall consider all relevant facts and circumstances. Any steep slope permit application must satisfy the following review criteria: 
A.  General Criteria. 
1.  Structures shall be designed in a manner that averts or minimizes alteration to the steep slope and that otherwise complies with the grading standards in 138-9.203.B. 
2.  Feasible alternatives to the proposed action, including avoidance of disturbance of the steep slope area and the availability of reasonable alternative building locations on the subject site or on any other adjacent parcels under the control of the applicant. 
3.  The suitability of the proposed activity to the area for which it is proposed. Structures should be sited on existing level areas of the site. 
4.  The suitability of soils and/or other structural characteristics of the slope that make the slope suitable for development, or unsuitable for development due to the slope's susceptibility to erosion, creep, or failure. 
5.  The proposed mitigation measures will adequately protect steep slopes from erosion, sedimentation, or damage beyond a natural rate of change. 
6.  The availability of technical improvements, safeguards, or other mitigation measures that could feasibly be added to the proposal. 
7.  Proposed method(s) of restoring disturbed areas of a steep slope. 
B.  Specific Criteria. 
1.  The alignment of roads and driveways shall follow the natural topography to minimize regrading and comply with design standards for maximum grades set forth in the City's engineering standards. 
2.  The natural elevations and vegetative cover of steep slopes shall be protected from disturbance to the maximum extent possible. 
3.  All regrading shall blend in with the natural contours of the land. 
4.  Cuts and fills shall be rounded off to eliminate sharp angles at the top, bottom and side of regraded slopes. 
5.  The angle of cut and fill slopes shall not exceed the natural angle of repose of the soil in the cut or fill, except where retaining walls or other structural stabilization is used; generally, for soils, cut and fill slopes should be not steeper than one vertical to three horizontal (33 percent slope). 
6.  Any disturbance of steep slopes shall be completed within one construction season, and disturbed areas shall not be left bare and exposed during the winter and spring thaw periods. 
7.  The disturbance of existing vegetative ground cover shall not take place more than seven days prior to commencing grading and construction. 
8.  Permanent deep-root vegetative cover shall be planted within three days after completion of grading. The vegetative cover proposed to be used shall be identified as part of the application and is subject to review and approval by the reviewing authority and City Engineer. Where final grading and permanent planting cannot be established within a short period of time, temporary seeding or mulching shall be applied. Upon good cause being shown by the applicant and based upon consideration of the time of year, slopes, soils and environmental sensitivity of the area involved, the Building Department may modify these specified time periods after consultation with the reviewing authority and City Engineer. 
9.  Measures for the control of erosion and sedimentation shall be undertaken in accordance with the Soil and Sedimentation Control Act (See Soil Erosion Act, Part 91 of PA 451 of 1994, as amended), which is administered by the Oakland County Drain Commissioner's Office. Topsoil that will be stripped from all areas of disturbance shall be stockpiled in a manner so as to minimize erosion and sedimentation and shall be replaced on the site at the time of final grading. 
10.  Fill material shall be composed only of nonorganic material that will allow for appropriate compaction and cover by topsoil. No voids are to be created or left remaining in the fill material that will allow further settlement of the fill or habitat for rodents, vermin or other undesirable species. 
11.  Compaction of fill materials in fill areas shall be such that it ensures support of proposed structures and stabilization for intended uses. 
12.  Permanent physical markers will be used to identify and delineate the steep slope setback area.  
SECTION 138-9.204 - Determinations 
In granting a steep slope permit under this Section, the reviewing authority shall evaluate and approve or deny an application based on the following considerations: 
A.  That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be accomplished are in accordance with the findings and purpose set forth in Section 138-9.200. 
B.  That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be accomplished can be completed without increasing the possibility of creep or sudden slope failure and will minimize erosion to the maximum extent practicable. 
C.  That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be accomplished will not adversely affect the preservation and protection of existing wetlands, water bodies, watercourses and floodplains. 
D.  That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be accomplished will not adversely affect adjacent property. 
E.  That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be accomplished can be completed in such a way so as not to adversely affect any threatened or endangered species of flora or fauna. 
F.  That the proposed activity is compatible with the public health and welfare. 
G.  That the proposed regulated activity cannot practicably be relocated on the site or reduced in size so as to eliminate or reduce the disturbance of the steep slope area. 
H.  The applicant shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Article 9, Chapter 2.  
SECTION 138-9.205 - Review Procedures and Submittal Requirements 
A.  Reviewing Authority. The Planning Commission shall be the reviewing authority for any steep slope permit that is required in conjunction with a site plan, conditional use, or plat. The Engineering Services Department shall be the reviewing authority for all other applications, including single-family plot plans. 
B.  Submittal Requirements. All applications shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name and address of owner and applicant. 
2.  Street address of the property, or other means of identifying the property if it does not have a street address such as a tax identification number. 
3.  Statement of consent from the owner for any agent making application. 
4.  A written narrative explaining the nature of the proposal, including the proposed work and purpose thereof, any future development proposals for the property and whether alternative locations exist for the proposed activity. 
5.  A site plan drawn at a scale no less than one inch equals 50 feet and prepared, signed, and sealed by a landscape architect, architect, professional engineer or professional surveyor and showing the following information for all areas on the subject site that contain steep slopes: 
a.  The location of proposed buildings and structures, including driveways and retaining walls. 
b.  The location of the proposed area of disturbance and its relationship to neighboring properties, together with structures, roads and watercourses or regulated wetlands located within 100 feet of the boundaries of the disturbed area. 
c.  The existing topography in the proposed area of disturbance at a contour interval of not more than two feet. Contours shall be shown for a distance of 100 feet or greater beyond the limits of the proposed area of disturbance. The contour map shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Michigan. The elevations and contours on said map shall be in North American Vertical Datum of (NAVD88) or North American Datum NAD 83 (1986 adjustment) International Feet, or the latest revision of either standard. 
d.  The location and size of areas of Moderate Steep Slope, Very Steep Slope, and Bluff Slope under both existing and proposed conditions in the area of proposed disturbance and within a distance of 100 feet thereof. 
e.  The top of slope and toe of slope elevation contours, along with any transition contours between areas of Moderate Steep, Very Steep, or Bluff Slope. 
f.  Steep slope setback lines measured parallel to the top of slope and any transition contours. 
g.  The proposed final contours of the disturbed area at a maximum contour interval of two feet and proposed surface materials or treatment. 
h.  Cross-sections of the existing and proposed steep slope areas. 
i.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
j.  The details of any surface or subsurface drainage system proposed to be installed, including special erosion-control measures designed to provide for proper surface or subsurface drainage, both during the performance of the work and after its completion. 
k.  A landscape plan showing the location, size, species, and quantity of deep root vegetation that will be established. 
l.  Locations of permanent physical markers delineating the steep slope setback area. 
6.  Photographs of the steep slope, with the photograph locations cross-referenced on the survey. 
7.  A list of all applicable City, County, State and Federal permits required for such work or improvement. 
8.  Payment of all applicable fees as required by Division 4 or Article IV of Chapter 110 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
9.  Any of the following information, if determined necessary by the City Engineer or the reviewing authority: 
a.  Other information, including specific reports by qualified professionals on soils, geology, hydrology, flora, and fauna. 
b.  Existing soils within 50 feet of the proposed disturbed area, taken from field investigations by a soils scientist and classified into hydrologic soil groups. 
c.  A cut/fill map delineating proposed areas of disturbance at affected depths in increments of zero to three feet, three to six feet, six to ten feet and ten feet and over and the estimated material quantities of cut/fill. 
C.  Review Procedures. 
1.  Applications Requiring Planning Commission Review. 
a.  Applications for steep slope permits proposed in conjunction with another application requiring Planning Commission review and approval shall be reviewed concurrently with the site plan, special land use, or plat application to which the steep slope permit is related. The Planning Commission shall consider all of the general and specific design standards listed in Section 138-9.203.A. and Section 138-9.203.B. of this Article 9, Chapter 2. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 138-1.203 to receive comment on the requested steep slope permit following the noticing procedures applicable for a conditional use. 
c.  The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested steep slope permit. All such approvals, approvals with conditions, or denials shall be issued in writing. In the case of a conditional approval or a denial, such written decision shall state the reasons for denial or the conditions of approval. 
2.  All Other Applications. Any steep slope permit application that is not proposed in conjunction with another application requiring Planning Commission review shall be reviewed by the Engineering Services Department shall review the application for compliance with all of the standards of this Chapter. The Engineering Services Department may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested steep slope permit. All such approvals, approvals with conditions, or denials shall be issued in writing. In the case of a conditional approval or a denial, the written decision shall state the reasons for denial or the conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 18, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-9.206 - Permits 
Steep slope permits issued pursuant to this Chapter and permit holders shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Content. Steep slope permits shall include, at a minimum, the following items of information: 
1.  The approval date of the permit. 
2.  The expiration date of the permit. 
3.  Limitation on the total portion of any lot or the portion of the steep slope on the lot that may be disturbed. 
4.  Setbacks for structures, fill and other activities from the top of slope. 
5.  The approved grading plan shall be kept on file with the approved steep slope permit. 
B.  Notification and Display of Permit. Permit holders shall comply with the following requirements prior to and during the commencement of activity on the site: 
1.  The permit holder shall notify the Engineering Services Department and the Planning Department of the date on which the work is to begin, at least five days in advance of such date. 
2.  The permit shall be prominently displayed at the project site during the undertaking of activities authorized by the permit. 
C.  Expiration of Permit. 
1.  All permits shall expire on completion of the acts specified therein and, unless otherwise indicated, shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue. 
2.  In the case of a permit where the work on the steep slope(s) has not commenced, the reviewing authority may extend the time in which the acts specified in the permit may be completed if, in its opinion, such extensions are warranted by the particular circumstances involved. Such extensions shall not exceed two additional periods of one year each. The reviewing authority may require the permit holder to provide additional information demonstrating that conditions on the site have not substantially changed from the time the steep slope permit was first issued. The site shall be subject to a field inspection by City Staff or Planning Commission prior to the granting of an extension. 
3.  Should a permittee fail to complete the acts specified in the permit prior to the expiration of the second one year extension, the original permit shall become null and void, and an application must be made for a new permit. The request for a new permit shall follow the same form and procedure as the original application. 
4.  In the case of a permit where the work on the steep slope(s) is partially completed, the number and length of extensions shall be at the sole discretion of the reviewing authority. 
5.  A request for an extension of an original permit shall be made in writing to the reviewing authority at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the original permit and each extension. 
D.  Performance Guarantee. The permit grantee shall be required to file with the City a cash or corporate surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit running to the City in an amount, if any, determined necessary by the City's engineering services department to guarantee performance of and compliance with use permit conditions and this Article.  
SECTION 138-9.207 - Appeals 
Any final determination, decision or order of the Engineering Services Department or Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
The City Council, upon review, shall make findings and determine whether or not there has been compliance with the requirements and standards of this Chapter, and based on its findings, may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision rendered by the Engineering Services Department or the Planning Commission, as the case may be.  
SECTION 138-9.208 - Enforcement 
A.  Civil Infraction. Any person who violates this provision of this Chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
B.  Separate Offense. Each consecutive day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
C.  Inspections and Violations. 
1.  Inspection. Any site for which an application has been submitted shall be subject to inspection by the reviewing authority or its designated representative(s), including weekends and legal holidays. 
2.  Administrative sanctions. 
a.  Restoration. The Engineering Services Department shall have the authority to direct the violator to restore the steep slope area to its condition prior to violation, insofar as that is possible, within a reasonable time and under the supervision of the Engineering Services Department or its designate. Further, the Engineering Services Department shall have the authority to require an adequate performance guaranty in a form and amount deemed necessary by the Engineering Services Department to insure the restoration of the affected steep slope area. 
b.  Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person holding a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter violates the terms of the permit, fails to comply with any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit, exceeds the scope of the activity as set forth in the application or operates so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to a steep slope area, the reviewing authority may suspend or revoke the permit or withhold issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy until the provisions of this Chapter, including any conditions attached to a Permit, have been fully met. Failure to comply with a stop work order shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
D.  Fines. Any person convicted of having violated or disobeyed any provision hereof, any order of the reviewing authority or any condition duly imposed by the reviewing authority in a permit granted pursuant to this Section, for the first offense shall be subject to the penalties, sanctions, remedies and costs authorized in City Code Section 1-16. 
E.  Injunctive Relief. The City is specifically empowered to seek injunctive relief restraining any violation or threatened violation of any provisions hereof and/or to compel the restoration of the affected steep slope area to its condition prior to the violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
F.  Enforcement. The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall be empowered to enforce compliance with this ordinance.  
SECTION 138-9.209 - Notice and Conflicts 
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions hereof, and in addition to the powers specified elsewhere in this ordinance, the following general provisions shall apply: 
A.  Notice Provisions. The deed, contract of sale and final plat of any land subdivided subsequent to the enactment of this Chapter shall describe all steep slope areas on said land which are regulated by this Chapter and shall include a note on the deed, contract and final plat, respectively, that any construction within these areas requires a permit. 
B.  Conflicts. Wherever this Article 9, Chapter 2 is inconsistent with any other law of the City of Rochester Hills, whichever law imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail.  
SECTION 138-9.210 - Definitions 
As used in this Article 9, Chapter 2, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
APPLICANT: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind, excluding the City of Rochester Hills and its governmental agencies, who requests the reviewing authority to issue a permit, or to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of this Chapter. 
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Rochester Hills. 
CREEP: The gradual movement downhill of soil or loose rock on a steep slope. The process of creep may result in the migration of the top of slope contour and destabilization of the slope. 
DEEP ROOT STABILIZING VEGETATION: Vegetation that increases soil strength and stability by providing reinforcement and increasing the shear strength of soils. Deep root vegetation contains a fibrous root system that penetrates more than four feet below the surface (in a mature plant). Deep root stabilizing vegetation includes certain native species of trees, shrubs, and native grasses. Turf grass root systems are typically only four to six inches deep, so turf grasses do not qualify as deep root vegetation. The City maintains a list of acceptable native deep-root vegetation appropriate for use on steep slopes. 
DISTURBANCE: The removal of vegetation, except as specifically permitted herein, or the filling, excavation, regrading or removal of soil, rock or retaining structures in areas of steep slope, whether by manual labor, machine or explosive. The condition of disturbance will be deemed to continue until the area of disturbance is revegetated and/or permanently stabilized. 
DISTURBED AREA: Any steep slope area for which a disturbance is proposed or is ongoing. 
GRADING: Adjusting the degree of inclination of the natural contours of the land, including leveling, smoothing, grubbing, tilling, and other modification of the natural land surface. 
HORIZONTAL AREA: The horizontal area is the area of a level plane drawn underneath the steep slope with the toe and top of slope as the boundaries of the horizontal plane. For instance, a topographical map shows the horizontal area of a steep slope by rendering the slope area on a level plane. 
LAND IMPROVEMENT PERMIT: The written approval issued by the Engineering Services Department permitting the actual commencement and continuation of grading work in accordance with an approved grading plan or construction engineering plan. 
MATERIAL: All liquid, solid or gaseous substances. 
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind, including public agencies and municipal corporations. 
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Rochester Hills. 
PROJECT: Any proposed or ongoing action that may result in direct or indirect physical impact on a steep slope, including, but not limited to, any regulated activity. 
REVIEWING AUTHORITY: The City agency(s) or public official(s) empowered to administer the permit procedures of this Chapter. 
SLOPE: Slope is defined as "rise over run," and is determined by dividing the vertical change in grade by the horizontal distance over which that grade change occurs. The vertical and horizontal distance of a slope is measured from the toe of slope to top of slope. 
 
Measurement of Slope 

STEEP SLOPE: Any geographical area, whether on a single lot or not, having a topographical gradient of 20 percent or greater (ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance) between the toe of slope and top of slope and a minimum area as defined below. Known steep slope areas are identified on the City's Steep Slope Map. Steep slopes are further categorized as: 
1.  MODERATE STEEP SLOPE: A slope equal to or greater than one vertical on five horizontal (20 percent) but less than one vertical on four horizontal (25 percent) and having a minimum vertical elevation change of ten feet from the top of slope to toe of slope. 
2.  VERY STEEP SLOPE: A slope equal to or greater than one vertical on four horizontal (25 percent) but less than one vertical on 2.5 horizontal (40 percent) and having a minimum vertical elevation change of ten feet from the top of slope to toe of slope. 
3.  BLUFF SLOPE: A slope equal to or greater than one vertical on 2.5 horizontal (40 percent) and having a minimum vertical elevation change of 15 feet or more from the top of slope to toe of slope. 
 
TYPES OF STEEP SLOPE 
STEEP SLOPE PERMIT: The written form of City approval granted by the reviewing authority and required by this Chapter for the issuance of a work permit and the conduct of any regulated activity on a steep slope. 
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or in the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, athletic courts, swimming pools and decks. 
 
TOE OF SLOPE: The base or bottom of a slope at the point where the ground surface changes to a flatter grade (less than 20 percent), and below which no further steep slope exists within 100 feet of the toe of slope line. 
TOP OF SLOPE: The top of slope is the point where the grade changes from less than to greater than 20 percent. 
TRANSITION CONTOUR: A contour elevation that marks a change between two types of steep slope. Transition contours also occur if a steep slope includes a plateau of land that has a slope of 20 percent or less with a horizontal distance of less than 100 feet. If such a plateau exists, the contour line where the slope changes from 20 percent or more to less than 20 percent shall be considered as transition contours, and not as a top or toe of slope.  
ARTICLE - 10 GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 1. - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS 
Accessory structures, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, shall be subject to the following: 
 
SECTION 138-10.100 - General Standards for All Accessory Structures 
A.  Appearance. The exterior façade materials and architectural design of all accessory structures shall be similar to and coordinated with those of the principal building on the lot. The overall appearance of the structure shall be in accordance with the purpose of the district where it is located. 
B.  Temporary Accessory Structures. Temporary accessory structures that do not require permanent attachment to the ground, but have similar characteristics as an accessory structure including but not limited to inflatable swimming pools and moveable carports shall comply with the setback requirements for detached accessory structures. 
C.  Area. The combined floor area of detached and attached accessory structures shall not exceed the floor area of the first and second floor of the main building. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-10.101 - Attached Accessory Structures 
A.  Compliance with standards for main building. 
1.  Where the accessory structure is attached to a main building, it shall be considered a part of the main building and shall be subject to the area, lot coverage and setback regulations of this ordinance applicable to main buildings. 
2.  An accessory structure is considered attached when: a. The accessory structure is attached by a common wall through which a doorway provided direct access from the principal building into the accessory structure; or b. The accessory structure is attached by a breezeway with a floor area of 70 square feet or greater. The distance between the main structure and the accessory structure attached by a breezeway shall not be greater than ten feet. 
3.  The maximum height for attached accessory structures shall be the maximum height permitted in the zoning district or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-10.102 - Detached Accessory Structures 
A.  Area. Detached structures accessory to a residential or non-residential building may be located in the side or rear yard. Such structures shall not be located in the front yard. The combined floor area of all detached accessory buildings on a single parcel shall not exceed the limits set forth in the following table, so long as total building area of all structures does not exceed the maximum lot coverage as provided in Section 138-5.100: 
Lot or Parcel Size 	Maximum Permitted Combined 
Accessory Structure Floor Area 
0.01 - 0.99 acres 	1,000 square feet 
1.00 - 1.99 acres 	1,200 square feet 
2.00 - 2.99 acres 	1,400 square feet 
3.00 - 3.99 acres 	1,600 square feet 
4.00 - 4.99 acres 	1,800 square feet 
5.00 or more acres 	2,000 square feet 
 
For purposes of this subsection, floor area of an accessory structure shall be defined as the exterior footprint of the structure supporting a roof measured from the exterior of the exterior walls, assembly or structural supports. A structure shall be considered detached when it is completely separate from the main structure and when it does not meet one of the conditions noted in Section 138-10.101.A.2, above. 
B.  Setbacks. A detached structure accessory to a residential building on properties less than two acres shall be located no closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line. A detached structure accessory to a residential building on properties two acres or larger shall be located no closer than 20 feet to any side or rear lot line. A detached structure accessory to a non-residential building shall be located no closer than ten feet to any side or rear lot line. A detached accessory structure shall not be located in any required side yard. 
C.  Height. 
1.  No detached accessory structure in an RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, RMH or RCD district shall exceed one story or 14 feet in height when the roof pitch of the accessory structure is less than 4/12. If the roof pitch is 4/12 or greater, the maximum building height is 16 feet. 
2.  Detached accessory structures in all zoning districts except for those listed in Section 138-10.102.F.1 above may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in such districts, subject to site plan review requirements. 
D.  Other Zoning Districts. Accessory structures in all other zoning districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in such districts, subject to site plan review requirements. 
(Ord. No. 182 , § 7, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-10.103 - Corner Lots 
Buildings or structures accessory to a residential dwelling unit located on a corner lot shall comply with the greater of the following setbacks: 
A.  Side street setback. The accessory structure shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from a right-of-way or utility easement. 
B.  Front setback from side street required. Where a residential dwelling unit is located on a lot within 300 feet of the corner lot, is located on the same side of the street or across the street from the corner lot, and has a front yard relationship to a street upon which the corner lot has frontage, the accessory structure located on the corner lot may not be located closer to the street than the front yard setback required for the adjacent lot or lot across the street having the front yard relationship with said street. 
Refer to the illustration on the following page for examples of corner lot accessory structure setback requirements: 
SITUATION A - all adjacent and nearby houses have front yard relationship on street 1, no adjacent or nearby houses have front yard relationship on street 3. A front yard setback is required for accessory buildings from street 1, and a ten-foot setback is required for accessory buildings from street 3. 
SITUATION B - There are adjacent and nearby houses that have a front yard relationship to streets 1, 2, and 3, so a front yard setback is required for accessory buildings from streets 1, 2, and 3. 
SITUATION C - There are adjacent and nearby houses that have a front yard relationship to streets 2, and 3, so a front yard setback is required for accessory buildings from streets 2, and 3. 
 
(Ord. No. 182 , § 7, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 183 , § 19, adopted June 18, 2018 deleted former § 138-10.103 entitled "Height", and further renumbered §§ 138-10.104—38-10.108 as §§ 138-10.103—38-10.107 as herein set out.  
SECTION 138-10.104 - Exceptions 
A building accessory to a residential building may be constructed with a floor area or height greater than otherwise permitted, subject to the following limitations: 
A.  Land division. Whenever a residential lot is divided or partitioned, the accessory structures located on such lot shall be removed or reduced in size in order that accessory structures located on the resultant parcels will conform to the maximum area and height limitations of this section. 
B.  Historic districts. In regard to an accessory structure which is located on a lot designated under article II of chapter 118 of the City Code of Ordinances as a historic district, the Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the accessory structure to be constructed to a height greater than what is otherwise allowed under this section, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  The accessory structure may not exceed the height of the main building; 
2.  The accessory structure may not exceed the structure height limitation applicable to the zoning district under Section 138-5.100; 
3.  The Historic Districts Commission must first approve the accessory structure and submit to the approving authority a written recommendation explaining specifically why the commission believes increased height is necessary in order to further the purpose and objectives of the commission and article II of chapter 118 of the Code of Ordinances; 
4.  A greater height shall only be allowed if the accessory structure is built in the exact location on the property as shown on the site plan or application for a height increase. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-10.105 - Decks and Patios 
A.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this Section, shall have the following meaning: 
1.  Deck. A platform structure, either freestanding or attached to a building, without a roof that is elevated above the surface of the ground and supported by columns or posts. A deck is not intended to provide shelter or create an enclosure. 
2.  Deck, Attached. A deck that is physically attached to and supported by the principal building. 
3.  Deck, Detached. A deck that is not physically attached to or supported by the principal building. 
4.  Patio. An area with a hard surface that is completely supported by the ground. 
5.  Roofed Deck. Any deck that is either completely or partially roofed, inclusive of open beams or latticework. 
B.  Decks. 
1.  Attached and Detached Decks. Attached and detached decks are accessory structures and shall meet the setback requirements for detached accessory structures. 
2.  Roof Structures. 
a.  Any roof structure that is open 50 percent or more to allow the passage of the elements shall be considered an accessory structure and shall meet all applicable standards for an attached or detached deck. 
b.  Any roof structure that is open less than 50 percent and located within ten feet of the principal structure shall comply with the setback requirements for the principal building. 
C.  Patios. Patios may be located in any rear or side yard, provided that a five-foot setback is maintained from any property line. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-10.106 - Gazebos 
Gazebos are permitted in the RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RCD, RM-1 and RMH districts, subject to the following limitations: 
A.  Area. Gazebos shall not exceed 180 square feet in floor area. However, the floor area of gazebos shall not count toward the maximum allowable floor area for accessory structures. 
B.  Height. Gazebos shall not exceed one story or 16 feet in height. If the gazebo is part of a deck attached to the main building, the height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the usable floor surface of the main building to the highest point of the gazebo roof. 
C.  Setbacks. Gazebos shall comply with the yard and setback regulations applicable to detached accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-10.107 - Fences 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The standards for fences contained in subsections B and C below, shall apply to all fences installed or replaced in the city, subject only to those exceptions set forth in subsection A.2 below. 
2.  This article shall not apply to the following fences installed or replaced: 
a.  In accordance with an approved site plan; or 
b.  Swimming pool enclosures as specified in the state construction code. 
B.  In General. 
1.  Fences shall be installed and maintained free from defects, safety hazards and collapse, and shall be kept in good repair. 
2.  No signs, words, letters, images or illustrations, except for those signs required in subsection C.5 of this section, may be painted or otherwise affixed to fences. 
C.  Residential Fences. Fences in a residential district shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Residential fences may be located along a property line if the other provisions of this section are met. 
2.  Fences that are located along the side and rear lot lines shall be a maximum of six feet in height and may not extend closer to the front lot line than the front of the dwelling or the minimum front setback, whichever is less, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance. In no instance shall an obscuring fence over three feet high be placed between the front of a residence and minimum front setback line, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance. Fences on corner lots shall meet the standards for corner lots as provided in Section 138-10.104. 
3.  Fences not to exceed three feet in height shall be permitted within a required front yard setback or an side street yard setback; provided, however, that corner clearance as provided in Section 138-5.204 has been met. 
4.  Materials used shall be wood, metal, bricks, masonry or other solid natural or synthetic material that is all-weather resistant and designed for permanent and stationary fencing or screening. Fabric-type materials are not permitted. Wire fences, barbed or razor wire, spikes, nails or any other sharp pointed instruments of any kind are prohibited. 
5.  Electrically charged fences are prohibited, except that the building department may approve electric fences for the purpose of retaining animals under the following circumstances: 
a.  Sufficient proof has been presented that the fence will not be hazardous to persons or animals; 
b.  The power source shall be obtained from a listed electric fence controller; and 
c.  Signs shall be conspicuously located on the fence warning that the fence is electrified. 
D.  Non-Residential Fences. Fences in non-residential district shall comply with the following: 
1.  The erection, construction or alteration of any fence, wall or other type of protective barrier shall be approved by the Building Official as to the fence conforming to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and to the requirements of this section. 
2.  The maximum height for all fences shall be eight feet, unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance. Security fences made of anodized aluminum, or other approved ornamental material, may be permitted to a maximum height of ten feet at the discretion of the Planning Commission. Barbed wire cradles that face inward may be permitted, at the discretion of the Planning Commission and City Council. 
3.  Materials used shall be wood, metal, bricks, masonry or other solid natural or synthetic material that is all-weather resistant and designed for permanent and stationary fencing or screening. Fabric-type materials are not permitted. Open, wire fences shall be of a chain-link variety only. Plastic, vinyl, aluminum, or wood slates or similar devices placed through the wire fences, shall not be used to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance for screening or an obscuring fence. 
(Ord. No. 182 , § 7, 2-5-2018; Ord. No. 183 , § 19, 6-18-2018)  
CHAPTER 2. - EXTERIOR LIGHTING 
 
SECTION 138-10.200 - Purpose 
The purpose of this Chapter is to preserve, protect, and enhance the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of all properties in the City through the use of appropriate lighting practices and systems. Exterior lighting shall be designed, installed and maintained to control glare and light trespass, minimize obtrusive light, conserve energy and resources, maintain safety, security and productivity, and prevent the degradation of the nighttime visual environment. It is the further intent of this Chapter to encourage the use of innovative lighting designs and decorative light fixtures that enhance the character of the community while preserving the nighttime visual environment.  
SECTION 138-10.201 - General Provisions 
The design and illumination standards of this Chapter shall apply to all exterior lighting sources and other light sources visible from the public right-of-way, road easement, or adjacent parcels, except where specifically exempted herein. 
 
Figure 5. Lighting FixtureOrientation and Shielding 
A.  Shielding. Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward at a 90 degree angle. Oblique lenses (such as many wall-pack fixtures) are prohibited. All fixtures shall incorporate full cutoff housings, louvers, glare shields, optics, reflectors or other measures to prevent off-site glare and minimize light pollution. Only flat lenses are permitted on light fixtures; sag or protruding lenses are prohibited. 
B.  Intensity. The following light intensity requirements shall apply on all sites within the City. 
1.  The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed ten footcandles. Exception: the maximum intensity permitted in areas of intensive vehicular use, such as the area underneath gas station pump canopies, in the immediate vicinity of ATM facilities, or outdoor sales areas shall be 20 footcandles. 
2.  The maximum light intensity permitted at a street right-of-way line shall be one footcandle. 
3.  The maximum light intensity permitted at any property line other than a street right-of-way shall be 0.5 footcandles. 
C.  Glare and light trespass. Exterior lighting sources shall be designed, constructed, located and maintained in a manner that does not cause off-site glare on neighboring properties or street rights-of-way. In general, the hot spot, or light emitting element of any light fixture shall not be directly visible from a neighboring property, as this is the primary cause of glare. 
D.  Lamps. 
1.  Wattage. Lamps with a maximum wattage of 250 watts per fixture are permitted for use in the City to maintain a unified lighting standard and to minimize light pollution. The Planning Commission may permit the use of lamps with wattages up to 400 watts if the applicant can demonstrate that the higher wattage fixture is necessary to provide adequate lighting on the site and that the light fixture is in compliance with all other requirements of this Chapter. The exemption for higher wattage lamps shall not be granted if the same lighting effect can be reasonably accomplished on the site by incorporating additional 250 watt fixtures into the site design. 
2.  Low traffic areas. Low-pressure sodium lamps are recommended for security lighting purposes in areas of low vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
3.  High traffic areas. Due to their superior color rendering characteristics, high pressure sodium or metal halide lamps should be used in parking lots and other areas of high pedestrian and vehicular traffic use. 
4.  LED Lighting. LED fixtures may be used for any outdoor lighting application. Any LED fixture used for parking lot or street lighting purposes shall comply with applicable Illuminating Engineering Society of North America standards. 
E.  Animated lighting. Permanent exterior lighting shall not be of a flashing, moving, animated, or intermittent type. 
F.  Hours of operation. All exterior lighting in nonresidential districts shall incorporate automatic timers and shall be turned off between the hours of midnight and sunrise, except for lighting necessary for security purposes or accessory to a use that continues after midnight. 
G.  Measurement. Light intensity shall be measured in footcandles on the horizontal plane at grade level within the site, and on the vertical plane at the property or street-right-of-way boundaries of the site at a height of five feet above grade level.  
SECTION 138-10.202 - Standards by Type of Fixture 
A.  Freestanding pole and building mounted lighting. The maximum height of such fixtures is 20 feet. Where a pole or building mounted fixture is located within 50 feet of a residentially zoned or used property, the maximum pole height shall be 15 feet. 
B.  Decorative light fixtures. The Planning Commission may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures, provided that such fixtures would enhance the aesthetics of the site and would not cause off-site glare or light pollution. Such fixtures may utilize incandescent, tungsten-halogen, metal halide or high-pressure sodium lamps with a maximum wattage of one-hundred watts (100w) per fixture.  
SECTION 138-10.203 - Exempt Lighting 
The following exterior lighting types are exempt from the requirements of this Article, except that the Zoning Administrator may take steps to minimize glare, light trespass or light pollution impacts where determined to be necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public: 
A.  Holiday decorations. 
B.  Pedestrian walkway lighting. 
C.  Residential lighting. 
D.  Instances where federal or state laws, rules or regulations take precedence over the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  Temporary emergency lighting.  
SECTION 138-10.204 - Exceptions 
It is recognized by the City that there are certain uses or circumstances not otherwise addressed in this Chapter, such as sports stadiums, streetlighting, or lighting for monuments and flags, that may have special exterior lighting requirements. The Planning Commission or the Planning and Development Director may waive or modify specific provisions of this Chapter for a particular use or circumstance upon determining that all of the following conditions have been satisfied. The Planning Commission shall be the deciding body in all cases where site plan or special use approval is required, while the Planning and Development Director shall decide in all other cases. 
A.  The waiver or modification is necessary because of safety or design factors unique to the use, circumstance or site. 
B.  The minimum possible light intensity is used that would be adequate for the intended purpose. Consideration shall be given to maximizing safety and energy conservation, and to minimizing light pollution, off-site glare and light trespass on to neighboring properties or street rights-of-way. 
C.  For lighting related to streets or other vehicle access areas, a determination is made that the purpose of the lighting cannot be achieved by installation of reflectorized markers, lines, informational signs or other passive means. 
D.  Additional conditions or limitations may be imposed by the review authority to protect the public health, safety or welfare, or to fulfill the purpose of this Chapter.  
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
SECTION 138-10.300 - One-Family Residential Design Standards 
A one-family dwelling and any additions or alterations thereto erected or placed in the City, other than mobile homes located in a licensed mobile home park approved under Article 6, Chapter 4, shall conform to the following in addition to all other regulations of this ordinance: 
A.  It shall comply with all pertinent building, construction and fire codes for single-family dwellings. 
B.  The plan outline of the dwelling, including heated living areas, shall be large enough to contain within it a square of 20 feet on a side. This size requirement shall not make any house existing at the date of amendment nonconforming so that they cannot be enlarged or improved. 
C.  It shall be firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the state construction code and shall have a rat wall under the entire perimeter of the structure, and shall be constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code for single-family dwellings. If the dwelling is a mobile home, as defined in this ordinance, such dwelling shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the state mobile home commission and shall have a perimeter wall as required in this section. 
D.  If a dwelling is a mobile home as defined in this ordinance, each mobile home shall be installed with the wheels removed. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis. 
E.  It shall be connected to a public sewer and water supply, if available, or if not available to private facilities approved by the county health department. 
F.  It shall comply with all pertinent zoning, subdivision and other ordinances regulating use, floor area, lot size, setback, yards, etc., in the zoning district in which it is located. 
G.  It shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes. If a mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to such mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
H.  It shall be in compliance with the standards contained in this subsection, and shall be aesthetically compatible in character, design and appearance to residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks, as follows: 
1.  If located in a platted subdivision with at least one existing home, it shall be compatible with homes in the particular plat of which it is a part. 
2.  If not located in a platted subdivision and the area within 500 feet has existing homes, it shall be compatible with those homes within the 500 feet that might reasonably be considered to be an identifiable neighborhood of which it would be a part. 
3.  Otherwise, it shall be compatible with homes generally located throughout the City. 
4.  The determination of compatibility shall be based upon compliance with the following standards: 
a.  The dwelling shall have a roof covered with composition asphalt organic felt shingles or a material of similar texture, malleability and coarseness, not to exclude copper, wood, slate or clay material, as on roofs of homes with which the dwelling is to be compatible. 
b.  The roof of the dwelling shall have a slope of not less than two vertical units to each 12 horizontal units. 
c.  The dwelling shall have steps and/or porches which provide access to exterior doors, which are permanently attached to the ground and to the structure, or which are comparable to steps and/or porches of homes with which the dwelling is to be compatible. 
d.  The exterior surface of exterior walls of a dwelling and roof shall be covered with wood or stucco, or a material of metal, metal alloy, brick, masonry, vinyl or plastic with major actual or visual vertical or horizontal joints spaced at not more than eight inches apart. 
e.  The dwelling shall have windows located on the front elevations, and shall have exterior doors either on the front and rear, or front and side as generally found in homes with which the dwelling is to be compatible. 
f.  The dwelling shall not have a detached garage, if attached garages are typical to homes with which the dwelling is to be compatible. 
g.  The ratio of the horizontal dimension of the front to side elevation of the structure shall not be more than three units to one unit. 
5.  If no more than two of the standards in this subsection are not met, a dwelling may be approved as aesthetically compatible in character, design and appearance, provided it is determined that the dwelling and/or its site have other design features which make it aesthetically compatible with the homes with which it is to be compatible. This shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as energy conscious devices such as solar energy, view, unique land contour or relief from the common or standard designed home. 
6.  An applicant for a building permit aggrieved by an adverse decision by the building department may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which board shall make the determination, with findings, based upon its independent judgment, without reference to the standards for the granting of variances.  
SECTION 138-10.301 - Basement Residency 
Basement residency is expressly prohibited in the City; however, bedroom or kitchen facilities that are part of a principal single-family dwelling unit and that do not constitute a separate dwelling unit are permitted. Points of egress via daylight windows or walkout basements are also permitted, provided that they are not part of a dwelling unit located in a basement.  
SECTION 138-10.302 - Signs 
Signs shall be regulated by Chapter 134 of the City Code of Ordinances pertaining to signs. The minimum front yard setback for signs shall be as provided in Chapter 134 of the City Code of Ordinances.  
SECTION 138-10.303 - Use Restrictions 
No portion of a lot or parcel once used in complying with the sections of this ordinance for yards, lot area per family, density as for a development in the multiple-family district, or percentage of lot occupancy, in connection with an existing or proposed building or structure, shall again be used as part of the lot or parcel required in connection with any other building or structure existing or intended to exist at the same time.  
SECTION 138-10.304 - Voting Places 
This Chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election.  
SECTION 138-10.305 - Access Through Yards 
For the purpose of this ordinance, subject to Section 138-11.102.B.4.c, with respect to private roads, private drives and off-street parking areas, including maneuvering lanes, within required yards in the RM-1 and RCD districts where the adjacent property is zoned one-family residential, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards and/or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further any walk, terrace, or other pavement servicing the like function, and not in excess of nine inches above grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this ordinance not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required yards.  
SECTION 138-10.306 - Dual Use of Property 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance, no parcel of property may be used for more than one use at a time. An example, but not as a limitation, would be a parcel of property with a residential nonconforming use in a business or industrial district shall not also be used for a business or industrial use.  
SECTION 138-10.307 - Essential Public Services and Utilities 
Essential services buildings and structures shall be permitted as authorized under any franchise in effect within the City. Such essential services shall be subject to State laws, City ordinances and regulations in addition to being consistent with the list of uses permitted in each zoning district. It is the intent of this Section to ensure conformity of all buildings, structures, uses and storage yards to the requirements of this ordinance wherever such conformity shall be practicable and not in conflict with the specific requirements of such franchise, state legislation, or City ordinance. In the absence of such conflict, the ordinance shall prevail.  
SECTION 138-10.308. - Parking and Storage of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles 
A.  Commercial Vehicles and Equipment. 
1.  Public Property. A person shall not park or store any commercial vehicle identified in paragraph A.2.a, below or commercial equipment on public property located in any zoning district, including but not limited to public streets, rights-of-way, bike paths, greenbelts, and planting areas between bike paths and streets, except as allowed in paragraph A.4, below. 
2.  Residential Districts. 
a.  A person shall not park or store any step vans, cube vans, buses, dump trucks, stake trucks, flatbed trucks, wreckers, semi trucks and trailers, tank trucks, commercial and construction equipment and trailers and any similar trucks and equipment in a residential district, except as allowed in paragraph A.4, below. 
b.  Commercial vehicles other than as specified in paragraph A.2.a, above, such as pickup trucks, passenger/cargo-style vans with seating of up to 15 persons, sport utility vehicles, passenger cars, and similar type vehicles, with no more than allowed accessories as provided in paragraph A.2.d, below, may be parked or stored in a residential district. 
c.  A maximum of one commercial vehicle of the type described in paragraph A.2.b, above, which is used for transportation by occupants of the home on the property shall be stored or parked outside of an enclosed building. 
d.  Allowed accessories shall mean equipment attached to vehicles which does not extend a vehicle to more than nine feet in height or wider or longer than the manufacturer's specification for the vehicle without the equipment. Roof accessory racks, but not side racks, shall be allowed. A plow on the front and a spreader on the rear of a vehicle may be attached even if the length of the vehicle is extended beyond the manufacturer's specification. 
e.  A person shall not park or store a vehicle outside of an enclosed building in a residential district if there is a sign on it not directly related to the vehicle's use. 
3.  Nonresidential Districts. A person shall not park or store any commercial vehicle identified in paragraph A.2.a, above, or commercial equipment on private property in any nonresidential district except as is allowed in paragraph A.4, below, or unless such vehicle or equipment is parked or stored in relation to a permitted principal or accessory use of the property. In such event, parking or storage must comply with all other city codes and ordinances. 
4.  Exception. The parking or storage of commercial vehicles identified in paragraph A.2.a, above, or commercial equipment shall be allowed in any zoning district, where such parking or storage is limited to vehicles or equipment engaged in the performance of a service on the adjacent or underlying property, for the period of time reasonably necessary to complete the service. 
B.  Vehicle for Sale. 
1.  A person shall not park any motor vehicle on any private property in the city without the expressed or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. 
2.  A person shall not park any motor vehicle on any private property, with or without consent of the owner, within 100 feet of a street right-of-way with a speed limit greater than 25 mph for the principal purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale, displaying, advertising, or selling merchandise from such vehicle, except within the defined limits of a duly established new or used automobile dealership or sales lot, which shall not include bike paths adjacent to any automobile dealership or sales lot, or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinance code provisions of the city. 
C.  Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  A person shall not park and/or store a recreational vehicle, snowmobile, camper enclosure, utility trailer, boat or similar vehicle or equipment not owned by the occupant or owner of the premises for a period exceeding 72 hours on lands not approved for such parking or storage, except that the building department may grant a temporary permit allowing the parking of a recreational vehicle on private property not to exceed a period of two weeks. All recreational vehicles, snowmobiles, camper enclosures, utility trailers, boats, and similar vehicles or equipment owned by city residents stored in residential districts on their individual lots or premises shall not be stored within any front yard or any required side yard and shall further conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance applicable to accessory buildings, insofar as distances from main buildings, lot lines, and rights-of-way are concerned. 
2.  The parking and storage of recreational vehicles, snowmobiles, camper enclosures, utility trailers, boats and similar vehicles or equipment in residential districts shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  All such units parked or stored outside of a completely enclosed building shall be kept in a state of proper repair and secured to prevent unauthorized entry. 
b.  The parking and storage of such units shall be limited to a lot or parcel upon which an occupied dwelling is located. 
c.  All such units shall not be connected to electricity, gas, water or sanitary sewer facilities, except that a temporary electrical connection may be made for the purpose of recharging batteries. 
d.  All such units shall not at any time be used for living or housekeeping purposes while on the premises. 
e.  A person shall not park or store any such unit upon any public property, including public streets, stub streets, rights-of-way, bike paths and planting areas between pathways and streets, except as allowed in paragraph C.2.f, below. 
f.  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, such a unit may be temporarily parked or stored within any front yard or on a public street for a period not to exceed 72 hours for the purpose of loading, unloading, trip preparation or minor, routine maintenance and repair, although at no time shall any unmounted camper enclosure or any snowmobile or boat not mounted on a utility trailer be parked or stored within any front yard, required side yard or public street. 
D.  Responsibility for Compliance. The owner of the vehicle, equipment or other unit and the owner or occupant of private property upon which the vehicle, equipment or other unit is parked or stored shall each be responsible for compliance with the terms of this section. In any proceeding for the violation of any section of this section, the person to whom the vehicle, equipment or unit is registered, as determined from the registration plate displayed on the vehicle, equipment or unit, shall be presumed in evidence to be the owner. If no registration plate exists, the owner shall be presumed in evidence to be the titleholder, lessee or other person with an immediate right of possession. For purposes of determining the ownership of real property, it shall be presumed in evidence that the person to whom the property is assessed on the city's most recent tax assessment roll is the owner of the property. 
E.  Violations. 
1.  Notice. A written notice of violation of this section shall be served on the person in violation directing the discontinuance and abatement of the illegal action or condition within 24 hours. For purposes of serving this notice on a commercial or recreational vehicle owner, it shall be sufficient to affix the notice in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. 
2.  Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with the notice of violation shall constitute a violation of this section. 
3.  Subsequent Violations. For subsequent or repeat violations by the same person, a written notice of violation shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 180/593 , § 4, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-10.309 - Excavation and Filling of Land 
A.  Soil Excavation and Landfill Ordinance. Any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to compliance with and operations and/or activities under a permit shall conform with the City soil excavation and landfill ordinance in Article II of Chapter 126 of the Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Exempt Activities. No permit under this ordinance (a land improvement permit may be required pursuant to Article II of Chapter 126 of the Code of Ordinances) shall be required for: 
1.  Excavations for the construction of buildings or structures permitted in the City for which a building permit has been issued; 
2.  The moving, grading or leveling of earth or rock materials by a property owner solely upon his own property and not removed to other noncontiguous property; 
3.  The filling of land for purposes of construction where the land is low and in need of fill so long as the fill does not contain any refuse, the fill material does not exceed five inches in depth when spread on the area to be filled, it is not a commercial operation and not more than five acres are involved on any given site; or 
4.  The removal of soil, etc., when no more than 20 cubic yards are removed in any calendar year. 
C.  Site Work Not Incidental to Construction or an Exempt Activity shall require a land improvement permit pursuant to Article II of Chapter 114 of the City Code of Ordinances prior to any site work being completed. Clearing, excavation, filling, grubbing, disking or blading of land.  
SECTION 138-10.310 - Performance Standards 
The following performance standards are established in order to preserve the environmental health, safety and welfare of the City. No activity, operation or use of land, building or equipment shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable element or condition that adversely affects the surrounding area. Any use permitted by this ordinance shall be operated in conformance with all applicable performance standards set forth in this Section 138-10.310. The following standards are deemed the minimum requirements to be maintained. 
A.  Airborne Emissions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke or air contaminant in violation of applicable air quality standards adopted by the Federal Clean Air Act and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
B.  Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the public or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public shall be removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove the odor. Such odors shall be prohibited when perceptible at any point along the property line. 
C.  Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is injurious or destructive, harmful to person or property, or explosive is prohibited. 
D.  Noise and Vibration. 
1.  Noise which is objectionable due to intensity, frequency, or duration shall be muffled, attenuated, or otherwise controlled, subject to the following: 
a.  Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature, or sounds characterized by high frequencies shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
b.  Sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt from this requirement. Noise resulting from temporary construction activity shall also be exempt from this requirement. 
c.  The emission of measurable noises from the premises shall not exceed 65 decibels as measured at the boundary or property lines, except that where normal street traffic noises exceed 65 decibels during such periods, the measurable noise emanating from the premises may equal, but shall not exceed, such traffic noises. Within the I district, sound levels not exceeding 75 decibels may be permitted. 
In addition, objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature or sounds characterized by high frequencies, even if falling below the decibel limits, shall be so controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. This shall particularly apply to loading and unloading areas in commercial or industrial districts adjacent to residential districts. 
2.  Vibration. No use shall generate any ground transmitted vibration in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibration shall be measured at the nearest adjacent lot line. The vibration maximums set forth below are stated in terms of particle velocity, which may be measured with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and frequency. When computed, the following standards shall apply: 
Particle Velocity in Inches-Per-Second 
Frequency in Cycles per Second 	Displacement in Inches 
0 to 9.99 	0.0010 
10 to 19.99 	0.0008 
20 to 29.99 	0.0006 
30 to 39.99 	0.0004 
40 and over 	0.0002 
 
a.  If requested by the enforcement official the petitioner shall provide evidence of compliance with the above noted vibration calculations. 
b.  Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
E.  Electrical Disturbance, Electromagnetic, or Radio Frequency Interference. No use shall create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations of equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance, or cause, create or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including television and radio broadcasting transmission) to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely affected. 
F.  Hazardous Substances. 
1.  Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a business of conducting an activity which uses, stores, or generates hazardous substances shall obtain the necessary permits and/or licenses from the appropriate Federal, State or local authority having jurisdiction. The City shall be informed of any and all inspections conducted by a Federal, State or local authority in connection with a permit and/or license. 
2.  Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a business or conducting an activity which uses, stores, or generates hazardous substances shall complete and file a hazardous materials survey in conjunction with the following: 
a.  Upon submission of a site plan. 
b.  Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or premise. 
c.  Upon any change of the manner in which such substances are used, handled, stored, and/or in the event of a change in the type of substances to be used, handled or stored. 
G.  Glare and radioactive materials. 
1.  Glare from any process, such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting, which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
2.  Glare from automobile headlights or commercial or industrial vehicle headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property so as to become a nuisance. 
3.  In nonresidential areas, exterior lighting shall be installed so that the source of light shall not be visible from any residential dwelling and shall be so arranged as far as practical to reflect light away from the residential use. In no case shall more than one candlepower of light cross a lot line five feet above the ground into a residential district. 
H.  Fire and explosive hazards. The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquified petroleum gases and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations as established by Public Act No. 207 of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.). 
I.  Waste and rubbish dumping. No garbage, sewage, filth, refuse, waste, trash, debris or rubbish, including cans, bottles, wastepaper, cartons, boxes and crates, or other offensive or obnoxious matter shall be kept in open containers or piled, placed, stored or dumped on any land within the City in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance or create a hazard to health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City. 
J.  Building mechanical equipment. For all uses, except residential uses, heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanical equipment located on the exterior of the building shall be screened from adjacent public or private streets and adjacent properties. If the equipment is mounted on the building, it shall be screened in a manner that is architecturally compatible with the building design. If the equipment is ground mounted, it shall be screened in a similar manner and/or with evergreen plant materials. The method of screening shall be approved by the Planning Commission or official approving the site plan. Other types of mechanical equipment located on the exterior of the building, such as dust collectors, hoppers, stacks, etc., that cannot practicably be screened, shall be designed, located and/or painted to minimize the adverse visual impact.  
SECTION 138-10.311 - Dumpster and Trash Storage Screening 
A.  Screening shall be required for trash receptacles or other outdoor storage of refuse or waste bins or materials whenever the storage area is visible from a public or private road or from an adjacent property. When the dumpster or trash storage area is accessory to an industrial use, and is not visible from a public road or from any property located in a zoning district other than the industrial district, screening may not be required at the discretion of the reviewing authority based on site conditions. 
B.  When screening is required for trash receptacles or other outdoor storage of refuse or waste, an enclosure constructed of masonry material and sturdy obscuring wood gates shall be provided. The enclosure shall be at least six feet in height or equal to the height of the receptacle or waste material being stored, whichever is greater. If the enclosure is in a conspicuous location or visible from a public road or residential zoning district, the Planning Commission or official approving the site plan may specify the type and/or appearance of masonry material to be used to construct the enclosure. 
( Ord. No. 581, § 3, 11-11-2013 )  
CHAPTER 4. - SUSTAINABLE ENERGY GENERATION 
 
SECTION 138-10.400 - Wind Energy 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of wind energy systems to reduce or replace on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity. It is the purpose of this Section to standardize and streamline the review and permitting process for small wind energy systems. 
B.  Findings. The City has found that wind energy is an abundant, renewable, and nonpolluting energy resource and that its conversion to electricity will reduce our dependence on non-renewable energy resources and decrease air and water pollution that results from the use of conventional fossil-fuel inputs. Wind energy systems will also enhance the reliability and power quality of the power grid, reduce peak power demands, and help diversify the City's energy supply portfolio. 
C.  Definitions. The terms used in this section have the following meanings: 
 
Figure 6. Horizontal and Vertical Axis Systems 
Height. The vertical distance from grade level adjacent to the base of the structure to the center of the hub for a horizontal axis wind turbine or the highest point of a vertical-axis wind turbine. 
Roof-Mounted Energy System. A type of small wind energy conversion system that is mounted on a roof with a height not greater than 15 feet above the ridgeline of a pitched roof or parapet of a flat roof. 
Small Wind Energy System. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, tower or axis, blades or blade system, and associated control or conversion electronics primarily intended to reduce on-site consumption of utility power. 
Tower Mounted Wind Energy System. A wind energy conversion system that is mounted on a freestanding or guyed tower attached to the ground, and not attached to any other permanent or temporary structure. 
Utility Wind Energy System. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, tower or axis, blades or blade system, and associated control or conversion electronics primarily intended to provide wholesale or retail energy to the electric utility grid. 
Wind Energy System. Any wind energy conversion device including all associated control or conversion electronics. 
D.  Where Permitted. 
1.  Small Wind Energy Systems are permitted by right in any zoning district, provided that the requirements of this Section are met. 
2.  Utility Wind Energy Systems may be permitted in any zoning district as a conditional use by the City Council, provided that the requirements of this Section are met. 
E.  Review Procedures and Standards. 
1.  Small Wind Energy Systems. 
a.  Submittal Requirements. Applications for small wind energy systems shall be reviewed administratively by the Planning and Development Department. The applicant shall submit a plan complying with the requirements of Section 138-2.208 for a sketch plan. 
b.  Height Modification. If the applicant requests a height modification, the application shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission following a public hearing held in accordance with the requirements of Section 138-1.203. 
2.  Utility Wind Energy Systems. The review process for any utility wind energy system shall follow the conditional use review process set forth in Article 2, Chapter 3. 
F.  General Standards. The following requirements are applicable to all wind energy systems. 
1.  Noise. A wind energy system shall not generate a noise level of 55 dB(A), measured at the property line, for more than three minutes in any hour of the day. EXCEPTION: if the constant ambient sound pressure level exceeds 55 dB(A), measured at the base of the wind energy system, a decibel level of the ambient dB(A) plus five dB(A) shall not be exceeded for more than three minutes in any hour of the day. 
2.  Shadow Flicker. Shadow flicker is a term used to describe what happens when rotating wind turbine blades pass between the viewer and the sun, causing an intermittent shadow. The application for a wind energy system shall include a shadow flicker analysis demonstrating locations where shadow flicker will occur at sunrise and sunset, along with measures the applicant will take to eliminate or mitigate the effects of shadow flicker on adjacent or nearby affected properties. 
3.  Lighting. No wind energy system shall be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
4.  Appearance, Color, and Finish. The wind energy system shall be maintained in the color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer, unless otherwise approved in the building permit. All wind energy systems shall be finished in a non-reflective matte finished color. 
5.  Signs. All signs other than the manufacturer or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification signs are prohibited. 
6.  Electrical Wires. All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system other than wire necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and grounding wires shall be located underground. 
7.  Compliance With Electrical Code. Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by line drawings of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code. 
8.  System Access. The tower shall be designed and installed such that step bolts, ladders, or other means of access readily accessible to the public are located at least eight feet above grade level. 
9.  Wind Access. The City makes no assurance of wind access other than the provisions of this Section. The applicant may provide evidence of covenants, easement or similar documentation for abutting property owners providing access to wind for the operation of a wind energy system. 
G.  Tower-Mounted Small Wind Energy Systems. The following standards are applicable to tower-mounted small wind energy systems: 
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PARCELS 	NONRESIDENTIALLY ZONED 
AND USED PARCELS 
Minimum Parcel Area 
0.5 acres 	No minimum parcel area. 
Maximum Height 
The maximum height is: 
- 35 feet plus the area of the parcel in acres multiplied by 17.5, or 
- 150 feet, 
whichever is lower. 	The maximum height is: 
- One foot of height for each 2.5 feet of setback from the base of the tower to the nearest residential dwelling unit, or 
- 150 feet, 
whichever is lower. 
Setback Requirements 
- The minimum setback from any property line shall be the height of the wind turbine plus five feet. 
- The minimum setback from any road or overhead utility right-of-way or easement shall be equal to the height of the turbine unless written permission is granted by the governmental agency or other entity with jurisdiction over the right-of-way or easement. 
- Tower-mounted wind energy systems may not be located in the front yard of any lot unless the principal building is set back 200 feet or more. In such a case, a tower-mounted system may be located in the front yard provided that a minimum 150-foot front yard setback between the tower and the front property line is maintained. 	- The minimum setback from any property line shall be the height of the wind turbine plus 5 feet. 
- The minimum setback from any road or overhead utility right-of-way or easement shall be equal to the height of the turbine unless written permission is granted by the governmental agency or other entity with jurisdiction over the right-of-way or easement. 
- Tower-mounted wind energy systems may not be located in the front yard of any lot unless the principal building is set back 200 feet or more. In such a case, a tower-mounted system may be located in the front yard provided that a minimum 150-foot front yard setback between the tower and the front property line is maintained. 
 
H.  Roof-Mounted Small Wind Energy Systems. The following standards are applicable to roof-mounted small wind energy systems: 
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PARCELS 	NONRESIDENTIALLY ZONED 
AND USED PARCELS 
Minimum Parcel Area 
No minimum parcel area. 	No minimum parcel area. 
Maximum Height 
The maximum height is 15 feet above the highest point of the roof. 	The maximum height is: 
- 20 feet above the top of roof elevation of the building for any building located within 250 feet of a residential dwelling, or 
- 150 percent of the building height, 
whichever is lower. 
Setback Requirements 
Roof-mounted wind energy systems shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the property line, or the height of the system above the top of roof elevation multiplied by 1.25, whichever is greater. 	Roof-mounted wind energy systems shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the property line, or the height of the system above the top of roof elevation multiplied by 1.25, whichever is greater. 
 
I.  Utility Wind Energy Systems. The following standards are applicable to large wind energy systems: 
1.  Minimum Site Area. Utility wind energy systems may only be developed on a zoning lot with an area of 20 acres or greater. 
2.  Setbacks. Any utility wind energy system shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower plus five feet from any property line, road right-of-way, or overhead utility line. 
3.  Towers. Utility wind energy systems shall use tubular monopole towers, and shall not contain lettering, company insignia, advertising, or graphics on the tower or turbine that are visible beyond the property boundaries. 
4.  Environmental Impact. The applicant shall submit an environmental impact analysis prepared by a qualified third party assessing any potential impacts on the natural environment including, but not limited to wetlands and other fragile ecosystems, historical and cultural sites, wildlife, and antiquities. The applicant shall take appropriate measures, if possible, to minimize, eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts identified in the analysis. If the adverse impacts cannot be sufficiently mitigated or eliminated, City Council shall deny the request for a conditional use permit for the utility wind energy system. 
5.  Community Impact. The applicant shall be responsible for repairing any public roads or other public infrastructure damaged or otherwise worn beyond typical usage by the construction of the utility wind energy system. 
6.  Decommissioning. The applicant shall submit a decommissioning plan, including the following items of information: 
a.  The anticipated life of the project. 
b.  The estimated decommissioning costs and net salvage value in present dollars. 
c.  The method of ensuring funds will be available for decommissioning and removal of towers, and restoration of the site to a pre-construction condition. 
d.  Anticipated manner in which the project will be decommissioned and the site restored. 
7.  Complaint Resolution. The applicant shall develop a process to resolve any potential complaints from nearby residents concerning the construction and operation of the project. The process may use an independent mediator or arbitrator and shall include a time limit for acting upon a complaint. The process shall not preclude any governmental body from acting on a complaint. The applicant shall maintain and make available to nearby residents a telephone number where a project representative can be reached during normal business hours. 
SECTION 138-10.401   Solar Energy Systems
A.  Definitions. 
Solar Energy System. A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array that converts solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy. 
Solar Storage Battery. A device that stores energy from the sun and makes it available in an electrical form. 
B.  Rooftop Solar Energy Systems. Rooftop and building mounted solar energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts., subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Roof mounted systems shall not extend more than four feet above the surface to which it is affixed. 
2.  No solar energy system may protrude beyond the edge of the roof. 
3.  A building permit shall be required for installation of rooftop and building mounted systems. 
C.  Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems. Ground mounted and freestanding solar energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Location. The solar energy system shall meet the required front yard setback requirement for the district in which it is located, and be set back a minimum of five feet from any side or rear property line. 
2.  Height. 
a.  The height of the solar energy system and any mounts shall not exceed 10 feet when oriented at maximum tilt. 
b.  If the solar energy system is located in the front yard between the required front setback line and front building wall of the principal building, the maximum height for the system shall be 42 inches (3.5 feet). Evergreen landscaping that is sufficient to buffer the equipment from view from nearby dwelling units or streets but that will not obstruct the energy collecting surface from solar energy shall be provided. 
3.  Building Permit. A building permit shall be required for any ground mounted solar energy system. 
4.  Area. No more than 20 percent of the total lot area may be covered by a ground mounted solar energy system. 
D.  Batteries. When solar storage batteries are included as part of the solar collector system, they must be placed in a secure container or enclosure when in use, and when no longer used shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
E.  Removal. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its intended function for more than 12 consecutive months, the property owner shall remove the collector, mount, and associated equipment and facilities no later than 90 days after the end of the 12-month period.  
SECTION 138-10.401 - Solar Energy Systems 
A.  Definitions. 
Solar Energy System. A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array that converts solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy. 
Solar Storage Battery. A device that stores energy from the sun and makes it available in an electrical form. 
B.  Rooftop Solar Energy Systems. Rooftop and building mounted solar energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts., subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Roof mounted systems shall not extend more than four feet above the surface to which it is affixed. 
2.  No solar energy system may protrude beyond the edge of the roof. 
3.  A building permit shall be required for installation of rooftop and building mounted systems. 
C.  Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems. Ground mounted and freestanding solar energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Location. The solar energy system shall meet the required front yard setback requirement for the district in which it is located, and be set back a minimum of five feet from any side or rear property line. 
2.  Height. 
a.  The height of the solar energy system and any mounts shall not exceed 10 feet when oriented at maximum tilt. 
b.  If the solar energy system is located in the front yard between the required front setback line and front building wall of the principal building, the maximum height for the system shall be 42 inches (3.5 feet). Evergreen landscaping that is sufficient to buffer the equipment from view from nearby dwelling units or streets but that will not obstruct the energy collecting surface from solar energy shall be provided. 
3.  Building Permit. A building permit shall be required for any ground mounted solar energy system. 
4.  Area. No more than 20 percent of the total lot area may be covered by a ground mounted solar energy system. 
D.  Batteries. When solar storage batteries are included as part of the solar collector system, they must be placed in a secure container or enclosure when in use, and when no longer used shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
E.  Removal. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its intended function for more than 12 consecutive months, the property owner shall remove the collector, mount, and associated equipment and facilities no later than 90 days after the end of the 12-month period.  
ARTICLE 11 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERALLY 
 
SECTION 138-11.100 - Purpose 
Off-street facilities designed for the parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for occupants, employees and patrons of buildings erected, used, altered or extended after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Such facilities shall be maintained and not encroached upon so long as the principal use remains, unless an equivalent number of spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this ordinance. 
The purpose of this Article is also to protect water quality and the capacity of drainage and stormwater management systems; to limit the number of off-street parking spaces and amount of impervious surfaces that may be permitted on a parcel of land or accessory to a use or building; to establish flexible minimum and maximum standards for off-street parking and loading; and to promote the use and development of shared parking facilities and cross-access between sites.  
SECTION 138-11.101 - Scope 
Adequate off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in all districts in accordance with the provisions in this Article whenever a structure or use is established, constructed, altered, or expanded, an existing use is replaced by a new use (change of use), or the intensity of a use is increased through additional dwelling units, an increase in floor area or seating capacity or similar means. Such spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this Article.  
SECTION 138-11.102 - General Standards 
The following general standards shall apply to all off-street parking and loading facilities: 
A.  Provision of Spaces. There shall be provided in all zoning districts, at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as prescribed in this section. 
B.  Location of Spaces. 
1.  Proximity to Site. Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, provided, further, that such off-street parking may be located in a different zoning district than the building it is intended to serve only if that building and its proposed use would also be permitted in the different zoning district. 
2.  Location in Non-Required and Rear Yards. Off-street parking may be located within any non-required yard and within the rear yard setback. Refer to Section 138-5.100 on for yard setback requirements. 
3.  Location in Required Front and Side Yards. Off-street parking shall not be permitted in a side or front yard setback except as follows: 
a.  Off-street parking may be permitted to occupy a required front yard after approval of the parking plan layout, provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of 20 feet in I (Industrial) districts and ten feet in all other nonresidential districts between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of driveways, and the nearest right-of-way line. The buffer area between the parking lot and the right-of-way line shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 138-12.301.B. 
b.  In I (Industrial), REC-W, and REC-C districts, required side yards may be utilized for parking and loading and unloading provided that in such instances the Planning Commission shall review the plans for such area to ensure sufficient access to the building or any storage or related areas to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of employees in the building. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be provided with adequate obscuring screening at least six feet in height, except it shall not be required on the interior of the district where the area is not visible from a thoroughfare or other zoning district. 
c.  Off-street parking may be located in a required side yard abutting a nonresidential zoning district in B-1, B-2, B-3, B-5, CI, O-1, ORT, REC-I, REC-M, and SP districts provided that there shall be an unobstructed and landscaped setback of at least ten feet maintained between the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, exclusive of driveways, and the side lot line. Such unobstructed and landscaped setback shall extend continuously and uninterrupted along the side lot line from the nearest right-of-way line or private road easement to the rear yard. The unobstructed and landscaped setback of at least ten feet may be reduced or waived by the Planning Commission or Planning and Development Director (relative to site plans not submitted to the Planning Commission) upon determining that such reduction or waiver is compatible with and/or part of a comprehensive plan with the adjacent properties. 
d.  Off-street parking may be located in the required interior side yard in SP districts provided that type B screening is provided as required by Section 138-12.300 between the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, exclusive of driveways, and the interior side lot line. 
4.  Setback from Residential Districts and Uses. Parking areas, and circulation or access drives shall be setback from adjoining or abutting residentially zoned property as follows: 
a.  Where the parking lot or drive abuts a residential district at the side or rear lot line said parking lot or drive shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from said lot line. 
b.  Where the parking lot or drive shares common, contiguous street frontage with an abutting residentially zoned parcel, said parking lot or drive shall maintain the same minimum front or street side setback required for the residential parcel dependent upon orientation to the common street of said parcel and other residential parcels in the same block. 
c.  Private roads, private drives and off-street parking areas, including maneuvering lanes, shall not be permitted within required yards in the RM-1 and RCD districts where the adjacent property is zoned one-family residential. 
5.  Setback from Buildings. Parking, loading areas, and circulation or access drives shall set back at least five feet from any building or structure. Concrete curbing shall be installed along the perimeter of the vehicular use area to prevent encroachments. 
C.  Alteration of Existing Parking. Existing off-street parking facilities accessory to an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than the minimum required by this Article for a similar new building or new use. The minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless adequate parking facilities meeting the standards of this Article have first been provided at another location acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
D.  Residential Parking. Residential off-street parking spaces for single-family and two-family dwellings shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
E.  Pedestrian Circulation. The parking lot layout shall accommodate pedestrian circulation. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided, distinguished by textured paving or pavement striping, and integrated into the sidewalk network. 
F.  Cross Access. Common, shared parking facilities are encouraged. As such, wherever feasible, cross-access connections between adjacent parking lots, or a future connection when no adjacent parking lot exists but can reasonably be expected to be constructed on an adjacent parcel at a future date are required. Blanket cross-access easements across the entire parking lot area shall be provided for connected lots under separate ownership or management. The cross-access easement shall be without limitation and shall be recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds. 
G.  Permit Required. 
1.  Construction. No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit for such construction is issued by the public services department. Application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as may be determined by the City and shall be accompanied with two sets of plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. No final occupancy permit shall be issued by the building department until the parking lot has been completed. 
2.  Maintenance. A permit from the Building Department shall be required for any parking lot resurfacing or restriping activity. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans demonstrating that the provisions of this section shall be fully complied with. 
H.  Prohibited Activities. The outdoor storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks or equipment, wrecked, junked or unlicensed vehicles, or the repair of vehicles in areas designated for parking (including the maneuvering lane) is prohibited. 
I.  City Parks Exempt. The standards and regulations applicable to off-street parking shall not be applicable to publicly owned City parks. A parking plan shall be submitted and reviewed by City staff when a new park is proposed or modifications in an existing park are proposed. In those cases wherein the Planning Commission will review and approve a site plan for a park, a parking plan must be included and approved based on current and future expected usage. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 12, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 179 , § 3, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 182 , § 8, 2-5-2018)  
CHAPTER 2. - MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM PARKING REQUIRED 
 
SECTION 138-11.200 - General Provisions 
A.  Minimum Parking Required. Off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements of Section 138-11.204. The Planning Commission may reduce the number of required spaces as described in Section 138-11.202, Modification of Standards. 
B.  Maximum Parking Permitted. In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement which negatively impact aesthetic standards and contribute to high volumes of stormwater runoff, the maximum amount of off-street parking permitted for any use shall not exceed 125 percent of the minimum parking requirements of Section 138-11.204. This requirement shall not apply to single-family or two-family dwellings. The Planning Commission may permit additional parking over and above the maximum parking limit based on evidence indicating that the maximum parking permitted will not be sufficient to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
C.  Uses Not Listed. For uses not specifically listed in Section 138-11.204, the default parking standard for that type of use shall apply, unless the Planning and Development Director or his designee determines that the standard for a similar listed use is more appropriate. 
D.  Uses Meeting More Than One Category. Where more than one use is present in a building or a site (such as a gas station with convenience store and restaurant; or a place of worship with day care center and community center) the various components of the use shall comply with the requirement for each component. In such a case, the applicant must provide information regarding the floor area, employees, or other relevant information for each use in order to allow the City to determine the minimum parking requirement for the use. 
E.  Fractional Spaces. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded, and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
F.  Units of Measurement. The following units of measurement are used in calculating required parking: 
1.  Floor Area: Where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of parking spaces, said unit shall mean gross floor area. 
2.  Usable Floor Area: Usable floor area shall mean the floor area used for service to the public and shall not include floor area used for storage or processing and packaging of merchandise where it is undertaken in a room in which service to the public is not involved. When usable floor area is not known at the time of site plan submittal, 80 percent of the total floor area shall be used for usable floor area for parking computations. 
3.  Places of Assembly: For places of worship, sports arenas or similar places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches, pews or similar seating, each 24 inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat. 
4.  Employees: For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall be based on the maximum number of employees on the premises during the largest shift.  
SECTION 138-11.201 - Shared Parking 
Different types of uses have different peak usage times, for instance, residential land uses generate the most parking demand during evening and night hours, while office uses generate the most parking demand during business hours. Therefore, the minimum parking requirement may be adjusted by a shared parking factor that considers a mixture of uses sharing a common parking facility. The uses that share a common parking facility may be located within a single building or in separate buildings located on the same or different sites. 
A.  Shared Parking Procedure. The number of shared parking spaces required for two or more land uses sharing a parking lot or located on the same parcel of land shall be determined by the following procedure: 
1.  Multiply the minimum parking required for each individual use, as set forth in the Shared Parking Factor Table below, by the appropriate percentage indicated in the Shared Parking Factors table below for each of the six designated time periods. 
2.  Add the resulting sums for each of the six columns. 
3.  The minimum parking requirement shall be the highest sum among the six columns resulting from the above calculations. 
4.  Other Uses. If one or all of the land uses proposing to make use of shared parking facilities do not conform to the general land use classifications in the Shared Parking Factor table, as determined by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall submit sufficient data to indicate the principal operating hours of the uses. Based upon this information, the Planning Commission shall determine the appropriate shared parking requirement, if any, for such uses. 
Table 14. Shared Parking Factors 
Land Use 	Weekdays 	Weekends 
	1:00 a.m. — 7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m. — 7:00 p.m. 	7:00 p.m. — 1:00 a.m. 	1:00 a.m. — 7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m. — 7:00 p.m. 	7:00 p.m. — 1:00 a.m. 
Residential 	95% 	25% 	95% 	95% 	75% 	95% 
Commercial/Retail 	0% 	95% 	75% 	0% 	90% 	75% 
Office/Service 	5% 	95% 	5% 	0% 	10% 	0% 
 
B.  Agreement. A written agreement between joint users in a form approved by the City shall be filed with the Oakland County Register of Deeds. The agreement shall assure the continued availability of the parking facility for the uses it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-11.202 - Modification of Parking Requirements 
The Planning Commission may modify the numerical requirements for off-street parking based on evidence submitted by the applicant that another standard would be more reasonable because of the level of current or future employment or customer traffic. 
The Planning Commission may attach conditions to the approval of a modification of the requirements of Section 138-11.204 that bind such approval to the specific use in question.  
SECTION 138-11.203 - Deferred Parking 
If the minimum number of required parking spaces exceeds the amount necessary to serve a proposed use, the Planning Commission may approve construction of a lesser number of parking spaces, subject to the following: 
A.  The banked parking shall be shown on the site plan and set aside as landscaped open space. 
B.  The banked parking shall be constructed upon request by the Building Official, after the City documents three incidents of problem parking on the site within any one year period. 
C.  Banked parking shall be located in areas that are suitable for future parking and comply with Ordinance requirements.  
SECTION 138-11.204 - Parking Requirements 
Table 15. Minimum Parking Requirements 
USE 	MINIMUM PARKING REQUIRED 
COMMUNITY and RECREATION USES 
DEFAULT PARKING STANDARD 	1 space per 3 persons permitted at maximum occupancy 
School, elementary or middle 	1 space per employee + 1 space per 3 persons permitted at maximum occupancy for auditoriums and gyms 
School, high 	1 space per employee + 1 space per each 10 students + 1 space per 3 persons permitted at maximum occupancy for auditoriums and gyms 
Hospital or urgent care center 	1 space per 3 beds 
Municipal buildings and uses 	1 space per employee 
Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care centers 	1 space per 10 pupils + 1 space per employee + 5 stacking spaces for drop-off and pick-up 
Places of worship 	1 space for each 3 persons permitted in the main worship hall at maximum occupancy 
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE and RETAIL USES 
Car wash 	1 space per employee + four stacking spaces per wash line or bay + 1 exit stacking space for post-wash detailing 
Drive-in or drive-through facilities 	• 3 stacking spaces per general use service window or station, or 
• 10 stacking spaces per restaurant service window 
Hotel, motel, or other lodging 	1.1 spaces per room 
Office, medical or professional 	1 space per 350 sq. ft. of floor area 
Places of Assembly (where parking demand is generated by occupancy rather than floor area, such as (banquet halls, movie theatres, etc.) 	1 space per 3 persons permitted at maximum occupancy 
Restaurant 	1 space per 2 persons permitted at maximum occupancy 
Retail sales and service establishments 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 
INDUSTRIAL, RESEARCH and TECHNOLOGY USES 
Light Industrial and Manufacturing 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area + 1 space per 350 sq. ft. of office floor area 
Mini-warehouses 	3 spaces + 1 space per employee 
Warehousing or distribution 	1 space per 1,700 sq. ft. of floor area + 1 space per 350 sq. ft. of office floor area 
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Elderly housing, independent and senior housing 	0.8 spaces per dwelling unit 
Elderly housing, dependent (including nursing homes and assisted living) 	0.5 spaces per resident sleeping room 
Foster care small or large group home 	0.25 spaces per resident 
Congregate care facility 	
State licensed residential facility 	
Group child day care home 	
Manufactured Housing Park 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Multiple Family 	• 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit with 2 or fewer bedrooms + 0.2 visitor spaces per dwelling unit 
• 2 spaces per dwelling unit with 3 or more bedrooms + 0.25 visitor spaces per dwelling unit 
One and two-family dwellings 	2 for each dwelling unit 
 
(Ord. No. 170 , §§ 13, 17, 6-16-2014)  
CHAPTER 3. - PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS 
Off-street parking facilities, other than parking for one or two-family dwellings, shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following: 
 
SECTION 138-11.300 - Barrier-free Parking Requirements 
A.  Minimum Number of Barrier-free Spaces. Barrier-free parking spaces shall be provided per the following Table 16: 
Note: the existing Table 16 will be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
Table 16. Barrier-Free Parking Requirements 
Total Parking Spaces Provided 	Minimum Number of Barrier-Free Spaces Required 
Up to 25 	1 
26-50 	2 
51-75 	1 + 4% of total parking provided in lot 
76-100 	1 + 4% of total parking provided in lot 
101-150 	2 + 3.33% of total parking provided in lot 
151-200 	2 + 3.33% of total parking provided in lot 
201-300 	4 + 2.33% of total parking provided in lot 
301-400 	5 + 2% of total parking provided in lot 
401-500 	5 + 2% of total parking provided in lot 
501-1,000 	5 + 2% of total parking provided in lot 
1,001 and over 	15 + 1% of total parking provided in lot 
 
Notes to Table 16: 
1.  Fractional Spaces. Whenever a fractional space is required by the above Table 16, it shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
2.  Example Calculation. A parking lot with 140 parking spaces would have a minimum barrier-free parking space requirement of two spaces plus 140*.0333 = 2 + 4.66 = 6.66 spaces, rounded up to seven spaces. 
3.  Van Accessible Spaces. All barrier-free parking spaces are required to use the Universal Design concept to allow van access in any barrier-free space, and therefore no spaces need be designated specifically for van access. 
The above Table 16 is greater than the 2010 ADA requirements for accessible design, as published by the U.S. Department of Justice as of the date of adoption. If new ADA standards affecting barrier-free parking requirements are adopted that are greater than those contained in this ordinance, they shall supersede Table 16. 
B.  Barrier-Free Space Layout. All barrier-free spaces shall be designed using universal barrier-free design. All spaces shall be 132 inches (11 feet) in width with a 60 inch (five-foot) access aisle (see the following Figure 7). 
Figure 7. Barrier-Free Space Layout 
 
The Planning Commission may permit 96-inch (eight-foot) wide barrier-free spaces with an adjacent 60 inch (five-foot) access aisle when the applicant can demonstrate that providing 132 inch (11 foot) wide spaces will constitute a hardship in meeting the minimum parking requirement or other site design requirements. When 96 inch (eight-foot) spaces are permitted, a minimum of one out of every eight spaces shall be van accessible (with at least one van accessible space being provided on-site in all cases). 
C.  Location and Construction. 
1.  Barrier-free spaces shall be accessible from and conveniently located near each primary building entrance. 
2.  All access aisles shall be level with the parking space, and access aisles cannot include a ramp or sloped area to accommodate a person with a disability using a lift or ramp. 
3.  The access aisle must be connected to an accessible route to the appropriate accessible entrance of a building or facility. 
4.  The parking access aisle must either blend with the accessible route or have a curb ramp complying ADA standards. Such a curb ramp opening must be located within the access aisle boundaries, not within the parking space boundaries. 
5.  Barrier-free spaces shall be identified by above-grade signs and pavement striping in accordance with ADA standards. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-11.301 - Landscaping and Lighting 
Landscaping shall be provided as required by Section 138-12.301 and lighting shall be provided as required by Article 10, Chapter 2.  
SECTION 138-11.302 - Parking Layout 
The layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following Table 17: 
Table 17. Parking Layout 
Parking Pattern 
(degrees) 	Maneuvering Lane 
Width 	Minimum Space 
Width 	Minimum Space 
Length 
0 o (parallel) 	24 feet (two-way) 	8.5 feet 	22 feet 
0 o to 29 o 	12 feet (one-way) 	10 feet 	18 feet 
30 o to 53 o 	12 feet (one-way) 	10 feet 	18 feet 
54 o to 74 o 	15 feet (one-way) 	10 feet 	18 feet 
75 o to 90 o 	24 feet (two-way) 	10 feet 	18 feet 
 
A.  The depth and width of parking spaces and the width of maneuvering lanes shall be measured from the face of the curb, or when no curb is proposed, parking spaces and maneuvering lanes shall be measured from the edge of pavement. If any fixed objects, including, but not limited to, bollards, posts, building edges, bumper posts and light poles, are located within the pavement area of a parking space or maneuvering lane, the depth and width of the parking space and the width of the maneuvering lane shall be measured from the edge of the fixed object. 
B.  The minimum parking space width may be reduced to nine feet for employee spaces or other parking spaces that are intended for long-term parking and that are not intended for use by the general public or customer traffic or subject to frequent turnover. Any parking space width reduction shall require approval by the reviewing authority for the application. 
C.  All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90-degree and parallel pattern may permit two-way movement. 
D.  Fire hydrants shall not be located closer than five feet from the back of the curb adjacent to any parking space, loading area, fire lane or maneuvering lane. 
E.  Parking aisles shall not exceed 300 feet without a break in circulation. 
F.  All parking lots shall be provided with curbs, wheel stops or bumper guards so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the lot boundaries, into required screening or landscaping, or across sidewalks or pedestrian pathways. 
G.  Parking structures may be built to satisfy off-street parking regulations when located in other than residential districts subject to the area, height, bulk and placement regulations of such district in which located. 
H.  When a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to and from an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
I.  Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 20 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
J.  Two feet of required adjacent walkways at least seven feet in width and landscape areas may be part of the required parking space length. The requirements of Section 138-12.301.A.5 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 183 , § 20, 6-18-2018)  
SECTION 138-11.303 - Off-Street Loading 
There shall be provided and maintained on the same premises with every structure, use or part thereof involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, equipment, materials or merchandise adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
A.  Spaces Required - B, REC-I, and REC-M Districts. In all B, REC-I, and REC-M districts, except the B-5 automotive service district, at least one off-street loading space shall be provided in the rear yard for all buildings over 20,000 square feet in floor area. Alternatively, off-street loading may be provided in the side yard upon Planning Commission review and approval of a plan depicting the method of screening or obscuring the loading area. All loading spaces in B districts shall have a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum length of 40 feet. 
B.  Spaces Required - I, REC-W, REC-C, and SP Districts. All spaces in the I (industrial), REC-W, REC-C, and SP districts shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten by 50 feet with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent durable and dustless surface. All spaces shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to usable floor area: 
1.  Buildings up to and including 5,000 square feet of floor area shall not be required to provide a dedicated loading space. 
2.  Buildings with more than 5,000 square feet in floor area, but less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area shall provide at least one space. 
3.  Buildings with more than 20,000 square feet in floor area, but less than 100,000 square feet shall provide a minimum of one space plus one space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet. 
4.  Buildings 100,001 square feet and greater in floor area shall provide a minimum of three spaces. 
C.  Location of loading spaces. The location and arrangement of loading spaces shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Off-street loading space may be completely enclosed within a building, or may occupy a portion of the site outside of the building. Where any portion of a loading space is open to view from a public right-of-way or residential zoning district, screening shall be provided in accordance with Article 12 (Landscaping and Screening). 
2.  All loading and unloading in an industrial district shall be provided off-street in a rear or side yard. Loading and unloading facilities shall be prohibited in the front yard. 
3.  Off-street loading facilities that make it necessary or possible to back directly into a public street shall be prohibited. All maneuvering of trucks and other vehicles shall take place on the site and not within a public right-of-way. 
4.  Off-street loading facilities shall be located so as to not interfere with pedestrian access. 
5.  Cross-access agreements between adjacent properties to facilitate off-street truck maneuverability are encouraged. 
D.  Loading Restrictions. Delivery vehicles and trailers shall load or unload or park only in designated loading/unloading zones as indicated on the approved site plan. Delivery vehicles and trailers shall not park or load or unload elsewhere on the premises. Under no circumstances shall a delivery vehicle or trailer park in a designated loading/unloading zone for longer than 48 hours. 
E.  Modification of Loading Space Requirements. The Planning Commission may modify or waive the requirement for off-street loading areas, upon determining that adequate loading space is available to serve the building or use, or that provision of such loading space is unnecessary or impractical to provide. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 14, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-11.304 - Pavement Striping 
A.  Customer or Client Spaces In B, FB, REC-M, and O-1 Districts shall be double striped with four-inch wide lines spaced 24 inches apart to facilitate vehicle movement and to center parked cars within the parking space in high-turnover spaces. The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for double striped spaces in instances where a low volume of parking turnover will reduce or eliminate the need for double striping. Refer to Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Parking Lot Double Striping 
B.  Employee Spaces in B, FB, REC-M, and O-1 Districts and All Parking Spaces in Any Other District may be single striped with four-inch wide stripes. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 4, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 170 , § 15, 6-16-2014)  
SECTION 138-11.305 - Stacking Spaces 
Where required by this Article, stacking spaces shall be eight feet wide by 16 feet long. Stacking spaces shall not intrude into any street right-of-way or interior maneuvering lane.  
SECTION 138-11.306 - Grading and Drainage 
Driveways and parking areas shall be graded and provided with adequate drainage to dispose of surface waters in accordance with applicable construction and design standards established by the City. Surface water shall not drain on to adjoining lots, towards buildings or across a public street, except in accordance with an approved drainage plan.  
SECTION 138-11.307 - Construction 
The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes required under this section shall be provided with asphalt, concrete, brick pavers, or an equivalent material. Stone or similar material may be approved by the reviewing authority in cases where the parking lot will be infrequently used, or where alternate parking lot surfacing would be more in character with the site and its surroundings. Only alternate surfacing materials that will be non-dusting and will be sufficient to meet all other requirements of this Ordinance may be approved. All parking lot surfacing shall be in accordance with specifications approved by the City engineer 
The parking area shall be surfaced within one year of the date the permit is issued. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings, and plans shall meet the approval of the City engineer. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 5, 3-19-2012)  
SECTION 138-11.308 - Maintenance 
All parking and loading areas shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Article, an approved site plan and the following: 
A.  Alterations to an approved parking or loading facility that are not in accordance with an approved site plan shall be considered a violation of this ordinance. 
B.  All parking areas, perimeter landscaped areas, and required screening shall be kept free from tall grass, weeds, trash, and debris. Surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, signage, and related improvements shall be kept in good repair. 
C.  Parking and loading areas shall be diligently kept clear of snow. Up to ten percent of the parking area may be used for snow deposit. 
D.  Parking lots shall be maintained in a clean and debris free manner.  
ARTICLE 12 - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERALLY 
 
SECTION 138-12.100 - Purpose and Intent 
The purposes and intent of the landscaping and screening requirements of this Article are to: 
A.  Minimize the transmission from one land use to another of nuisances associated with noise, dust, glare, and litter. 
B.  Minimize visual pollution that may otherwise occur within an urbanized area. Minimal screening provides an impression of separation of spaces, and more extensive screening can entirely shield the visual effects of an intense land use from a less intense land use. 
C.  Establish a greater sense of privacy from visual or physical intrusion of intense land uses, the degree of privacy varying with the intensity of screening. 
D.  Establish aesthetically pleasing, functionally appropriate and sustainable landscaping design for the long-term enhancement of the appearance of development in the community. 
E.  Safeguard the public health, safety and welfare, and preserve and enhance aesthetic qualities that contribute to community character.  
SECTION 138-12.101 - Scope 
Wherever in this ordinance a greenbelt, planting and/or material is required, the landscaping shall be planted prior to the issuance of any temporary or final certificate of occupancy and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained consistent with the intent of the approved landscaping design plans. If it is not possible to install the landscaping prior to the certificate of occupancy, a performance guarantee shall be posted consistent with Section 138-22.208.  
SECTION 138-12.102 - Submittal Requirements 
All landscape plans shall be signed and sealed by a registered Landscape Architect, and shall include all of the information required by Section 138-2.208.  
SECTION 138-12.103 - Design Standards 
A.  Visibility. Landscaping and screening materials shall be laid out in conformance to the requirements of Section 138-5.204 (Corner Clearance), and shall not conflict with visibility for motorists or pedestrian access. 
B.  Plantings near utility lines and fire hydrants. Required plant materials and screening shall be arranged to avoid conflicts with underground and overhead utility lines and access to or visibility of fire hydrants. The anticipated height at maturity of trees planted near overhead utility lines shall not exceed the line height above grade. 
C.  Protection. Where pavement and landscape areas interface, concrete curbing or similar measures shall be provided to protect plants from vehicle encroachment.  
SECTION 138-12.104 - Walls 
[A.  ] Walls required under this Article shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except such openings as may be approved by the City. All walls required in this ordinance shall be constructed of decorative stone or brick. The height of the wall shall be measured from the prevailing grade of the land on the side of the wall facing the less intense use. Walls shall be erected on a concrete foundation which shall have a minimum depth of 42 inches below a grade approved by the building department and shall not be less than four inches wider than the wall to be erected. 
[B.]  A six-foot tall decorative opaque vinyl fence or densely planted evergreen landscaping sufficient to form a living green wall with a minimum height of six feet may be permitted by the Planning Commission in lieu of a masonry wall when the characteristics of the two abutting uses would make such a substitution appropriate.  
SECTION 138-12.105 - Irrigation 
To assist in maintaining plant materials in a healthy condition, all landscaped areas (including lawns) shall be provided with an automatic, underground, or drip irrigation system, subject to the following: 
A.  The Planning Department may approve an alternative form of irrigation for a particular site, or may waive this requirement upon determining that underground irrigation is not necessary for the type of proposed plant materials. 
B.  All automatic irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize water usage, and shall be shut off during water emergencies, periods of protracted rainfall, or water rationing periods. 
C.  The irrigation requirement may be waived by the reviewing authority if the project incorporates landscaping that will contribute points towards LEED certification or an equivalent rating system.  
SECTION 138-12.106 - Location of Screening 
Screening required under this Article shall be located directly adjacent to the lot line except where underground utilities interfere. Upon approval of the Planning Commission and when mutually agreeable to affected property owners, required screening may be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way when a nonresidential district abuts a residential district. The continuity of the required screening on a given block shall be a major consideration of the Planning Commission in reviewing such request.  
SECTION 138-12.107 - Tree Removal 
Please refer to Chapter 126, Article 3, Divisions 1—3 of the General Code of Ordinances for tree removal and replacement requirements. Trees provided as replacement trees shall not count towards the requirements of this Article, however, trees to be preserved may be counted towards the minimum requirements in accordance with Section 138-12.204.  
SECTION 138-12.108 - Performance Guarantee 
A.  Performance Bond. 
1.  Whenever a site plan requires any type of landscaping, the applicant may be required to post a Performance Bond prior to the issuance of a temporary or final Certificate of Occupancy to ensure the completion of landscaping (including irrigation). If the landscaping is not 100 percent complete when any certificate of occupancy is requested, the City will inspect the landscaping and determine the percentage of completion and a performance bond must be submitted to the City by the Developer in the sum equal to the unfinished portion of the landscape work. The City will have the authority to determine the percentage of completion and the bond amount required. If the landscaping is 100 percent compete and approved no Performance Bond will be required. 
2.  If a Performance Bond is required it must be a cash bond or a corporate surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in the full amount of the sum due as determined by the City. 
3.  All residential developments must post a Performance Bond (100 percent of estimated cost of landscaping) prior to the issuing of the Land Improvement Permit. 
B.  Maintenance Bond. A Maintenance Bond in the sum of 25 percent of estimated cost of landscaping (including irrigation) must be posted prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy (including temporary). The Maintenance Bond is held for a period two years, at the end of which time the City shall inspect the landscaping. Once, inspection issues are addressed the unused balance of the Maintenance Bond will be released. 
For all residential developments the Maintenance Bond must be posted prior to the release of the Performance Bond. The Maintenance Bond shall be released as specified above.  
SECTION 138-12.109 - Maintenance 
The owner of the property shall be responsible for all maintenance of site landscaping, as follows: 
A.  Landscaping shall be kept in a neat, orderly and healthy growing condition, free from debris and refuse. 
B.  Pruning shall be minimal at the time of installation, only to remove dead or diseased branches. Subsequent pruning shall assure proper maturation of plants to achieve their approved purpose. 
C.  All dead, damaged, or diseased plant material shall be removed immediately and replaced within six months after it dies or in the next planting season, whichever occurs first. For purposes of this Section, the planting season for deciduous plants shall be between March 1 and June 1 and from October 1 until the prepared soil becomes frozen. The planting season for evergreen plants shall be between March 1 and June 1. Plant material installed to replace dead or diseased material shall be as close as practical to the size of the material it is intended to replace. The City may notify property owners of the need to replace dead, damaged, or diseased material. 
D.  The approved landscape plan shall be considered a permanent record and integral part of the Site Plan Approval. Unless otherwise approved in accordance with the aforementioned procedures, any revisions to or removal of plant materials, or non-compliance with the maintenance requirements of this Section 138-12.109 will place the parcel in non-conformity with the approved landscape plan and be a violation of this ordinance. 
E.  If protected trees are damaged, a fine shall be issued on an inch-by-inch basis at a monetary rate as defined by the Forestry Department.  
SECTION 138-12.110 - Installation 
All landscaping shall be installed in a manner consistent with the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen, the approved site plan, and the following: 
A.  Deadline for installation. Installation of required screening and landscaping shall be completed prior to or at the time of completion of building construction, except when building construction is completed during the off-season when plants cannot be installed, in which case the owner shall provide a performance guarantee to ensure installation of required landscaping in the next planting season. 
B.  Extension. The City may extend the deadline to allow installation of required plant materials by the end of the next planting season, upon determination that weather conditions, development phasing, or other factors would jeopardize required plant materials and prevent their installation by the deadline specified in this Section. 
C.  Performance Guarantee. Installation and maintenance bonds may be required. Refer to Section 138-12.108, above.  
CHAPTER 2. - PLANT MATERIAL STANDARDS 
All plant materials shall comply with the following standards: 
 
SECTION 138-12.200 - General 
Whenever a landscape planting screen or other plantings are required under this ordinance, such plantings shall be installed according to accepted good planting procedures and in a sound, workmanlike manner. All plant material shall meet current standards of the American Association of Nurserymen and approved by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI 260.1, 1996). 
A.  All plant material shall be true to name in conformance to the current edition of Standardized Plant Names established by the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature, or other source accepted by the City. 
B.  All plant material shall be nursery grown in a northern climate; hardy to the climate of Michigan; appropriate for the soil, climatic and environmental conditions; and resistant to disease and insect attack. 
C.  A minimum four inches of topsoil shall be provided for all lawn areas, ground covers, and planting beds. 
D.  Artificial plant material is prohibited and shall not be used to meet the requirements of this Article.  
SECTION 138-12.201 - Groundcovers 
The following shall apply to all groundcover materials: 
A.  Lawn areas shall be planted in species of grass normally grown as permanent lawns in Michigan. Grass may be sodded or hydro-seeded, provided that adequate measures are taken to minimize soil erosion. Sod or seed shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. 
B.  A minimum four-inch layer of shredded hardwood bark shall be placed in all planter beds containing trees or shrubs and around the base of all trees planted within lawn areas (mulch cover the entire planting pit width). To aid in maintenance operations all shrubs planted within lawn areas are to be planted in groups and mulched as a group, and hedgerows are to be mulched as one continuous strip. 
C.  Live groundcovers such as myrtle (Vinca minor), blue rug junipers (Juniperus horizontalis 'Wiltonii'), Baltic ivy (Hedera helix 'Baltica', Pachysandra (Pachysandra terminalis) and other similar vines and plant material shall be mulched with a two-inch layer of shredded hardwood bark. Any deviations must be approved by the City's landscape architect.  
SECTION 138-12.202 - Permitted Landscape Materials 
Landscape materials used to satisfy the requirements of this Article shall be common to the area and suitable for their intended use. Species native to southeast Michigan are encouraged. The Planning Department will maintain on file a list of prohibited plant materials that may not be used to satisfy the requirements of this Article. Bare root stock of any kind is not permitted.  
SECTION 138-12.203 - Plant Material Spacing 
Spacing of plant materials required under this Article shall be as follows: 
A.  Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four feet from the fence line or property line. 
B.  Where plant materials are planted in two or more rows, planting shall be staggered in rows. 
C.  Where shrub plantings are required to form a continuous hedge or used for screening purposes, the plants shall not be spaced more than 36 inches on center at planting, and shall have a minimum height and spread of 30 inches at planting. Shrubs that will not attain sufficient width to form a complete hedge spaced 36 inches on center shall be planted at a spacing that will allow them to form a complete hedge within 2 years of planting. 
( Ord. No. 581, § 9, 11-11-2013 )  
SECTION 138-12.204 - Existing Vegetation 
Healthy existing trees on a site may be used to satisfy any of the requirements of this Article, subject to the reviewing authority's approval and the following. This Section 138-12.204 does not replace or supersede the requirements of the City's Tree Conservation Ordinance. 
A.  Site plans shall show all existing trees which are located on the portions of the site and on portions of adjacent sites within 20 feet of the site that will be built upon or otherwise altered, and are six inches or greater in caliper, measured 4.5 feet above grade. Trees shall be labeled "To Be Removed" or "To Be Saved" on the site plan, with tree species and caliper noted for trees to be saved. Only trees six inches in caliper or greater may be used to satisfy any landscaping requirement of this ordinance. 
B.  The Planning Commission may require City inspection of existing plant materials prior to or as a condition of site plan approval to determine the health and desirability of such materials. Such inspections shall be performed by the City or by a certified arborist or similar qualified consultant. 
C.  Where plant materials are to be saved, prior approval shall be obtained by the property owner from the City prior to any delimbing, root pruning, or similar work. 
D.  Protective fencing shall be placed at the drip-line of existing trees, and around the perimeter of other preserved plant materials, with details of protective measures noted on the site plan. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within protected areas. 
E.  In the event that healthy plant materials which are intended to meet the requirements of the Ordinance are cut down, damaged or destroyed during construction, said plant material shall be replaced with an equivalent species to the damaged or removed tree. Replacement trees shall be provided at the ratio of one replacement tree for each six inches in caliper measured 4.5 feet above grade level or fraction thereof of tree that is cut down, damaged, or destroyed, up to a maximum of four replacement trees, unless otherwise approved by the City based on consideration of the site and building configuration, available planting space, and similar considerations. 
F.  Transplanting of trees within the site is prohibited without the prior approval of the Planning Commission. If such trees are transplanted, their actual replacement value must be calculated and 100 percent of the replacement value must be included in the Maintenance Bond required by Section 138-12.108.  
SECTION 138-12.205 - Size and Variety of Plant Materials 
A.  To ensure adequate variety, and to avoid monotony and uniformity within a site, required plant materials shall not include more than 20 percent of any single plant species, and shall comply with the following schedule for minimum sizes at planting: 
Table 18. Plant Material Requirements 
Screening Materials 	Minimum Size at Installation 
Deciduous Shade Trees 	3 caliper-inches* 
Evergreen Trees 	10 feet height and 5 feet spread 
Deciduous Ornamental Trees 	2 caliper-inches* or 6 feet overall height 
Shrubs 	30 inches in height, 24 inches in spread when used for screening or buffering purposes, or 3 gallon container size when used for other purposes 
Groundcovers 	Shall be from flats 
 
*Caliper-inches measured 12 inches above grade. 
B.  The City may approve modifications from the above table for appropriate landscape materials that do not meet the above minimum size requirements or are not readily available at landscape supply yards in the required size. If smaller materials are approved the difference for the smaller materials shall be compensated with additional material being provided. In approving such a modification, the City shall determine that the substituted plant material size will meet the intent of this Article, and that providing a landscape material that meets the above size requirements is impractical or not feasible. 
(Ord. No. 170 , § 17, 6-16-2014)  
CHAPTER 3. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
 
SECTION 138-12.300 - Buffer Requirements 
Buffers or greenbelts and obscuring walls or fencing are intended to mitigate any potential negative impacts that a proposed land use may have on neighboring land uses, or to obscure unsightly items or areas from view off the site. The buffer or greenbelt is a designated unit of yard or open space together with any plant materials, barriers and screening designed to minimize negative impacts of adjacent land uses. Both the amount of land and the type and amount of landscaping specified are intended to minimize potential nuisances such as noise, glare, dirt, litter, unsightly areas and similar impacts. 
These buffer requirements are designed to be flexible. A single standard applied to all circumstances may not function as well and might impose unnecessary difficulties on development and lead to monotony. It is the intent of the following provisions to provide flexibility to the developer or property owner through the manipulation of four basic elements: distance, plant material type, plant material density and structural or land forms. 
Buffers shall be required as indicated in Table 19. Such buffers shall be provided along site perimeters without road frontage, except to permit driveways or other necessary site improvements. 
A.  Buffer Descriptions and Requirements. The following is a description of the intended character and function of each buffer type. The specific requirements for each buffer are listed in subsection B., and the type of buffer required between land uses is listed in subsection C. 
1.  Type A: Intended to separate uses, provide vegetation in densely developed areas, and to enhance the appearance of individual properties. 
2.  Type B: Low density screening to partially block visual contact between zoning classifications. 
3.  Type C: Medium density screen to partially block visual contact between zoning classifications and to create spatial separation. 
4.  Type D: Medium-high density screen intended to substantially block visual contact between zoning classifications and create spatial separation. Must form an opaque screen to a height of six feet within three years of planting. 
5.  Type E: High density screen intended to substantially block visual contact between zoning classifications and create spatial separation. Type E planting buffers reduce light and noise trespass that would otherwise intrude upon adjacent zoning classifications. Must form an opaque screen to a height of eight feet within three years of planting. 
B.  Buffer Requirements. The following table lists the minimum amount of plant material required in each buffer type. The following table lists only the minimum requirement, and nothing shall prevent a property owner from providing additional landscaping. Landscaping required by the following table may be planted in clusters at appropriate locations within the buffer or spaced regularly throughout the buffer, provided that the landscape plan meets the intent of the buffer type listed in subsection A., above. 
Table 19. Buffer Standards 
  	Buffer Type 1 
	A 3 	B 3 	C 3 	D 3 	E 3 
Buffer Yard Minimum Width 	6 	10 	20 	25 	50 
Buffer Yard Minimum Width (with wall) 	N/A 	N/A 	8 2 	8 2 	10 2 
Deciduous Trees (per 100 lineal feet) 	1.5 	2 	2 2 	2.5 2 	2.5 
Ornamental Trees (per 100 lineal feet) 	— 	1.5 	1.5 2 	1.5 2 	1.5 
Evergreen Trees (per 100 lineal feet) 	1 	2 	4 2 	5 2 	6 
Shrubs (per 100 lineal feet) 	4 	4 	6 2 	8 2 	10 
Berm Height 3, 4 	— 	— 	— 	— 	6 ft. 
 
Notes: 
1.  Residential Buffers. All required buffers within residential developments must be placed within defined landscape buffer easements and may not be part of any individual residential lot. 
2.  Screening Wall. Where a screening wall is required, either a masonry or a densely planted "green" wall may be used at the discretion of the reviewing authority after taking into account specific conditions on and adjacent to the site. Screening walls shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Green Wall Requirements. Where a green wall is proposed, the plantings comprising the green wall shall be of a sufficient size and spaced on-center such that they will be sufficient to form an opaque screen to a height of six feet within three years of planting. The evergreen and shrub planting requirements of the above table shall be disregarded when a green wall is proposed, as the green wall plantings will serve the same purpose as the evergreen and/or shrub planting requirements. 
b.  Masonry Wall Requirements. All masonry screen walls shall be six feet in height, consist of decorative masonry or natural materials such as brick or stone, and capped with a stone or concrete cap. The color and material shall be coordinated with the materials of the principal building. 
c.  Landscaping With a Masonry Wall. Where a masonry wall is proposed, no evergreen trees are required. Instead, additional deciduous trees and shrubs shall be provided at the rate of 0.5 deciduous trees and two shrubs for each evergreen tree that would otherwise be required in the buffer yard. These additional deciduous trees and shrubs are in addition to the deciduous trees and shrubs otherwise required in the buffer yard. 
3.  Existing Vegetation. The berm or planting requirements may be waived or modified by the reviewing authority if existing vegetation will provide an equal or greater screen than that required by Table 17. If existing vegetation is removed or damaged during construction, buffer plantings shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Table 17. 
4.  Earth berms required under this ordinance shall consist of raised earth with side slopes of 3:1 or flatter with a four-foot-wide flat or slightly rounded crest contoured to the side slopes to facilitate maintenance. Berms shall be covered with grass or other ground cover to prevent erosion. 
C.  Required Buffer Types. The following Table 20 identifies required buffer types. 
Table 20. Required Buffer Types 
Adjoining Zoning 
District 	Developing Zoning District 
  	R 1, 3 	RM-1 	RMH 	B-1 	B-2 
REC-M 
REC-I 	B-3 	B-5 	O-1 	ORT 	I 
REC-W 
REC-C 	SP 
R 	— 	C 2 	A 2 	D 2 	D 2 	D 2 	D 2 	C 2 	E 2 	E 	A 
RM-1 	B 2 	— 	B 	B 	C 	C 	C 	C 	E 	E 	B 
RMH 	B 	B 	— 	C 2 	D 	D 	D 	C 2 	E 2 	E 	B 
B-1 	B 2 	B 	B 2 	— 	— 	A 	A 	— 	— 	D 	C 
B-2, REC-M, REC-I 	B 2 	C 	B 2 	— 	— 	A 	A 	— 	— 	D 	C 
B-3 	B 2 	C 	B 2 	A 	— 	— 	B 	B 	— 	D 	C 
B-5 	B 2 	C 	B 2 	A 	A 	— 	— 	C 	— 	D 	C 
O-1 	B 2 	C 	B 2 	A 	A 	B 	C 	— 	— 	D 	C 
I, REC-W, REC-C 	B 	E 	B 	D 	D 	D 	D 	C 	C 	— 	D 
SP 	B 	C 	B 	D 	D 	D 	D 	C 	D 	E 	— 
M-59 4 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	B 	D 	D 
 
Table Notes: 
1.  Landscape requirements apply only to subdivision or condominium development in one family residential zoning districts. The buffer yard may be accommodated on or within lots, and need not be provided in a separate landscape area. 
2.  The Planning Commission may require a six-foot tall decorative masonry screen wall in addition to the landscape requirements. 
3.  Where the rear yard of lots or units in a plat or condominium face a perimeter road, a minimum eight-foot tall opaque screen shall be provided along the entire length of frontage. Such screen may be provided by preserving existing vegetation and/or by additional plantings. 
4.  In respect to the designation of M-59, M-59 is not a zoning district. It is intended that the buffer and screening shall be for any zoning district with frontage along the M-59 Freeway. 
(Ord. No. 170 , §§ 16, 17, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 179 , § 4, 8-8-2016)  
SECTION 138-12.301 - Parking Lot Landscaping 
The development of land for parking lot purposes alters natural topography, disturbs existing vegetation and creates impervious surface, all of which can have a negative effect on the ecological balance of an area by causing increases in air temperature and accelerating the processes of runoff, erosion, and sedimentation. Recognizing that the preservation or installation of vegetative cover in parking lots promotes the health, safety and general welfare by aiding in the stabilization of the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the process of air purification, ground water recharge, and stormwater runoff retardation while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement, the following requirements for the landscaping of parking and outdoor display areas are enacted: 
A.  Interior Landscaping. Interior landscaping shall be provided within the boundaries of the parking lot unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. If interior landscaping is provided along the perimeter of the parking lot, it shall be in addition to the perimeter landscaping requirements. 
1.  Interior landscaping areas equivalent to five percent of the vehicle use area shall be required in all parking lots of 20 spaces or more. One deciduous shade tree shall be required for each 150 square feet of required interior landscape area. The vehicle use area includes all areas used for vehicular circulation and parking. 
2.  Terminal landscape islands shall be provided at the end of each row of parking spaces to separate parking from adjacent drive aisles. Terminal islands shall be curbed, and shall be at least 144 square feet in area and 18 feet long for each single row of parking spaces. Each landscape island shall have a minimum of one shade tree. The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for terminal landscape islands in the interest of meeting barrier-free requirements. 
3.  Interior landscape islands shall have a minimum area of 160 square feet and a minimum width of eight feet (measured from the back of curb). Each landscape island shall have a minimum of one deciduous shade tree unless waived by the reviewing authority consistent with Section 138-12.308. 
4.  Parking lot divider medians with a minimum width of eight feet (measured from the back of curb) may be used to meet interior landscape requirements and shall form a continuous strip between abutting rows of parking. One shade tree or two ornamental trees shall be required for each 25 lineal feet of divider median or fraction thereof. Shrubs shall be planted to form a continuous hedge the full length of divider medians which separate parking areas from access drives. 
5.  Two feet of interior landscape areas (except parking lot divider medians) may be part of each parking space required by Section 138-11.204 of this ordinance. Wheel stops or curbing shall be installed to prevent vehicles from encroaching more than two feet into any interior landscaped area. If a landscape area is used for parking overhang, at least two feet of clear area planted with lawn or covered with mulch shall be provided where cars will overhang the curb to protect landscape plantings from damage. 
B.  Perimeter Landscaping. Perimeter landscaping shall be provided along the edge of any parking lot facing and located 100 feet of a public right-of-way, unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the parking lot will be sufficiently screened from view by buildings or other site features or improvements. Parking lot perimeter landscaping shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Perimeter parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum of one deciduous shade tree per each 25 linear feet or fraction thereof and one ornamental tree per each 35 linear feet or fraction thereof. 
2.  Wherever a parking lot or vehicle parking space is located within 30 feet of a public street or right-of-way, the perimeter landscaping shall also include a continuous hedge of deciduous or upright evergreen shrubs planted not more than 30 inches on center between the parking area and the street. 
C.  Curbing Required. All landscaping and perimeter screening shall be protected from vehicle encroachment with concrete curbing or similar permanent means. 
D.  Snow storage area. Adequate snow storage area shall be provided within the site. Plant materials in snow storage areas shall be hardy, salt-tolerant groundcovers characterized by low maintenance requirements.  
SECTION 138-12.302 - Loading, Storage, and Service Area Screening 
Storage and loading areas are subject to the requirements of Section 138-4.430, and dumpsters and trash storage areas are subject to the requirements of Section 138-10.311. 
( Ord. No. 581, § 4, 11-11-2013 )  
SECTION 138-12.303 - Stormwater Management Pond Landscaping 
Where any pond, retention basin, detention basin, or other constructed stormwater management facility is required, it shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Basin configurations shall be incorporated into the natural topography to the greatest extent possible. Where this is not practical, the basin shall be shaped to emulate a naturally formed or free form depression. The basin edge shall consist of sculptured landforms to filter and soften views of the basin. 
B.  Basins shall be designed to avoid the need for perimeter fencing. Where such fencing is necessary, the location and design shall be subject to Planning Commission approval. 
C.  Basins shall be planted with a mixture of groundcover and wetland-based plantings native to Michigan, such as native grasses or wildflowers. 
D.  A Type A perimeter greenbelt buffer shall be provided in accordance with Section 138-12.300 (Buffer Requirements) and the following: 
1.  Plantings shall be clustered around the basin to achieve a variety of plant materials and to replicate a natural environment. Deciduous shade trees should be clustered around the south and west sides of the basin to provide shade and minimize solar heating of the water. 
2.  Trees shall be planted above the freeboard line of the basin. Any plantings proposed below the freeboard line shall be tolerant of wet or moist soil conditions. The location of plant materials shall take into consideration the need to provide access for routine basin maintenance. 
( Ord. No. 581, § 8, 11-11-2013 )  
SECTION 138-12.304 - Right-of-Way Landscaping 
Public rights-of-way and other public open-space areas adjacent to required landscaped areas and development sites shall be landscaped in a manner that enhances the visual character of City streets and minimizes adverse impacts of vehicular traffic on adjacent uses. Right-of-way landscaping shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Street trees. Street tree plantings shall be required for all development projects adjacent to or along the margins of street rights-of-way in the City, subject to the following: 
1.  Street trees shall consist of deciduous shade trees planted at a minimum concentration of one street tree per 35 linear feet of right-of-way. Required trees may be planted at regular intervals or in groupings. 
2.  Existing trees in good condition and of a desirable species located near or within street rights-of-way shall be preserved where feasible, and be counted toward the street tree planting requirement should the existing trees be 4 inches in caliper or greater. 
3.  Permits may be required by the Road Commission for Oakland County or Michigan Department of Transportation for installation of street trees within rights-of-way under their jurisdiction. Where such plantings are not permitted within a street right-of-way, required street trees shall be planted within the front yard setback area, or at an alternative location approved by the City. 
B.  Ornamental trees. Ornamental trees shall be required along street frontages for all development projects in the City. One ornamental tree shall be planted for every 35 lineal feet of right-of-way frontage. Ornamental trees may be clustered or planted at regular intervals. 
C.  Groundcover plantings within street rights-of-way. Street rights-of-way shall be irrigated and sodded with lawn grasses. 
D.  Maintenance of right-of-way landscaping. Right-of-way landscaping shall be maintained by the owner of the abutting lot(s), including any irrigation of the right-of-way. 
E.  Corner Clearance. Right-of-way landscaping shall comply with the corner clearance requirements of Section 138-5.204.  
SECTION 138-12.305 - Landscaping of Yards in Nonresidential Districts 
Any portion of a front, side or rear yard not utilized for storage, parking, loading or unloading shall be planted and maintained in a neat condition.  
SECTION 138-12.306 - Entranceway Landscaping 
In all R Districts, so called entranceway structures, including but not limited to walls, columns, gates, and landscaping that mark entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in Section 138-5.204 (Corner Clearance), provided that such entranceways shall comply to all codes and ordinances of the City of Rochester Hills and shall be approved by the City. Entranceway landscape areas shall be located in established landscape easements and may not be part of any individual lot.  
SECTION 138-12.307 - Modification of Landscape Requirements 
Recognizing that a wide variety of land uses and the relationships between them can exist, and that varying circumstances can mitigate the need for landscaping, the Planning Commission may reduce or waive the screening and buffer zone requirements of this Article 12 and approve an alternative screening plan. The Planning Commission shall find that the following standards have been met whenever it modifies any landscaping requirement: 
A.  The landscape/screening plan shall protect the character of new and existing residential neighborhoods against negative impacts such as noise, glare, light, air pollution, trash and debris, and hazardous activities. 
B.  The alternate width and type of buffer zone and screening provided therein will ensure compatibility with surrounding and nearby land uses because: 
1.  The development is compatible with and sensitive to the immediate environment of the site and neighborhood relative to architectural design, scale, bulk, building height, identified historical character, disposition and orientation of buildings on the lot and visual integrity. 
2.  The site has natural existing vegetation and/or topography, natural bodies of water or wetland areas or other existing conditions which offer screening consistent with the standards set forth in this Article 12. The Planning Commission shall require the preservation of these natural features as a condition of site plan approval. 
3.  The arrangement, design and orientation of buildings on the site maximize privacy and isolate adjacent and nearby land uses from any potential negative impacts of the project.  
SECTION 138-12.308 - Waiver of Requirements 
The Planning Commission or official approving the landscape and irrigation plans may waive or reduce the requirements of this division upon determining that the following would apply: 
A.  The purpose of this Article cannot be met; and 
B.  Compliance with the requirements would impose a practical difficulty on the applicant or would create safety hazards to pedestrians or motorists. 
C.  Safeguard the public health, safety and welfare, and preserve the aesthetic qualities and enhance the community character.  
ARTICLE 13 - DEFINITIONS 
 
SECTION 138-13.100 - Rules of Construction 
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this ordinance: 
A.  The particular shall control the general. 
B.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive and discretionary. 
D.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
E.  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. The word "dwelling" includes "residence". The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel". 
F.  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
G.  The word "person" includes an individual, a firm, an association, an organization, a corporation (public or private), a partnership or co-partnership, a limited liability company, an incorporated or unincorporated association, a trust, or any other entity recognizable as a "person" under the laws of Michigan. 
H.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
2.  "Or" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly or in any combination (i.e., "or" also means "and/or"). 
3.  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly. 
I.  The terms "this Zoning Ordinance" or "this ordinance" includes the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rochester Hills and any amendments there to. 
J.  The terms "abutting" or "adjacent to" include property "across from", such as across a street, alley, or an easement. This term shall also apply to adjacent zoning districts in an adjacent community. 
K.  The word "he" includes "she." 
L.  The phrase "such as" shall mean "such as, but not limited to." 
M.  The word "including" shall mean "including, but not limited to." 
N.  Terms not defined in Article 13 (Definitions), or elsewhere in this ordinance shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.  
SECTION 138-13.101 - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ACCESSORY BUILDING. A type of structure that: has a roof which is supported by columns or walls; is intended for the shelter or enclosure of animals, goods or property; and is further intended to be used in a manner that is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, subordinate to, and located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is exclusively related. 
Examples of accessory buildings include: garages, storage sheds, gazebos, play houses, greenhouses, pump houses, and dog houses. 
ACCESSORY BUILDING, ATTACHED. An accessory building that is physically joined to the principal structure by a wall, roof, rafter, or other structural component. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such location, and that is intended to be used in a manner that is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, subordinate to, and located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use to which it is exclusively related. Examples of accessory structures include: accessory buildings, swimming pools, play structures, HVAC units, generators, and tennis courts. 
ACCESSORY USE. A use that is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, subordinate to, and located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use to which it is exclusively related. 
ADJACENT. Lots are adjacent when at least one boundary line of one lot touches a boundary line or lines of another lot. Exception: when the only touching boundary lines are located within a road easement or right-of-way. 
AGRICULTURE. The carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as a source of income when conducted on at least five acres or more. 
ALLEY. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
ALTERATION. 
[A.  ] Structural. A change, addition or modification to; or enlargement, rearrangement, replacement or removal of the construction of structural parts, means of egress or supporting members of the building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, roof or exterior walls. 
[B.  ] Building. A change, addition or modification to; or enlargement or rearrangement of the type of occupancy, height, area, location, design or approved method of functioning. 
[C.  ] Sign. A change, addition or modification to the design or function or a sign; or enlargement, rearrangement, replacement or removal of any part of any sign or billboard, including the sign copy area. 
APARTMENT BUILDING. A residential structure containing three or more attached one-family dwellings. 
ASHES. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility providing responsible adult supervision or assistance with routine living functions of an individual in instances where the individual's condition necessitates that supervision or assistance. 
AUTOMOTIVE GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A building or premises to be used for the retail sale of gasoline or other motor fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles and which may include facilities for minor services such as tuneups, brake adjustments and repair, shock absorber repair and replacement, wheel alignments, the changing and repairing of tires, washing, polishing, oil changes, lubrication and other minor servicing, but excluding painting, engine rebuilding and other major repairs, unless incidental to the principal permitted use. The provision of such activities and similar service activities on the premises shall not be permitted unless the premises are used primarily for the retail sale of gasoline and oil and other automotive products. The retail sale of nonalcoholic beverages, cigarettes and other convenience store items shall be permitted within the gasoline service station provided such sales do not constitute the principal use of the premises. 
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR GARAGE. A building or premises where the following services may be carried out in a completely enclosed building: major repairs, including, but not limited to, engine rebuilding and the rebuilding of motor vehicles; application of paint preservation materials; radiator repair and replacement; transmission repair and replacement; automobile and van customizing; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; the painting and rustproofing of automobiles; tire recapping; and upholstery work. Automotive repair garages may also include facilities and/or equipment allowing for the repair of other motor vehicles including trucks, recreational vehicles, vans and buses, among others. 
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE CENTER. A building or premises used primarily for the sale and installation of major automobile accessories, including, but not limited to, tires, batteries, sunroofs, radios, electronic devices, air conditioners, windows and mufflers, plus such services as brake repair and adjustment, shock absorber installation and repair, wheel alignment and balancing, oil changes and lubrication, tuneups, exterior reconditioning excluding paint or painting and major mechanical work, and vehicle inspection pollution compliance facilities, but excluding any major mechanical repairs, collision work, undercoating or painting. Sale of gasoline and other fuels for the propulsion of motor vehicles, stored only in underground tanks, and the retail sale of oil and other automotive products shall not be the primary use of the premises. The primary use of the premises shall be devoted to one or more of the listed service activities. 
BASEMENT. That portion of a building wholly or partly below grade, but so constructed that the vertical distance from the average grade to the basement floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the basement ceiling. A basement shall not be included as a story for height measurement, and shall not be used for dwelling units, offices, retail sales or manufacturing, but may be used for storage, heating and utility facilities, etc. Should the vertical distance between the floor and midpoint, and ceiling and midpoint, be equal the area shall be counted as a basement. 
BED and BREAKFAST. A use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit in which transient guests are provided with a sleeping room and breakfast in return for payment. 
BEDROOM. A room in a dwelling used for or intended to be used solely for sleeping purposes by human beings. 
BERM. A mound of soil graded, shaped and improved with landscaping in such a fashion as to be utilized for screening purposes. 
BOARD OF APPEALS. The City Zoning Board of Appeals. 
BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling where meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation for three or more persons by prearrangement for definite periods. A boardinghouse shall be distinguished from a hotel. 
BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a lot or parcel after yard, parking, or any other requirements of this ordinance have been met. 
BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. This shall include tents, awnings, or vehicles situated on private property and used for purposes of a building. 
BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, or STRUCTURE. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the premises upon which said building is situated. 
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from average grade to: 
A.  The mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip, gable, or gambrel roof. 
B.  The top of the highest roof beam for flat roofs. 
C.  The deck line for mansard roofs. 
D.  The mean level for a shed roof, from highest point to lowest point of roof. 
Where buildings have multiple or conflicting roof styles, the most restrictive method applies. 
 
Figure 9. Building Height 
BUILDING INSPECTOR. The building inspector or official designated by the City Council. 
BUILDING LINE. A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purpose of this ordinance, a building line is the same as a front setback line. 
CAMPER ENCLOSURE means a structure or enclosure designed for mounting on a pickup truck or truck chassis in such a manner as to provide temporary living or sleeping quarters, including but not limited to a slide-in camper or truck cap. 
CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents are not immediately available to the child. 
CLINIC. A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick or injured persons, and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention. A clinic may incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies incidental or necessary to its operation or to the service of its patients, but may not include facilities for inpatient care of major surgery. 
CLUB. An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, literature, politics or the like, but not for profit. 
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWER. A tower, antenna, or similar structure used by a commercial enterprise to send and/or receive radio, television, or various other types of transmissions, but not including cellular telephone system towers or antennas. 
COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT means any machinery, parts, accessories, construction equipment or other equipment used primarily in the course of conducting a trade or business, and roll-off dumpsters and portable storage units in residential districts. 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE means any vehicle used to generate income or which has the appearance that it is used for business, due to size, type, signage and/or accessories. A pickup truck, passenger/cargo-style van with seating of up to 15 persons, sports/utility vehicle and passenger car without signage and accessories shall not be considered, for purposes of this chapter, as a commercial vehicle, even though used in business. 
CONDITIONAL USE. A use specified in this ordinance as permissible in a specific use district only after special conditions are met. 
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT means a bulldozer, front-end loader, backhoe, power shovel, cement mixer, trencher, and any other equipment designed or used for construction, including parts and accessories thereto, and trailers designed for the transportation of such equipment. 
CONVALESCENT or NURSING HOME. A home for the care of children, the aged, the infirm, or a place of rest for persons suffering serious bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are cared for. A convalescent or nursing home is subject to the licensing requirements of applicable State laws (Public Act 139 of 1956, as amended). 
DEVELOPMENT. The construction of a new use or building or other structure on a lot or parcel, the relocation of an existing use or building on another lot or parcel, or the use of acreage or open land for a new use or building. 
DISTRICT. A geographic area specified in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rochester Hills within which certain uses are permitted, and certain regulations apply under this ordinance. This term is synonymous with the term "zone" or "zoning district." 
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment so developed that its principal retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in or momentarily stepped away from their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, so that consumption within motor vehicles may be facilitated. 
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment so developed that its principal retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles to service patrons from a window or booth while in their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, so that consumption off the premises may be facilitated. 
DWELLING. A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
A.  Apartment. A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family or commercial building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
B.  Attached Dwelling. A dwelling unit attached to two or more dwelling units by common major structural elements. There are three types of attached dwelling unit: 
1.  Apartment Building. A building divided into apartments and designed for residential occupancy by three or more families and so designed and arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations and sanitary facilities for three or more families with each floor having two means of egress, exclusive of an elevator. Dwelling units in a multiple family building may be directly accessible and independent for each dwelling unit, or accessible via an internal corridor or hallway. 
2.  Stacked Flats Building. A type of attached dwelling unit building occupied by three or more families, where dwellings are divided by party walls in the horizontal plane and floor-ceiling assemblies in the vertical plane in an appropriate manner for multiple-family uses. Each dwelling unit is capable of individual use and maintenance without trespassing upon adjoining properties, and utilities and service facilities are independent for each property. 
3.  Townhouse. A type of attached dwelling unit building that is divided from the dwelling adjacent to it by a party wall extending the full height of the building with no visible separation between walls or roof. Each townhouse dwelling shall be capable of individual use and maintenance without trespassing upon adjoining dwellings, and access, utilities and service facilities shall be independent for each dwelling. 
C.  Detached Dwelling. A dwelling unit which is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. 
D.  Efficiency Apartment. A dwelling unit with a bathroom and principal kitchen facilities designed as a self contained unit for living, cooking, and sleeping purposes, and having no separate designated bedroom. 
E.  Manufactured Home Dwelling. A dwelling unit that is transportable in one or more sections, which is built upon a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. Recreational vehicles as described and regulated herein shall not be considered "manufactured homes" for the purposes of this ordinance. 
F.  Modular Dwelling. A dwelling which consists of prefabricated units transported to the site in two or more sections on a removable undercarriage or flat-bed and assembled for permanent location upon a permanent foundation on the lot, and to which such major elements as the heating system or a substantial portion of the siding are installed after transport, and shall not be considered a mobile home. 
G.  Site Built Dwelling. A dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled, and finished on the premises which are intended to serve as its final location. Site-built dwelling units shall include dwelling units constructed of precut materials, and paneled wall, roof and floor sections when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on the premises which are intended to serve as it final location. 
H.  Single-Family Dwelling. A building designed exclusively for residential occupancy by not more than one family. 
I.  Two-Family (Duplex) Dwelling. A building designed exclusively for residential occupancy by two families, and arranged to provide separate kitchen and sleeping accommodations and sanitary facilities for each family. 
ERECT. To build, construct, reconstruct, move, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix, paint or undertake any physical operation on the premises required for development of a building, sign, site or structure; including, but not limited to construction, grading, excavations, fill and drainage activities. 
ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution system, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment in connection therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. Wireless communication towers or antennas, utility buildings and storage yards are not considered essential services under this ordinance. 
EXCAVATION. Any breaking of the ground to hollow out by cutting, digging, or removing any soil or rock matter, except for common household gardening and general farm care. 
FAÇADE. The vertical plane of the exterior surface of a building, including all visible architectural, decorative and structural features, window openings, door openings and the outside surface of a parapet wall. 
FAMILY. 
A.  An individual or group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, together with foster children and servants of the principal occupants, with not more than one additional unrelated person, who are domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or 
B.  A collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a continuing nontransient domestic character and who are cooking and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. This definition does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or other similar determinable period. 
FENCE. Structures or partitions of definite height and location intended to serve as: a physical barrier to property ingress or egress; a screen from objectionable vista or noise; a marker; an enclosure in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance; or for decorative use. Hedges, ornamental shrubs, trees and bushes shall be considered fences for the purpose of this ordinance when placed in a manner or position to serve as such. 
FILLING. The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground, except common household gardening and general farm care. 
FIREARM. An instrument which is capable of hurling a missile by means of exploding or burning powder. 
FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat area or lowlands adjoining the channel of a watercourse or a body of water, which may be covered by floodwater when high amounts of precipitation are experienced. Determinants of a floodplain are as follows: 
A.  Contiguous areas paralleling major rivers or streams that constitute, at their maximum edge, the highest flood levels experienced in a period of 100 years. 
B.  Principal estuary courses of wetland areas that are part of the river flow system. 
C.  Contiguous areas paralleling major rivers or streams that exhibit unstable soil conditions for development. 
FLOODWAY. The channels and area adjacent to the channels necessary to carry and discharge floodwater. Floodway channel limits shall be the ordinary high water mark boundaries of the channel. 
FLOOR AREA. The sum total of the area of all buildings on a site excluding utility rooms and mechanical rooms, measured between the outer perimeter walls of the buildings, provided that space in a building or structure used for parking of motor vehicles shall not be computed in the floor area. Courtyards or balconies open to the sky and roofs which are utilized for recreation, etc., shall not be counted in the floor area but shall be a part of the recreational space. 
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA). The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The "floor area" of a building, which is what this normally is referred to as, includes the basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above the established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever is higher. Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in floor area. Areas of basements, utility rooms, breezeways, unfinished attics, porches (enclosed or unenclosed) or attached garages are not included. 
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The ratio between the maximum allowable amount of floor space on all floors in a building and the total area of the lot on which the building is located. Example: a FAR of 2.0 would allow floor space of twice the lot area, or a four-story, building covering one-half of the lot. A FAR of 0.5 would allow floor space of one-half the lot area, or a two-story building covering one-quarter of the lot. 
FLOOR AREA, USABLE (UFA). That portion of the floor area, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls, used for or intended to be used for services to the public or to customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures or equipment used for the display or sale of goods or merchandise, but not including areas used or intended to be used for the storage of merchandise, utility or mechanical equipment rooms, sanitary facilities, or service hallways or corridors. In the case of a half story, the usable floor area shall be considered to be only that portion having a clear height above it of four feet or more. 
 
Figure 10. Floor Area Terminology 
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a main building designated or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
GARBAGE. Any putrescible solid and semisolid animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the production, handling, preparation, cooking, service or consumption of food or food materials. 
GAZEBO. A roofed or sheltered structure which consists, generally, of open, screened or latticework construction and may be used for outdoor seating, but is not designed for year-round use. 
GRADE. A reference plane representing the average of the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building/dwelling. 
GREENBELT. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
GROSS FLOOR AREA. See FLOOR AREA, GROSS. 
GUN CLUB. Any club, organization, individual, group of individuals, or use, whether operated for profit or not, and whether public catering or private, which caters to or allows the use of firearms. 
HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession customarily carried on by the occupant of a dwelling unit at the dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. Home occupation includes a bed and breakfast operation. 
HOSPITAL. A building, structure or institution in which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical treatment and operating under license by the health department and the state, and that is used for primarily inpatient services, and including such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
HOTEL or MOTEL. A series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units which provide overnight lodging and/or temporary residence and which are offered to the public for compensation and which units are accessible from interior corridors or directly from outdoor parking areas and, the establishment may offer or provide meals, entertainment and/or personal services. 
JUNKYARD. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes automobile wrecking yards, and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
KENNEL. The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, or training of three or more dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age either 1) not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, or 2) for commercial gain. 
LABORATORY. A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing, but not devoted to the manufacturing of a product or products. 
LANDFILL. Any disposal area or tract of land, building, unit or appurtenance or combination thereof that is used to collect, store, handle, dispose of, bury, cover over, or otherwise accept or retain refuse as defined in this section. 
LIGHTING. The following definitions are related to lighting: 
A.  Canopy structure. Any overhead protective structure which is constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians/vehicles to pass under. 
B.  Floodlight. Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction. 
C.  Footcandle. A unit of illuminance, which is the quantity of light, or luminous flux, arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, amounting to one lumen per square foot. 
D.  Fully Shielded Fixture. A luminaire constructed or shielded in such a manner that all light emitted by the luminaire, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal plane through the luminaire's lowest light emitting part as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. 
E.  Glare. Direct light emitted by a luminaire that causes reduced vision or momentary blindness. 
F.  Light Fixture. The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A light fixture also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting. 
G.  Light Pollution. Artificial light which causes a detrimental effect on the environment, enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties. 
H.  Light Trespass. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of property in which it is located. 
I.  Luminaire. The complete lighting system including the lamp and light fixture. 
J.  Luminaire Cut-Off Angle. The angle, measured up from the nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which the bare source is not visible. 
K.  Luminous Tube Lighting. Gas filled tubing which, when subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular gas used, e.g. neon, argon, etc. 
L.  Outdoor Light Fixtures. Outdoor artificial illuminating devices, installed or portable, used for floodlighting, general illumination, or advertisement. 
LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, goats, and other useful animals normally kept or raised on a farm. 
LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
LOT. The contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of use or structure. The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
LOT AREA, GROSS. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
LOT AREA, NET. Gross lot area minus any portions of the lot located within dedicated rights-of-way, drainage easements, or bodies of water. 
LOT, CORNER. A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of the two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this ordinance if the arc is a radius of less than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. See Figure 15. 
LOT COVERAGE. The part or percentage of the lot occupied by buildings, including accessory buildings. 
LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between side lot lines. 
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all sides of such lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required. See Figure 15. 
LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot. See Figure 15. 
 
Figure 11. Interior and Corner Lots 
 
Figure 12. Lot Width 
LOT LINE. Any line dividing one lot from another lot, or from a street right-of-way or from any public place: 
A.  Front lot line. 
1.  In the case of an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street, except if the shape of the parcel, or some other reason, makes it impractical to use such line as the front line, another line may be used as the front upon approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals, if the placement of the structures and resulting yards are consistent with, and more easily blend with, the other buildings and development in the adjoining area. 
2.  In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line is that line separating such lot from the street which is designated as the front street in the plat and in the application for a building permit or zoning occupancy permit. In the case of a double frontage lot the front line is that line separating such lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat, or in the request for a building permit. 
B.  Rear lot line. The lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. In any case where this definition does not apply, the Planning Commission shall designate the rear lot line. 
C.  Side lot line. Any lot lines other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an interior side lot line. 
D.  Side street lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the side street lot line is the line separating such lot from the street which is not designated as the front street in the plat or in the application for a building permit or zoning occupancy permit. 
LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by City or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the two points where the building line, or setback, intersects the side lot lines. See Figure 12. 
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a non-motorized chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. A mobile home shall not include modular homes, motor homes, house trailer, trailer coach, or travel trailers. 
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK. A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a manufactured home, subject to the rules and requirements of the Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act 96, of 1987, as amended (MCL 139.2301 et seq.) and the Manufactured Housing Commission General Rules. A person, as used in this definition, means an individual, partnership, association, trust, corporation or any other legal entity or combination of legal entities. 
MASTER PLAN. A comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the City and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
MASTER THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The right-of-way and/or thoroughfare plan officially adopted by the City, the county and/or the intercounty highway commission. 
MEDIA and ENTERTAINMENT PRODUCTION FACILITY. A facility for the creation, production, recording, editing, or finishing of film, television, print, sound, or other media. Excluded are facilities classified as major utility services or broadcasting or communication towers. 
MEDICAL OFFICE. See OFFICE, MEDICAL. 
MOBILE HOME. See MANUFACTURED HOME or MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK. 
MOTEL. See HOTEL or MOTEL. 
NATURAL FEATURE. A wetland or watercourse. 
NONCONFORMITIES. 
A.  Nonconforming Structure. A structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located, but is otherwise in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
B.  Nonconforming Use of Land. A use that lawfully occupied a parcel or contiguous parcels of land or structure and land in combination at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located, or does not have special approval where provisions of this ordinance require such approval, but is otherwise in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
C.  Nonconforming Lot of Record. A platted or unplatted parcel of land lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located. 
D.  Nonconforming Site. A parcel of land that was developed or improved with structures and other site improvements prior to the date of adoption of current zoning ordinance provisions for site design, landscaping, pedestrian access, exterior lighting, paving and other site elements. 
E.  Illegal Structure. A structure or portion thereof, which is not a conforming or a nonconforming structure, or is not in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
F.  Illegal Use of Land. A use that occupies one or more contiguous parcels of land, or structures and land in combination, which is not a conforming or a nonconforming use, or is not in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
G.  Cessation. To terminate, abandon or discontinue a use of land for a period of time that, under the provisions of this ordinance, would prevent the use from being resumed. 
NUISANCE. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or practice being a cause or source of annoyance. 
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL. A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this ordinance does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or harvest and cut Christmas trees. 
NURSING HOME. See CONVALESCENT or NURSING HOME. 
OCCUPANCY LOAD. The number of individuals normally occupying a building or part thereof or for which the existing facilities have been designed. 
OCCUPIED. Being in actual or constructive possession of a structure or land. The term "occupied" includes the term "intended, designed or arranged to be occupied." 
OFFICE, SHOWROOM, or WORKSHOP ESTABLISHMENT. A service establishment that includes an office-showroom or workshop component, including but not limited to an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker, printer, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio, television or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require a retail adjunct. Automotive establishments such as muffler, shock-absorber or brake replacement businesses are not considered office, showroom, or workshop establishments. 
OFFICE, MEDICAL. Offices for medical professionals and related occupations, such as doctors, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, and similar or allied professions. 
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. Offices for executive, administrative, and professional occupations such as lawyers, accountants, architects, planners, engineers, financial advisors, media production, advertising, sales, and similar or allied professions. 
OPEN FRONT STORE. A business establishment other than a restaurant, bank, automobile service or repair station, so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the building, not requiring the patron to enter such building. 
OPEN AIR BUSINESS. The display and sale of products and services on a lot outside of a building including products and services that are displayed year round and those such as Christmas trees and flowers that are displayed and sold on a temporary or seasonal basis, excluding garage sales that are otherwise regulated in this ordinance. 
PARKING LOT. An area utilized for the off-street parking of automobiles which is constructed according to the standards of this ordinance or other City ordinances and which is built on the surface of the ground. 
PARKING SPACE. An area of definite length and width exclusive of drives, driveways, aisles or entrances giving access thereto and fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
PARKING STRUCTURE. An area utilized for the off-street parking of automobiles which is constructed according to the standards of this ordinance or other City ordinances and which may be one or more stories in height. 
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A business that performs services on the premises for persons residing in nearby residential areas including but not limited to shoe repair, tailoring, beauty parlors, nail salons, or barbershops. 
PET BOARDING FACILITY. A business for the temporary boarding and care of common household pets generally during daytime hours, but in some cases including overnight boarding. Pet boarding facilities may provide related services such as grooming or training. No animals may be bred or sold at a pet boarding facility. 
PLACE OF WORSHIP. A religious institution, or a site used for the regular assembly of persons, for the conducting of religious services, and for related accessory uses, including offices and living quarters for church ministry and other members of the religious order who carry out their duties primarily on the site, religious education classes, day care and limited recreation facilities. Rescue missions, tent revivals and other temporary assemblies are not included in this definition. 
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City as designated in Public Act No. 33 of 2008. 
PORCH, ENCLOSED. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is totally enclosed, which projects out from the main wall of such building or structure and which has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached. 
PORCH, OPEN. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed, except for columns supporting the porch roof, which projects out from the main wall of such building or structure and which has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached. 
POULTRY. Domestic fowl such as chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese. 
PRINCIPAL USE. A use as specified and listed in this ordinance under each district as a principal use. 
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. See OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. 
PUBLIC PARK. Any place devoted to recreation or conservation purposes within the jurisdiction and control of a governmental agency. 
PUBLIC SERVICE. Public service facilities within the context of this ordinance shall include such uses and services as voting booths, pumping stations, fire halls, police stations, temporary quarters for welfare agencies, public health activities and similar uses including essential services. 
PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
RECREATION FACILITIES, INDOOR. An establishment which provides indoor exercise facilities and indoor court sports facilities, and which may include spectator seating in conjunction with the sports facilities. For the purposes of this ordinance, a bowling establishment shall be considered a type of indoor recreation center. 
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, OUTDOOR. Playgrounds, parks, picnic areas, golf courses, ball fields, camps, swimming pools, nature preserves, or any other type of community space or equipment that is designed to provide the user with the opportunity to relax, engage in athletic activity, or engage in other leisure pursuits. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE means a mobile structure or unit designed or altered to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use, but not for commercial use. It may be self-propelled or designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. The term "recreational vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, a motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, folding camping trailer, or a converted van or bus. 
REFUSE. Any putrescible or nonputrescible solid waste, except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, offal and solid agricultural, commercial, industrial, hazardous and institutional wastes and construction waste resulting from the operation of a contractor. 
RESIDENTIAL INN. A series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units which provide temporary living units of rooms or suites that feature individual kitchen and dining facilities. Residential inns are distinguished from hotels and motels in that they are intended to provide temporary lodging for guests that require accommodations for longer periods of time, and in some instances for more than 30 days. 
RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT. Any generally recognized retail business that supplies commodities on the premises to the general public. Commodities supplied may include groceries and similar food products for consumption off the premises. Restaurants or any similar establishment that serves prepared food as its primary business is not considered a retail sales establishment. 
ROADSIDE STAND and MARKET. The temporary use of property or facilities for the selling of produce. 
RUBBISH. Any nonputrescible solid waste excluding ashes, such as paper, cardboard, plastic, metal, or glass food containers, rags, waste metal, yard clippings, small pieces of wood, glass, excelsior, rubber, leather, crockery and other similar materials. 
SETBACK. The distance required to comply with front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this ordinance. 
SHOPPING CENTER. Three or more commercial establishments which are contiguous and developed under one site plan. 
SIGN. The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which anything is made known, other than billboards, such as are used to show an individual firm, profession or business, and are visible to the general public; accessory signs pertain to uses or activities conducted on the premises where the signs are located. 
SOIL EXCAVATION. Removal of any kind or nature from a site of gravel, clay, sand, soil or other similar materials. 
STABLE, PUBLIC. A structure in which livestock used for pleasure riding or driving are housed or kept for hire, including a riding track. 
STABLE, PRIVATE. A building and associated site improvements for the keeping of horses for the noncommercial use of the residents of the principal use and does not include the keeping of horses for others, or for commercial breeding. 
STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. Any structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the State of Michigan pursuant to Michigan Public Act 116 of 1973 (the Child Care Licensing Act) or Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979 (the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act). This definition includes adult foster care facilities, foster family homes, foster family group homes, family day care homes, and group day care homes (see Human Services Facilities Subject to State Licensing Chart). 
A.  Adult foster care facility means a residential structure that is licensed to provide foster care, but not continuous nursing care, for unrelated adults over the age of 17. Adult foster care facilities are subject to all applicable provisions, definitions, and regulations of Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended (MCL 400.701 et seq.). 
1.  Foster care means the provision of supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
2.  Adult foster care facility does not include any of the following: 
a.  A licensed child caring institution, children's camp, foster family home, or foster family group home, subject to the limitations contained in Section 3(4f) of Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended (MCL 400.703). 
b.  A licensed foster family home that has a person who is 18 years of age or older placed in the foster family home under section 5(7) of Michigan Public Act 116 of 1973, as amended (MCL 722.115). 
c.  An establishment commonly described as an alcohol or a substance abuse rehabilitation center; a residential facility for persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions; a maternity home; or a hotel or rooming house that does not provide or offer to provide foster care. 
d.  A veterans' facility created by 1885 PA 152, MCL 36.1 to 36.12. 
3.  The following types of adult foster care facilities are provided for by this ordinance: 
a.  Adult foster care family home means a private home with the approved capacity to receive not more than six adults to be provided with foster care. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
b.  Adult foster care small group home means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive not more than 12 adults to be provided with foster care. Facilities with the approved capacity for seven or more adults are subject to conditional use approval. 
c.  Adult foster care large group home means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. Facilities are subject to conditional use approval. 
d.  Adult foster care congregate facility means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. Facilities are subject to conditional use approval. 
B.  Family day care home means a private home in which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
C.  Foster family home means a private home in which one but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan adoption code, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
D.  Foster family group home means a private home in which more than four but fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan adoption code, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
E.  Group child day care home means a private home in which more than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group child day care home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
F.  Private home means a private residence in which the licensee or registrant permanently resides as a member of the household, which residency is not contingent upon caring for children or employment by a licensed or approved child placing agency. 
	Number of 
Persons 	Private Home? 	Supplemental Use 
Standards 
Less Than 24-Hour Care 
Persons under age 18 
Family Day Care Home 	1-6 	Yes 	Section 138-4.440 
Group Child Day Care Home 	7-12 	Yes 	Section 138-4.440 
Child Care Center or 
Day Care Center 	1 or more 	No 	Section 138-4.422 
24-Hour Care 
Persons under age 18 
Foster Family Home 	1-4 	Yes 	Section 138-4.440 
Foster Family Group Home 	4-6 	Yes 	Section 138-4.440 
Persons age 18 and Over 
Adult Foster Care Family Home 	1-6 	Yes 	Section 138-4.414 
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home 	1-12 	Yes 	Section 138-4.440 
Adult Foster Care Large Group Home 	13-20 	No 	Section 138-4.440 
Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility 	20 or more 	No 	Section 138-4.440 
Nursing Home 	2 or more 	No 	Section 138-4.423 
 
STEEP SLOPE. Refer to Section 138-9.210 for definitions pertaining to steep slopes and their regulation. 
STORY. That part of a building, other than a mezzanine, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. Specifically: 
A.  Top Story Attic. A half story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of said story. 
B.  First Story. The highest story having its interior floor surface not more than four feet above the curb level, or the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building were it set back from the street. 
C.  Basement. A story if over 50 percent of its height is above the level from which the height of the building is measured, or if it is used for dwelling purposes by other than a janitor or domestic servant employed in the same building, including the family of the same. 
D.  Half-story. That part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, such part having a floor area which does not exceed one-half of the floor area of such full story, provided the area contains at least 200 square feet, with a clear height of at least seven feet six inches. 
E.  Mezzanine. A full story when it covers more than 33 percent of the area of the story underneath such mezzanine or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more. 
 
Figure 13. Basement and Story 
 
Figure 14. Basic Structural Terms 
STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
STREET, SIDE. 
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected and designed for a permanent location on the ground. 
TEMPORARY BUILDING. A structure permitted by this ordinance to exist during periods of construction or special events. 
TENT. A portable shelter of canvass, coarse cloth, etc., supported by one or more poles, but not including those used solely for children's recreational purposes. 
THOROUGHFARE, MAJOR. An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate City area and the region beyond, and may be designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term. 
THOROUGHFARE, SECONDARY. An arterial street which is intended to serve as a trafficway serving primarily the immediate City area and serving to connect with major thoroughfares. 
TRAILER means a vehicle, other than a utility trailer, designed for carrying property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
USABLE FLOOR AREA. See FLOOR AREA, USABLE. 
USE. The purpose for which land or premises, or a building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased. Used includes the term "intended, designed or arranged to be occupied." 
A.  Accessory Use. A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the principal use or building of the premises. 
B.  Conditional Use. An activity that may be detrimental to other land uses permitted within the same district, but that may be permitted subject to certain conditions or limitations designed to insure that the use is compatible with other permitted uses in the district. 
C.  Permitted Use. A use permitted in each zoning district by right subject to site plan review approval. 
D.  Seasonal Use. A temporary use permitted and regulated pursuant to this ordinance for a limited period of time conducted every year at the same time of year, such as, but not limited to, the sale of Easter flowers and Christmas trees. 
E.  Temporary Use. A use permitted and regulated pursuant to this ordinance for periods of time that are limited in duration as specified by this ordinance, including, but not limited to carnivals, circuses, farmers market, art fairs, craft shows, sidewalk sales, antique sales, Christmas tree sales, flower sales, flea markets and similar events. 
UTILITY ROOM. A room used primarily for storage, for housing a heating unit, or for laundry purposes. 
UTILITY TRAILER means a vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle in order to carry personal property, including but not limited to, firewood, refuse, snowmobiles, boats, motorcycles or recreational equipment, or used solely for noncommercial purposes. 
VARIANCE. A variation or modification of this ordinance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals relating to the construction, or structural changes in, equipment or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land, buildings, or structures, where there is a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance. 
VEHICLE means any device in, upon, or by which a person or property may be transported or drawn. 
VETERINARY CLINIC. A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick or injured animals, and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention. A veterinary clinic may include customary pens or cages which are permitted only within the walls of the clinic structure. 
WALL. 
A.  Obscuring. An obscuring structure of definite height and location constructed of masonry, concrete or similar material. 
B.  Decorative. A screening structure or wall of definite height and location constructed of an aesthetically pleasing masonry or rock material, such as face brick, stone or simulated stone, split-face CMU or other decorative block. 
WATERCOURSE. Any waterway, river, stream, inland lake or pond or other body of water having definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. The term "watercourse" does not include lakes or ponds constructed, by excavating or diking dry land and maintained for the sole purpose of cooling or storing water, and does not include lagoons used for treating polluted water. 
WETLAND. Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal conditions does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh and which is any of the following: 
A.  Contiguous to an inland lake or pond or to a river or stream; 
B.  Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond or a river or stream and is two acres or more in size; or 
C.  Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond or to a river or stream, and less than two acres in size, if the protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the City from pollution, impairment or destruction for one of the following reasons: 
1.  The wetland supports state or federal endangered or threatened plants, fish, or wildlife appearing on a list specified in MCL 324.36501, as amended; 
2.  The wetland represents what the reviewing authority has identified as a locally rare or unique ecosystem; 
3.  The wetland supports plants or animals of an identified local importance; 
4.  The wetland provides groundwater recharge documented by a public agency; 
5.  The wetland provides flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage capacity of the wetland; 
6.  The wetland provides wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting, or feeding grounds or cover for forms of wildlife, waterfowl, including migratory waterfowl, and rare, threatened, or endangered wildlife species; 
7.  The wetland provides protection of a subsurface water resource, a valuable watershed, or a groundwater recharge area; 
8.  The wetland provides pollution treatment by serving as a biological and chemical oxidation basin; 
9.  The wetland provides erosion control by serving as a sedimentation area and filtering basin, absorbing silt and organic matter; or 
10.  The wetland provides sources of nutrients in water food cycles and nursery grounds and sanctuaries for fish. 
YARD. An open space other than a courtyard located on the same lot as a main building or use, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring to determine the width of a yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
A.  Front yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line, a right-of-way as indicated on the master thoroughfare plan, or a private road easement used for ingress and egress, whichever is closest to the building which is to be located on the property, and the nearest point of the main building. 
B.  Rear yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line or zoning district line, whichever is closer to the building, except for changes in the zoning districts involving only residential zoning districts, a right-of-way as indicated on the master thoroughfare plan, or a private road easement used for ingress and egress, whichever is closest to the building which is to be located on the property, and the nearest point of the main building. 
C.  Side yard. An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line or zoning district line, whichever is closer to the building, except for changes in the zoning districts involving only residential zoning districts, a right-of-way as indicated on the master thoroughfare plan, or a private road easement used for ingress and egress, whichever is closest to the building which is to be located on the property, and the nearest point of the main building. 
D.  Side street yard. The area extending between the front yard and the rear yard situated between the side street lot line and the face of the principal building which is parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the side street lot line. 
E.  Required yard. An open space of prescribed width or depth, adjacent to a lot or property line, on the same land with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies in the area between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line, and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
 
Figure 15. Yard Requirements 
 
Figure 16. Open Space Terms 
(Ord. No. 180/593 , § 5, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 182 , § 9, 2-5-2018) 
