Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-181]
§ 1-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "2008 Ordinance
Adopting the Royal Oak Code of Ordinances."
§ 1-2. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to adopt the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances, pursuant to the Home Rule Cities Act, MCLA 117.1 et seq.
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
A. Grant of authority. The Home Rule Cities Act, MCLA 117.1 et seq.,
provides as follows:
Each city shall have power, whether provided in its charter or not,
to codify, recodify and continue in code its municipal ordinances,
in whole or in part, without the necessity of publishing the entire
code in full. The ordinance adopting the code, as well as subsequent
ordinances repealing, amending, continuing or adding to the code,
shall be published as required by law. The ordinance adopting the
code may amend, repeal, revise or rearrange ordinances or part of
ordinances by reference by title only. MCLA 117.5b.
B. Adoption of Code. Pursuant to the Home Rule Cities Act at MCL
§ 117.5b, the ordinances of the City of Royal Oak of a general and
permanent nature adopted by the City Commission of the City of Royal
Oak, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corporation, and consisting of Chapters 1
through 770, together with an appendix, are approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of Royal Oak," and can be
referred to as the "Code."
C. Code supersedes prior ordinances. This ordinance and the Code
supersedes all general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved
from repeal or continued in force.
D. Copy of Code on file. A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed
in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance;
and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, shall be certified to by the Clerk
of the City of Royal Oak by impressing the Seal of the City, as provided
by law. The certified copy of the Code shall remain on file in the office of
1. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Adoption of Code, adopted
6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-07.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
the City Clerk, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
E. Amendments to Code. Any and all additions, amendments or
supplements to the Code, when adopted in such form as to indicate the
intent of the City Commission to make them a part of the Code, shall be
incorporated into the Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of
Royal Oak" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever these additions, amendments or
supplements to the Code are adopted, they shall be printed and, as
provided, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code, as
amendments and supplements.
F. Publication; filing. The Clerk of the City of Royal Oak, pursuant to law,
shall cause to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this
adopting ordinance in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the
Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The enactment and publication of this adopting ordinance,
coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
G. Code book to be kept up-to-date. It is the duty of the Clerk or someone
authorized and directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified
copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her
office for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this codification
which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included by reference until such changes or new
ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted.
H. Sale of Code book. Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it,
may be purchased from the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk
upon the payment of a fee to be set by the City Commission or may be
furnished electronically. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
I. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties. It is unlawful
for anyone to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or
portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner
which will cause the law of the City of Royal Oak to be misrepresented.
Anyone violating this section or any part of this ordinance is subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court imposing
the sentence.
§ 1-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is
for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent portion of this ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 1-5. Savings.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-6 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 20, 2008.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise (including gas, electric and cable franchise agreements),
license, right, easement or privilege previously granted or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5
§ 1-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed only to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and
effect.
§ 1-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect 10 days after the final passage thereof.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map or the Zoning
Ordinance.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any legislation dealing with the Downtown Development Authority at
Ordinance No. 76-26, as amended.
§ 1-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 1-7
1:6
ARTICLE II
Municipal Civil Infractions
[Adopted 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-4]
§ 1-8. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Civil
Infraction Ordinance."
§ 1-9. Definitions.
For the purpose of the provisions of this article, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
ACT — Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended.2
AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL — A police officer or other personnel of
the City of Royal Oak authorized by this article or any ordinance to issue
municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation
notices.
BUREAU — The City of Royal Oak Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
as established by this article.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION — A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION — A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized City official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction
violation by the person cited.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE — A written notice
prepared by an authorized City official, directing a person to appear at the
City of Royal Oak Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine
and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines
adopted by the City, as authorized under Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the
Act.3
§ 1-10. Designation of authorized City officials.
The following personnel of the City of Royal Oak have the authority to issue
municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation
notices pursuant to this article:
A. Police officers.
B. Chief Inspector.
C. Assistant Chief Inspector.
2. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.101 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See MCLA §§ 600.8396 and 600.8707(6), respectively.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
§ 1-11. Municipal civil infraction action; commencement.
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by
an authorized City official of:
§ 1-12. Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized
City officials as follows:
D. Supervisor of Inspections.
E. Building Inspector.
F. Plumbing Inspector.
G. Electrical Inspector.
H. Mechanical Inspector.
I. Housing Inspector.
J. Code Enforcement Officer.
K. Code Enforcement Aide.
L. Fire Chief.
M. Fire Marshal.
N. Fire Inspector.
O. Animal Control Officer. [Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-25]
P. Dog Warden. [Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-25]
Q. Parking enforcement officer. [Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-25]
R. Police service aid. [Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-25]
A. A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to
appear in court; or
B. A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged
violator to appear at the City of Royal Oak Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau.
A. The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
B. The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district
court.
C. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be
§ 1-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 1-12
1:8
§ 1-13. Municipal civil infraction citations; contents.
retained by the City and issued to the alleged violator as provided by
Section 8705 of the Act.4
D. A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized City
official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement
immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare
under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the
best of my information, knowledge, and belief."
E. An authorized City official who witnesses a person commit a municipal
civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as
completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.
F. An authorized City official may issue a citation to a person if:
(1) Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or
(2) Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for an infraction and if the City Attorney approves in
writing the issuance of the citation.
G. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized City
official as follows:
(1) Except as provided by Subsection G(2), an authorized City official
shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged
violator.
(2) If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged
violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land,
building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching
the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the
citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land,
building, or structure at the owner's last known address.
A. A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of
the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place
where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
4. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.8705.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:9
B. Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may
do one of the following:
(1) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.
(2) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in
person, or by representation.
(3) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either
of the following:
(a) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or
district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a
judge is requested by the City.
(b) Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
C. The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1) That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with
explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator
must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain
a scheduled date and time for his appearance.
(2) That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a
hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
(3) That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the City.
(4) That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(5) That at formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
D. The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of
the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or
at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged
violator on the municipal civil infraction.
§ 1-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 1-14
1:10
§ 1-14. Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
A. Bureau established. The City hereby establishes a Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau ("Bureau") as authorized under Section 8396 of the
Act5 to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions
in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and
served by authorized City officials, and to collect and retain civil fines
and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance.
B. Location; supervision; employees rules and regulations. The Bureau
shall be located at the 44th District Court and shall be under the
supervision and control of the Court Administrator. The Court
Administrator shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the
Bureau.
C. Disposition of violations. The Bureau may dispose only of municipal civil
infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which
a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a
citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a
particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the
violation at the Bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict
the City from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any
violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent
jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil
infraction violation at the Bureau and may have the violation processed
before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any
person to dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall not prejudice the
person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and
protection accorded by law.
D. Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of
the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and
retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The
Bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies
having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with
explanation, and in no event shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to
determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an
alleged violation.
E. Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction
violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized City officials
under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided
for citations as provided in § 1-22F and G of this article. In addition to
any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the
notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator
must appear at the Bureau, the methods by which an appearance may
be made, the address and telephone number of the Bureau, the hours
during which the Bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for
5. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 600.8396.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:11
§ 1-15. Failure to appear; violations and penalties.
A person served with a municipal civil infraction citation as provided in
§ 1-22G who fails to appear within the time specified in the citation or at
the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or
appearance is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine
and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Failure to appear will also
result in the entry of a default judgment on the municipal civil infraction.
the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and
pay the required fine within the required time.
F. Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a
municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau
and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for
appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An
appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.
G. Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid.
If an authorized City official issues and serves a municipal ordinance
violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the
civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the
violation are not paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation
may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be
served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged
violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not
need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as
provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act,6 but shall consist of a
sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal
ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator
how to respond to the citation.
6. Editor's Note: See MCLA §§ 600.8705 and 600.8709, respectively.
§ 1-14 ROYAL OAK CODE § 1-15
1:12
Chapter 8
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 8-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Appearance Ticket
Ordinance."
§ 8-2. Statement of purpose.
This is a chapter to authorize the issuance and service of appearance tickets
by City of Royal Oak public servants other than police officers for violations
of Royal Oak ordinances.
§ 8-3. Public servants authorized to issue appearance tickets.
The following City of Royal Oak public servants have the authority to issue
and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he or she has a reasonable
cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of an ordinance
of the City of Royal Oak:
A. Chief Inspector.
B. Assistant Chief Inspector.
C. Building Inspector.
D. Plumbing Inspector.
E. Electrical Inspector.
F. Mechanical Inspector.
G. Housing Inspector.
H. Code Enforcement Aide.
I. Fire Marshal.
J. Fire Inspector.
K. Fire Chief. [Added 10-10-1988 by Ord. No. 88-13]
§ 1-15 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 8-3
8:13
Chapter 12
APPOINTMENTS TO ADVISORY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS
AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees — See Ch. 39.
§ 12-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Appointment
Ordinance."
§ 12-2. Statement of purpose.
This chapter distinguishes between those people whose terms have expired
but who are still, by past custom and practice, serving actively on a board
or commission, and those vacancies which are truly empty chairs because
someone has dropped off a board or commission.
§ 12-3. High school student representation.
This chapter encourages high school student representation on City boards
and committees so as to provide opportunities to students to serve the
community, to participate in democratic government, to enhance input from
students in governmental decisions that affect them, to create positive
interaction between adult and student leaders of the community, and to give
students an opportunity to gain valuable experience in the public sector
decision-making process.
§ 12-4. Committee review of appointment process.
A rotating committee of three members of the City Commission shall be
appointed in a timely manner to begin serving each January, May and
September to review the appointment process.
§ 12-5. Terms of appointment. [Amended 12-18-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-18]
A. Whenever possible, except for student appointments made under
§ 12-11 of this chapter, terms of appointment shall expire December 31
of the appropriate year.
B. Any City Commission member serving as a representative of the City
Commission on an appointed board or commission is required to be a
current member of the City Commission; the term of a City Commission
representative shall correspond to the term of the City Commission.
§ 8-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 12-5
8:14
§ 12-6. No appointments made after election and before first
meeting.
The City Commission shall not make an appointment during the period of
time between a biennial municipal election and the first meeting of newly
elected Commissioners.
§ 12-7. Criteria for reappointment.
In deciding whether or not to recommend to the City Commission the
reappointment of someone whose term has expired, the Committee shall
consider the following:
§ 12-8. Procedure for reappointment.
If in the judgment of the Committee the board or commission member
should be reappointed for another term, the following should occur:
C. City Commission representation on standing boards and committees
shall be limited to two consecutive full two-year terms, unless the City
Commission specifically finds by resolution that some special
circumstance exists which supports the reappointment of the serving
Commissioner.
D. An appointed board or commission member who ceases to reside in,
own property in, own a business in, or be employed in the City of Royal
Oak shall be replaced pursuant to § 12-9 unless the City Commission
finds good cause for that member to remain on the board or
commission.
A. Attendance at meetings.
B. Length of service.
C. Special expertise required by the board or commission, which can
either come from outside experience in the field (i.e., planning) or from
experience actually serving on the board or commission (i.e., zoning).
D. Recommendations from other members of the board or commission
and/or City Commissioners.
E. The opportunity for allowing new people to serve on a board or
commission.
A. The member shall be contacted to determine if he or she is interested in
serving for another term. If he or she is interested, the Committee may
recommend to the City Commission the member's name for
reappointment.
B. If in the judgment of the Committee the member should not be
reappointed, the City Commission shall be notified of this and shall
receive a brief explanation as to why the member should not be
reappointed.
§ 12-5 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 12-8
8:15
§ 12-9. Procedure for new appointments.
§ 12-10. Recommendation for appointment by Mayor or City
Manager.
C. The person shall be notified by the Committee, and the Committee shall
then make a recommendation for the vacancy from applicants.
D. If the Commission concurs with the recommendations of the Committee
for reappointments, these should be made as soon as possible and the
appointees notified by personal letter.
E. All reappointments shall be made not later than 60 days after expiration
of the term of the incumbent.
F. If the person is not interested in another term, the City Commission
shall be notified and the position filled pursuant to § 12-9 of this
chapter.
A. No person shall be appointed unless an application is on file with the
City Clerk.
B. The Committee shall review applications on file.
C. If additional applications are needed, the Committee will seek
additional applications from the general public.
D. The Committee shall review all applications and may interview
applicants when necessary.
E. The Committee shall then make a recommendation to the City
Commission for appointment.
F. Any member of the City Commission, at his or her discretion, may
interview a person recommended for appointment prior to acting on the
recommendation.
G. All new appointments shall be made not later than 60 days after
expiration of the term of the incumbent, and appointees shall receive a
letter notifying them of the appointment.
A. If the Mayor or City Manager does not intend to reappoint a person
currently serving on a board or commission, both the City Commission
and the person serving shall be notified two weeks prior to the time
when a recommendation for a new appointee will be considered by the
City Commission and provided the name of the recommended
appointee.
B. Recommendation for new appointees shall be accompanied by a
completed application.
§ 12-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 12-10
8:16
§ 12-11. Student appointments.
§ 12-12. Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to appointments of City employees to any board
or commission. It is not intended to preclude service on more than one
board or commission, nor is it intended to prevent reappointment to a board
or commission after one year of nonmembership.
C. Any member of the City Commission, at his or her discretion, may
interview a person recommended as a new appointee by either the
Mayor or City Manager.
A. Whenever possible, terms of appointments made under this section
shall coincide with the academic school year of the student
representative, expiring at the beginning of the following academic
year of the student representative or by September 1, whichever is
earlier. A student representative who graduates may continue to serve
until the beginning of the next academic year or until September 1,
whichever is earlier. Former student representatives are eligible for
reappointment or to serve on other boards or committees.
B. Students appointed shall be Royal Oak residents and shall be attending
high school at the time of their appointment.
C. Students seeking appointment under this chapter must submit a
completed application form to the City Clerk. The form shall also be
signed by the applicant's parent or legal guardian granting permission
to seek appointment and to serve as a student representative under this
chapter. The application shall be submitted to the City Clerk. The City
Manager shall develop the application form.
D. The City Commission Appointment Committee shall review all
applications and make recommendations to the entire City Commission.
E. Students appointed to City boards and commissions under this section
shall serve as nonvoting members.
F. Each City board or commission with a student representative shall
appoint an adult member to serve as a student liaison.
G. The City Manager shall appoint a student representative liaison to help
coordinate this program at its inception.
H. The commission, at its sole discretion, may appoint a student
representative to any City of Royal Oak board, commission, authority or
committee. The commission may also elect to not appoint a student
representative to some or all boards, commissions, authorities or
committees.
§ 12-10 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 12-13
8:17
§ 12-13. Term limitation.
This chapter limits the number of terms for new appointments and for
reappointments to three consecutive full terms, unless the City Commission
specifically finds by resolution that there is not a qualified individual
available to replace the member, or that some other special circumstance(s)
exists which supports the reappointment of the serving member.
§ 12-14. Vacancies; absence from meetings.
Chapter 17
ASSESSMENT REVIEW
CHARTER REFERENCES
Assessment of taxes and special
assessments — See Chs. 11 and 12.
A. Vacancy defined. If an appointed board, committee or commission
member misses two consecutive meetings, with or without excuse, and/
or three meetings within one calendar year, with or without excuse, is
convicted of a felony or any other serious crime while serving as a
member, the position shall be automatically vacated by law and filled
pursuant to § 12-9. The member whose position was vacated shall not
participate in meetings as a board, committee or commission member,
the member's presence shall not count towards quorum of the
membership and shall not have the right to vote.
B. Notice. The chairperson of each appointed board, committee or
commission shall keep a roll of attendance of each member and shall
provide written notice to the member of any vacancy created by the
number of the member's absences before the next meeting of that
board, committee or commission. Notice shall not be considered a
condition to vacate a position.
C. Appeal. The affected member shall have the right to appeal his/her
removal from the board, committee or commission he/she served by
filing a written request for appeal with the City Clerk within two weeks
of the vacancy as defined by this section. The request for appeal shall
state the reasons the former member should be reinstated. The
Appointments Committee shall hear the appeal within two of its next
regularly scheduled meetings, or at a mutual time and place agreeable
to the Appointments Committee and the former member. The
Appointments Committee shall have the right to establish reasonable
rules of procedure governing the appeal, or any hearing, by resolution.
D. Exceptions. If a state statute or separate City ordinance regulates the
removal of members from certain boards, committees, commissions or
authorities, then that state statute or separate City ordinance shall
govern.
§ 12-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 12-14
8:18
§ 17-1. Tax day.
December 31 of each year shall be the tax day in the City of Royal Oak,
Michigan. The taxable status of persons and real and personal property
shall be determined as of the tax day.
§ 17-2. Completion of assessment roll.
The City Assessor shall, on or before the first Monday in March in each year,
make and complete an assessment roll.
§ 17-3. Review of assessments by Board of Review.
§ 17-4. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the General Property
Tax Act7 which authorizes such changes in the making, completing and
reviewing of the assessment roll as herein made, any provisions of the City
Charter to the contrary notwithstanding.
A. The Board of Review shall meet, as required by law, to examine, review
and correct the assessment roll, at the Royal Oak City Hall at 9:00 a.m.
on the Tuesday immediately following the first Monday in March and
shall continue in session as long as may be necessary to complete the
review. The Board shall meet for a period of at least six hours in each
day during said review and shall hold at least two evening sessions of
not less than two hours each during said review. The review of
assessments shall be completed not later than the Wednesday following
the first Monday in April. The City Clerk shall give public notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Royal Oak of the date,
time and place of the meeting of the Board of Review at least one week
prior to the time of the meeting.
B. Any agent representing a taxpayer shall present a written letter of
authorization to the Board of Review at the time of his/her appointment.
The letter of authorization shall state that the representative is allowed
to appear before the City of Royal Oak Board of Review. Each individual
letter of authorization shall also include: 1) a single parcel identification
number; 2) the name of the authorized agent; 3) an original signature of
the authorizing person; 4) the date of the signature. A property owner
or agent representing the taxpayer must provide articles of
organization for a limited liability company to prove ownership.
7. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 211.1 et seq.
§ 12-14 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 17-4
8:19
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 26, Charitable Contributions for Public Purposes,
adopted 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-05, was repealed 3-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-04]
Chapter 33
CIVIL SERVICE MERIT SYSTEM
CHARTER REFERENCES
Civil service — See Ch. 16.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 128.
§ 17-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 17-4
8:20
ARTICLE I
Installation and Administration of Merit System
§ 33-1. Adoption of merit system.
There is hereby established a merit system for all positions in the civil
service of the City of Royal Oak, including unskilled labor, except as
hereinafter qualified or exempted. All municipal personnel problems shall
be approached so far as possible in a professional and impartial manner.
Appointments to the City's service and promotions and transfers therein
shall be based solely upon the qualifications, training and experience of
the individual, with no discrimination on account of political or religious
opinions, or affiliations, race, national or ethnic origin, sex, age, marital
status, handicap or other nonmerit factors. No officer or employee shall
be demoted, suspended, or discharged on caprice or for the above-stated
nonmerit factors, but such demotions, suspensions and discharges shall
be made only for inefficiency, incompetency, inability to perform essential
functions, insubordination, neglect of duty, misfeasance or malfeasance in
office, or other cause for the good of the service of the City.
§ 33-2. Civil Service Board.
There is hereby created a Civil Service Board who shall administer the said
merit system for all positions in the City's service except as hereinafter
qualified or exempted. The said Board shall consist of five electors of the
City to be appointed by the City Commission for a term of three years.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation and shall not hold
any other public City office or serve on any City political committee or
take active part in the management of any City political campaign. The
Commission may remove any member of the Board upon stating in writing
the reasons for removal and allowing him an opportunity to be heard in
his own defense. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Commission for the
unexpired term. The City Clerk shall act as Secretary for the Board.
§ 33-3. Oath of office of Board members.
Every member of the Civil Service Board shall, before entering upon the
discharge of the duties of his office and within 10 days after receiving notice
of his appointment, take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by
the Constitution of this state and file the same duly certified by the officer
administering it with the City Clerk.
§ 33-4. Organization of Board.
The Board shall organize by electing one of their number to serve as
Chairman, who shall serve as Chairman for one year, and thereafter the
Chairman shall be elected annually. The City Clerk shall act as Secretary for
the Board and shall supply the necessary clerical and stenographic service
for the work of the Board, and shall perform all secretarial and record
keeping functions of the Board.
§ 33-1 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-5
8:21
§ 33-5. Rooms and accommodations.
The Board shall be provided by the City Commission with suitable and
convenient quarters for carrying on its work and for conducting whatever
examinations and tests are necessary and proper for the carrying out of the
provisions of this chapter. The Board will be supplied from the Purchasing
Department, upon proper requisition, with the necessary stationery,
postage stamps and other supplies.
§ 33-6. Appropriation for merit system.
The Commission shall annually make such appropriation as shall be
necessary for meeting the expenses of effectually administering the merit
system. All expenses incurred by the Civil Service Board shall be paid out of
the said appropriation in the same manner and under the same conditions
as near as may be as expenses for other departments are paid.
§ 33-7. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have the power to prescribe and enforce rules and
regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this chapter and may
from time to time add to, amend or rescind any such rules, and any such
amendments or changes in rules shall be posted in conspicuous places in
the respective departments of the City at least 10 days before their effective
date. It shall have the power to conduct and supervise all examinations and
other selection instruments to determine the qualifications of applicants
for the City's service. It shall keep minutes of its own proceedings and
records of its official actions. Copies of all proceedings of the Board shall be
furnished by the City Clerk to the City Manager, City Commission and the
Human Resource Director.
§ 33-8. Public records; confidential materials.
The minutes of the official proceedings of the Board and a roster of all
officers and employees in the City's service and all eligibles for appointment
to such service shall be public records and, subject to reasonable
regulations, be open to public inspection. Applications, examination papers
or other tests, recommendations from former employers, reports of heads
of departments concerning employees, and such other letters and papers as
in the opinion of the Board shall be confidential shall be kept on file for the
use of the Board, but shall not be open for public inspection.
§ 33-9. Investigations.
The Board, or any member thereof authorized by the Board, may make
investigations of all matters pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter
and the rules and regulations prescribed thereunder, concerning the action
of any examiner or service, in respect to the administration of this chapter.
Each Board member, for the purpose of such investigation, shall have the
power to administer oaths and affirmations and take testimony, shall have
the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witness and the
§ 33-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-9
8:22
production of books and papers pertinent to the investigations and inquiries
hereby authorized; shall have the authority to incur expenses for payment
of fees for attendance and travel of such witness. All appointive officers in
the public service and their deputies, clerks, subordinates and employees
shall attend and testify before said Board when requested by it.
§ 33-10. Examiner or civil service expert.
The Civil Service Board may, subject to the approval of the City Commission,
appoint an examiner to conduct examinations and other tests held for
testing the ability of applicants for the City's service, or it may, with the
approval of the said Commission, enter into a contract for the services of a
person skilled in personnel work, who may or may not be a resident of the
City of Royal Oak, to prepare and conduct such examinations and tests and
otherwise assist the Board in carrying out the merit systems.
§ 33-11. Duties' classification.
The Civil Service Board shall, upon request of the City Commission or
may at any time of its own volition, make a study of the duties and
responsibilities of all positions in the City's service, to the end that a proper
duties' classification system may be in effect at all times. The Board shall,
upon request by the City Manager or any department head, make such
study of positions in the department or departments under the jurisdiction
of the appointing authority making such request to the end of making a
proper duties' classification in that particular department or departments.
§ 33-12. Pay differential.
The Civil Service Board shall be furnished within 30 days after this chapter
takes effect, and thereafter whenever requested by the Board, a schedule
showing the compensation for each position in the City's service. The Board
shall make a study of the compensation for each position in relation to the
duties performed and shall from time to time make such recommendations
as it deems advisable to the City Manager, in order that proper pay
differentials may be established between positions that differ materially
in duties performed and responsibilities exercised in order that so far as
possible there may be equal pay for equal work.
§ 33-9 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-12
8:23

ARTICLE II
Scope of Merit System
§ 33-13. Positions included.
Upon adoption of this chapter, all positions in the City's service, including
unskilled labor, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except as
hereinafter specifically qualified and exempted.
§ 33-14. Positions exempt.
A. The following positions shall be exempt from the operation of this
chapter, so far as appointment to, promotion in, and dismissal from the
service are concerned:
(1) Police Commander.
(2) Human Resource Director.
(3) Human Resource Specialist.
(4) Superintendent of Water, Sewer and Electrical.
(5) Library Director.
(6) Director of Recreation and Public Service.
(7) Superintendent of Recreation.
(8) Director of Arena Operations.
(9) Coordinator of Senior Citizen Activities.
(10) Superintendent of Motor Pool.
(11) Director of Planning.
(12) Deputy Director of Planning.
(13) Housing Program Supervisor.
(14) Housing Rehab Officer.
(15) Building Official.
(16) Deputy Building Official.
(17) Planner I, II and III.
(18) Librarian I, II and III.
(19) Manager of Information Systems.
(20) Information Systems Analyst I, II and III.
(21) Temporary assignments.
§ 33-13 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-14
8:25
(22) Special assignments.
(23) All Act 78 Fire positions.
(24) City Manager.
(25) Deputy City Manager.
(26) Confidential Secretary.
(27) Finance Director.
(28) Deputy Finance Director.
(29) Internal Auditor/Budget Analyst.
(30) Accountant I.
(31) Accountant II.
(32) City Clerk.
(33) Deputy City Clerk.
(34) City Treasurer.
(35) Deputy City Treasurer.
(36) City Attorney.
(37) Deputy City Attorney.
(38) Assistant City Attorney.
(39) Legal Secretary.
(40) City Assessor.
(41) Deputy City Assessor.
(42) Appraiser I.
(43) Appraiser II.
(44) Public Works Superintendent.
(45) City Engineer.
(46) Civil Engineer I, II and III.
(47) Police Chief.
(48) Deputy Police Chief.
B. The titles listed above are not necessarily civil service titles, but may
represent working titles.
§ 33-14 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-15
8:26
§ 33-15. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be deemed
to have the meanings hereinafter set forth:
ACTING CHIEF — Any officer who has been duly appointed by the Director
of Public Safety to act in the capacity of and perform the duties of Chief
without receiving appointment as Chief.
APPOINTING OFFICER OR AUTHORITY — A department head or other
person possessing the authority to appoint persons to fill job vacancies.
BOARD — Civil Service Board of the City of Royal Oak.
CITY SERVICE — Employment by the City of Royal Oak in a position covered
by civil service.
DEMOTION — Any change of job classification where the classification
to which the employee is appointed involves less responsibility, authority
or technical ability and where the maximum pay rate authorized for the
position in the City of Royal Oak pay plan is less than that authorized for
the position vacated by the employee upon appointment to the new job
classification.
PROMOTION — Any change of job classification where the classification
to which the employee is appointed involves more responsibility, authority
or technical ability and where the maximum pay rate authorized for the
position in the City of Royal Oak pay plan is greater than that authorized
for the position vacated by the employee upon appointment to the new job
classification.
QUALIFICATION EXAMINATION — An examination designed to determine
whether or not a person possesses the minimum skill and knowledge which
will enable him to perform the duties of a given position.
SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT — Any appointment or employment of technical,
expert or highly skilled nature to assist in or carry out a special work and
which is not a regular part of the administration of the City affairs, whether
or not such work shall be for a longer period than six months or periodic
in its nature. Special assignments shall be deemed to include audits of the
City records by auditors outside the regular City employ, the employment
of special counsel or special engineering services, employment of a zoning
expert, employment of a person skilled in personnel problems to assist in
the administration of this chapter, or other services of similar nature to
those mentioned. The specific mention of any special service shall not be
deemed to exclude others that may properly come within the term.
TEMPORARY APPOINTMENT — Any appointment or employment for a
period of six months or less in any one fiscal year, any appointment or
employment in which the employee works less than 15 days in each month
during his employment. The term shall include, by way of description but
not by way of limitation, all elected officials, members of the Board of
Review, and all irregular employment of day labor.
§ 33-15 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-15
8:27
TRANSFER — Any change of job classification where the classification to
which the employee is appointed involves the same degree of responsibility,
authority or technical ability and where the maximum pay rate authorized
for the position in the City of Royal Oak pay plan is the same as that
authorized for the position vacated by the employee upon appointment to
the new job classification.
VETERAN — Any person who is credited by the federal government of the
United States, or any of its branches, with having wartime service between
the dates specified by the federal government for the federal civil service
preference in any uniformed rank of the Army, Navy, or the Marine Corps
of the United States, or any person in the abovementioned forces who has
been issued a campaign badge for expeditionary service as specified in
the Federal Civil Service Code; provided, however, in all cases said person
shall have received an honorable discharge from said service in order to be
entitled to the benefits of this chapter.
§ 33-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-15
8:28
ARTICLE III
Induction Into Merit System
§ 33-16. Eligibility of new departments or enterprises acquired by
City.
All persons in the regular employ of any enterprise heretofore or hereafter
acquired by the City and operated as a public enterprise after such
acquisition shall be deemed probationary employees of the City for a period
of six months after such enterprise comes under public ownership by the
City. If such enterprise is operated as a separate department, the head of
said department and the chief assistant or secretary of such department
head, or in the case of a hospital, the Supervisor of Nurses, shall be
eligible for appointment as such without competitive examination or other
test and shall be exempt from the operation of this chapter so far as
appointment, to promotion in and dismissal from service are concerned. All
other persons employed in such enterprises who, upon completion of their
probationary period of six months, shall be retained in said employment
shall, upon recommendation of the head of the department which operates
said enterprise and upon approval of the Civil Service Board thereupon, be
deemed eligible for the respective positions held by them, without further
test or examination, and thereafter all the provisions of this chapter shall be
applicable to such employees as fully as to other employees of the City.
§ 33-17. Eligibility for appointment of spouse of disabled employee
with 10 years' service.
The spouse of any person who has been in the City service for not less than
10 years and who has become disabled while still a member of the City
service shall be eligible for appointment to a vacancy in the City service
without a competitive examination if such spouse is able to prove to the
satisfaction of the Civil Service Board and the appointing authority that
he or she is qualified to fill the position for which applied; in such case,
if satisfactory to the appointing authority, he or she may be appointed to
fill the position for which applied, but such appointment shall be on a
probationary basis for six months; at the expiration of the probationary
period, if the applicant has satisfactorily shown to the appointing authority
that he or she possesses the necessary qualifications to fill the position, he
or she may be appointed without competitive examination and in preference
to persons on the eligible list, if there is such an eligible list, for the position
to which appointed; provided, however, such appointment may be made
only for the period of the disability of the spouse and may be terminated in
case the spouse is ever able to return to former employment.
§ 33-16 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-17
8:29

ARTICLE IV
New Appointments to the Civil Service
§ 33-18. New appointments. [Amended 9-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-10]
All new appointments to the civil service of the City except as hereinbefore
exempted or qualified shall be made by the appointing authorities
designated in the City Charter and ordinances, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. All such appointments shall be based solely upon
merit and the good of the service. All appointments shall be made from
eligible lists furnished by the Civil Service Board whenever practicable and
from up to the 10 highest persons on such lists. However, tied scores shall
be treated equally.
§ 33-19. Preliminary qualifications.
All persons desiring employment in the City service, except to positions
exempted under the provisions of this chapter, shall file applications with
the Civil Service Board. Any person who is qualified shall be eligible for the
examinations and tests hereinafter provided and consequent appointment
to the City's service.
§ 33-20. Application for positions. [Amended 8-13-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-10]
The Civil Service Board shall require persons applying for positions in the
City service to file in its office a formal application, in which the applicant
shall state under oath or affirmation:
§ 33-21. Blank forms; rejection of applications.
Blank forms for applicants shall be furnished by the Civil Service Board
without charge to all persons requesting same. The Board may require,
in connection with such application, such licenses, diplomas, certificates
or other documentation of qualifications, as the good of the service may
require. The Board shall receive applications from any person desiring
employment in the City service, but may reject the application of any person
who is found to lack the established preliminary requirements or who has
been found guilty of a recent and/or job-related crime, or who has been
dismissed from the public service for cause, or who has made a false
statement of any material fact or practiced or attempted to practice any
deception or fraud in his application. The action of the Board in rejecting
A. His or her name and residence and post office address.
B. Occupation and previous employment for the five years immediately
prior to such application.
C. Such other information as may be reasonably and legally required,
relating to the applicant’s qualifications for public service.
§ 33-18 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-21
8:31
an application shall be final, but the Board may, prior to such final decision,
in its discretion, hold a hearing and permit the applicant to appear and
produce testimony in his behalf touching the matters concerning which his
application is refused.
§ 33-22. Physical examinations.
All appointments for any regular position in the City service, the normal
duties of which require more than 1,000 hours' work a year, shall be
contingent upon approval by a physician as able to perform the essential
duties of the position, with or without accommodation. The Civil Service
Board shall determine the examining physicians to be used for this purpose.
§ 33-23. Tests and examinations.
§ 33-24. Notice of examination.
All such examinations and tests shall be open to all applicants who have
fulfilled the preliminary requirements. Notice of the time and place and
purpose of every examination or test shall be given by the Board for such
time and in such manner as shall by it be deemed reasonable. When
practicable, such notice shall be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the City of Royal Oak at least 10 days prior to the time of
holding such test or examination and posted in a conspicuous place in the
City Hall. This shall be supplemented by such additional adds and postings
as needed to reach a qualified and diversified audience.
§ 33-25. Personnel expert.
The Civil Service Board may, with the approval of the City Commission,
employ, on a part-time basis or otherwise, a person trained and skilled in
personnel problems, to prepare examinations and other tests, to give advice
regarding the same and to assist it in any way to carry out the provisions of
this chapter.
A. The Civil Service Board shall prescribe such examinations or other tests
or measures of qualifications as it shall deem reasonable and
practicable for each class or kind of position in the City's service. Where
practicable, such examinations or tests shall be competitive in nature.
Such tests and examinations shall be held from time to time at the
discretion of the Civil Service Board to meet the prospective needs of
the service. The Civil Service Board shall adopt rules and regulations
governing the giving of such tests and examinations, which rules and
regulations shall give every applicant an equal opportunity for
consideration and shall be open to the public.
B. All examinations or tests for positions in the public service shall be
practical in their character and shall relate to such matters and include
such inquiries as will fairly and fully test the comparative merit and
fitness of the person examined to discharge the duties of the
employment sought by them.
§ 33-21 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-26
8:32
§ 33-26. Rating.
Each person taking any test or examination under the merit system shall
be rated according to his attainments, and in accordance with professional
standards and legal requirements. The Board shall determine the method
of making such ratings and prescribe a passing mark. The method of rating
and passing mark shall be determined in advance of any examination or
test.
§ 33-27. Eligible list; reemployment list.
§ 33-28. Certification of eligibles; filling of vacancies. [Amended
9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-10]
A. The names of all applicants for a position who have attained the
required rating or better on the examination and who are otherwise
eligible shall be placed in the order of their relative attainment on the
list of applicants eligible to appointments to the class of positions for
which the examination was held.
B. A reemployment list shall also be kept of all persons removed from the
City service because of the abolishment of his or her position or for
reasons of economy, or for any reason other than dismissal for cause or
voluntary resignation.
C. Persons already in the service who are applicants for specific vacancy in
some other position and are eligible for appointment thereto shall also
be listed.
D. If any name on any eligible list is passed over three times by any
appointing authority, that name shall be removed from such eligible list
by the Board. The appointing authority shall notify the Secretary of the
Board, who in turn shall notify the Board when a name has been so
passed over.
A. Whenever a position in the classified civil service is to be filled, the
appointing authority shall notify the Board of that fact and the Board
shall certify up to 10 names for the first vacancy, and for each additional
vacancy involving the same job classification the Board shall certify one
additional name. Tied scores shall be treated equally for purposes of
certification. The Board shall follow the following order of preference in
the certifying of eligibles:
(1) The Board shall first certify the names of persons currently in the
City service who are applicants for the vacancy and who are
eligible for appointment thereto, in the order of their attainment on
the required examination.
(2) The Board shall next certify the names of persons on the
reemployment list who are eligible for appointment to the vacancy
and desire appointment thereto, in the inverse order of their layoff.
§ 33-26 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-28
8:33
§ 33-29. Temporary appointments.
In case of emergency or to fill a temporary vacancy by sick leave or other
leave of absence, an appointing officer may make a temporary appointment
during the period of such temporary vacancy in his own discretion and
without waiting for certification of eligibles.
§ 33-30. Noncompetitive appointments.
In permanent and continuing positions employing only persons having
professional or technical qualifications where there are likely to be few
satisfactory applicants, and the persons qualified to serve are relatively few
in number, the Civil Service Board may dispense with the requirements for
formal tests and examinations and prescribe other methods of determining
the qualifications of the applicants; may dispense with its customary rules
and regulations and proceed in an informal manner to assist the appointing
authority in choosing a person qualified to fill any vacancy that may occur in
such position. The Board may, in its discretion, authorize either temporary
or probationary status for such appointees.
§ 33-31. Probationary period.
All original appointments to nonexempt positions in the City service shall
be for a probationary period of six months, except that in the case of police
officers the probationary period shall be one year. If at any time during
such probationary period the appointing officer shall find the appointee
unsatisfactory, he may dismiss such probationer and ask for the certification
of new applicants. In case of such dismissal, the probationer, if he had civil
service status in another position prior to his appointment to the position
(3) The Board shall next certify the names of persons who have
voluntarily resigned from the City service in good standing not
more than two years prior to the date the vacancy occurs, who are
eligible for appointment to the vacancy and have indicated that
they desire appointment thereto, but such persons shall be eligible
only for the lowest position in a work series or a job classification
series.
(4) The Board shall next certify the names of persons who have passed
the prescribed examination for the position, in the order of their
attainment on such examination.
B. The appointing authority shall appoint to the vacant position or
positions from the persons to be certified. If there are not enough
persons eligible for appointment to furnish the appointing authority
with the choice contemplated by the foregoing provisions, the
appointing authority may request the Board to hold an examination for
the purpose of certifying additional names of the eligible persons, and
in such case the appointing officer may, with the approval of the Board,
make a temporary appointment which shall be effective only until a
permanent appointment can be made from the eligible list.
§ 33-28 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-31
8:34
from which he is dismissed, shall automatically be restored to his former
position; in other cases he may, in the discretion of the Civil Service Board,
be reinstated on the eligible list if, after due inquiry, the Board deems him
worthy of such reinstatement. If, at the end of the probationary period, the
appointing authority has found the services of the appointee satisfactory,
he shall so notify the Board and the probationer shall thereupon forthwith
come under the merit system. The appointing officer may in his discretion
extend the probationary period of any employee for one six-month period,
provided that he shall so notify the Board and furnish the Board with a
complete statement of his reasons for taking such action.
§ 33-32. Records of Board.
A record shall be kept of all examinations and other tests and shall be kept
on file for the private use of the members of the Civil Service Board for at
least six months. Such records shall not be open to inspection by the general
public without the consent of the Civil Service Board, except by order of a
court of competent jurisdiction. Any applicant for a position, however, shall
be fully informed as to his exam results.
§ 33-33. Emergency Employment Act.
For the periods of time during which Public Law 92-54, 92nd Congress,
S. 31, adopted July 12, 1971 (An Act to provide during times of high
unemployment for programs of public service employment for unemployed
persons, to assist States and local communities in providing needed public
services, and for other purposes) is in effect, provisions of this chapter
relative to new appointments to the civil service shall be suspended and
inoperative to the extent that such provisions conflict with provisions of
Public Law 92-54 or any regulations adopted by the Secretary of Labor
pursuant thereto. It is the intent of the City Commission that the provisions
of this chapter relative to new appointments shall be applied, insofar as
possible, to the hiring of unemployed and underemployed persons pursuant
to Public Law 92-54, but that such provisions shall be inoperative to the
extent that they impede expeditious and effective implementation of said
Public Law 92-54.
§ 33-31 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-33
8:35

ARTICLE V
Promotions and Transfers in Service
§ 33-34. Promotions to be approved by Board.
Vacancies in higher positions in the classified service shall be filled insofar
as practicable by promoting persons holding positions in the next lower
grades in the service. Such promotions shall be based upon merit as
ascertained where practicable by test, and as shown by the previous service
and experience of the person promoted. When a vacancy occurs the Board
shall determine, following consultation with the Human Resource Director
and the appointing authority, whether promotion is possible and
practicable, and if so, what classes of employees are eligible for such
promotion and whether an examination or test shall be held to determine
the relative fitness of eligible employees, or whether such relative fitness
shall be determined by their seniority and efficiency records or by both such
examination and records. Upon the joint recommendation of the Human
Resource Director and the appointing authority, and with the approval of
the Board, an employee may be promoted solely on the basis of a passing
grade obtained on a qualification examination.
§ 33-35. Promotions not confined within departments.
Promotion shall in every case involve a definite change in duties and an
increase in responsibilities and shall not be made merely for the purpose
of effecting an increase in compensation. Promotions shall not necessarily
be confined to positions within a department but may be within a specific
classification or closely related classifications or service of positions in
different departments.
§ 33-36. Length of service required for promotion.
The length of service time required before employees shall be eligible for
promotion shall be determined by the Board through the adoption of a job
specification.
§ 33-37. Certification of eligible persons for promotion.
Certification to appointing officers of the names of persons eligible for
promotion shall be made in the same manner as certification of persons
eligible to original appointment, except with respect to the number
certified. A member of any department failing to qualify for promotion shall
retain his position and eligibility for future promotion.
§ 33-38. Transfers.
The City Manager may, in the case of departments administered by him,
transfer an employee from a position in one such department to a position in
another such department, provided such transfer does not involve either an
increase or a decrease in compensation, and further provided that seniority
standing shall be the dominant factor in determining any such transfer.
§ 33-34 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-38
8:37
Other transfers, not involving either increase or decrease of compensation,
may be made by the department heads concerned with the consent of the
employee, but subject to the approval of the transferred employee shall be
credited in his new job classification with the seniority in classification that
such employee had in his old job classification.
§ 33-38 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-38
8:38
ARTICLE VI
Removal from Service
§ 33-39. Abolishment of positions and layoffs.
A. The City Manager may, for reasons of economy, for more efficient
administration, or for lack of sufficient appropriation of funds, abolish
positions in a department and lay off employees. The following
procedures shall be followed in any such case:
(1) Temporary employees in the affected job classifications shall be
laid off first.
(2) Probationary employees in the affected job classifications shall be
laid off next.
(3) Permanent employees shall be laid off next, in the order of their
seniority in the job classifications affected by the lay off, the person
with the least seniority in the job classification being laid off first
and the person with the greatest seniority in the job classification
being laid off last.
B. Provided that any permanent employee who is laid off or occupies an
abolished position and who has longer seniority in his job classification
than another employee has in a lesser classification (paywise) having
similar job requirements shall be entitled to the position in the lesser
classification held by such other employee who has less seniority. In like
manner and under the same conditions, any permanent employee
displaced form his position by an employee having greater seniority in
classification may displace any other employee with lesser seniority in
classification.
C. The Civil Service Board shall determine whether or not given job
descriptions have similar job requirements, and its decision shall be
final.
D. Provided, further, that any such laid off permanent employee or
employee occupying an abolished position may, with his consent and
with the approval of the Civil Service Board, be placed in any job
classification held by a probationary employee, provided that such job
classification is not entitled to more pay than the job classification held
by the laid off employee. In the case of displacement of a probationary
employee, such probationary employee shall be placed in any other
vacant position having job requirements which the probationary
employee is capable of performing, but if no such vacant position exists,
his employment shall be terminated.
E. Further, provided that any such laid off permanent employee or
employee occupying an abolished position may, with his consent and
with the approval of the Civil Service Board, be placed in any vacant
and unfilled job classifications, provided that such job classification is
not entitled to more pay than the job classification held by the laid off
§ 33-39 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-39
8:39
§ 33-40. Demotions, dismissals and suspensions.
employee. Such action may be taken without the holding of a
competitive examination, even though the laid off employee or
employee occupying an abolished position is not immediately capable
of performing the work required for such unfilled job classification. In
such event, such employee shall be on probation for a six-month period,
during which time he shall be trained to perform the work required
in such job classification. At the end of such six-month probationary
period, his department head shall advise the Civil Service Board
whether the employee can then perform the work required for such
job classification. The Civil Service Board shall then determine whether
the employee shall be given permanent status in the new position, and
the decision of the Board shall be final. If the employee is not given
permanent status in the new position, he may still exercise his seniority
rights as herein provided or may be transferred to any other vacant and
unfilled position, in like manner and under the above stated conditions.
F. In the event of multiple layoffs or position abolishments in a
department, seniority in classification shall be followed in allowing the
employees involved to exercise the seniority privileges detailed herein,
and the employee shall be allowed 10 days within which to make his
election. Any employee exercising such privileges shall be credited in
his new job classification with the seniority in classification that such
employee had in his old job classification. In every instance in which an
employee loses his job classification either by layoff or position
abolishment, he shall retain his right to occupy such job classification in
case it later should become available, and he shall also retain his
seniority in such job classification from which he was released either
through layoff or position abolishment, he shall then return to such job
classification or forfeit his seniority therein and his right to return to
such job classification.
G. In the event that any employee is removed from City employment as a
result of layoff or position abolishment, his name shall be placed upon
the reemployment list and he shall be eligible for future reemployment
as provided in Article IV of this chapter. The name of such person shall
remain on the reemployment list until such person is reemployed,
requests the removal of his name from the list, or refuses appointment
to a position in the job classification formerly held by such person.
H. The Civil Service Board shall interpret and construe the provisions of
this section in all cases in which doubt may arise concerning the intent
and meaning thereof.
A. The appointing officer shall have the authority to demote an employee
from an exempt position to any position in the classified service which
such employee has formerly held without the necessity of competitive
examination, provided that such position is open and unfilled at the
time of such demotion.
§ 33-39 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-40
8:40
§ 33-41. Tenure; reasons for dismissal; review of dismissals and
suspensions.
The tenure of everyone holding office, place, position or employment in the
City's service shall be only during good behavior and efficient service, and
any such person may be removed or discharged, suspended without pay,
deprived of vacation privileges or other special privileges for inefficiency,
incompetency, insubordination, dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct,
discourteous treatment of the public, neglect of duty, violations of the
provisions of this chapter of the rules of the Civil Service Board, or any
other act or omission detrimental to the good of the City service. The
Civil Service Board shall have the power to review all dismissals and all
suspensions imposed for more than 10 working days or 80 working hours.
§ 33-42. Charges and communications by citizens.
Any charge preferred by a citizen against any person under the merit
system employed by the City shall be made in writing and under oath and
filed with the City Clerk. All communications to the Civil Service Board or
any member thereof touching their duties as such shall be made in writing
and filed with the City Clerk.
§ 33-43. Appeals to Civil Service Board.
In case of discharge or removal, or suspension for more than 10 working
days or 80 working hours, any officer or employee in the classified service,
feeling himself aggrieved thereby, shall have a right to file a petition with
the Civil Service Board within six days from the effective date of such
B. The City Manager, or any appointing authority, may demote, suspend or
dismiss any person in his department for cause, but no person shall be
reduced in pay or position, laid off, suspended for religious or political
reasons or affiliations or because of bias or prejudice. In all cases of
reduction, demotion, layoff, suspension or dismissal of any employee in
the classified service, the appointing officer shall, within three days of
the effective date thereof, furnish such employee and the Civil Service
Board with a copy of the reason or reasons for such reduction, layoff,
suspensions or dismissal by registered mail, return receipt requested.
Such employee shall have an opportunity to make and to file a written
answer in like manner. Such answer, if any, together with the
explanation, if any, shall be filed with the Civil Service Board within six
says from said effective date. All notices and charges shall be sent by
registered mail, return receipt requested. Nothing herein contained
shall limit the power of an appointing officer to suspend without pay for
purposes of discipline, or the good of the service, any person under his
supervision for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 10 working
days or 80 working hours, and the Board shall not have jurisdiction to
review any such suspension; provided, however, that repeated
suspensions within any thirty-day period shall be subject to review by
the Civil Service Board.
§ 33-40 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-43
8:41
discharge, removal or suspension, asking for reinstatement in the service
or other relief and giving reasons therefor. The Civil Service Board shall
grant the petitioner a hearing, which shall be either private or public at the
option of the petitioner. In the case of dismissal from the City service, the
petitioner shall be considered suspended without pay pending the period
between the making of the charges as a basis for removal and the decision
thereon by the Board.
§ 33-44. Hearings.
The Civil Service Board shall conduct such hearing within 10 days after the
petition is filed. At such hearing the burden shall be upon the appointing
officer to justify his action. The hearing shall be deemed an investigation
and not a trial, and the Board shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence and procedure. It shall, however, conduct the hearing in an orderly
manner, confine the scope thereof to matters set forth in the reasons for
dismissal, and secure both to the petitioner and the dismissing officer, a full
and impartial hearing in regard thereto. Both parties shall be permitted to
be represented by counsel and to produce witnesses or any other testimony
they may have pertinent to the matter. The petitioner shall be entitled to
first hear the testimony against him and to face his accuser. He and his
witnesses shall then be permitted to be heard in his own defense. Hearsay
evidence, as the term is commonly understood, excepting declarations
against interest, shall not be deemed sufficient proof to warrant removal,
demotion or suspension. A written record of all testimony taken at such
hearing shall be kept and preserved by the Board, which record shall be
sealed and not be available for public inspection, in event that no appeal
shall be taken from the action of the Board.
§ 33-45. Decision of Board; appeals.
The Board shall make its decision on an appeal within five days after the
hearing. It shall have the power to pass upon the discharge or removal,
suspension for more than 10 working days or 80 working hours, or other
action from which the appeal has been taken, and may confirm, modify, or
reverse such action. If reinstated without discipline in the position from
which he was removed, the employee shall be entitled to compensation from
the time of his demotion or discharge until the time his reinstatement was
ordered. The dismissing authority, the petitioner and the Human Resource
Director shall be entitled to a copy of the findings of the Board upon
request. In the event that the Board shall sustain the action of the removing
officer, the person removed shall have an immediate right of appeal to the
Circuit Court, by writ of certiorari. Any such appeal shall be taken within 30
days from the entry of the Board's order. The Circuit Court shall hear any
such appeal upon the original record taken therein, and no additional proof
shall be permitted to be introduced.
§ 33-46. Political activity of Board members and employees.
§ 33-43 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-46
8:42
A. No member of the Civil Service Board or employee of the City of Royal
Oak shall become a candidate for any elective City office, or shall
actively further the candidacy of any person for any elective City office,
or shall otherwise become actively interested in any political campaign
for any elective City office, without first resigning from his position.
This provision shall not be construed to interfere with the right of a
person to sign a petition or cast his vote as an individual.
B. No City employee shall directly or indirectly solicit, receive from or give
to any other City employee any money, property or other thing of value
for any political party, political candidate, or political purpose
whatsoever.
C. Any violation of the provisions of this section by any City employee shall
be cause for dismissal.
§ 33-46 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-46
8:43

ARTICLE VII
Veterans' Preference
§ 33-47. Eligibility.
Eligibility for veterans' preference shall be determined by reference to
federal rules defining beginning and termination dates of various wars.
§ 33-48. Evidence of service and disability.
In all instances the records of the duly constituted federal bureau covering
the respective veteran's service and status shall be accepted as final
evidence of his service and physical status in determining whether he is
entitled to the benefits under this article.
§ 33-49. Passing mark.
§ 33-50. Veterans not having disability; time spent during military
duty.
All veterans not having a service-connected disability as described in
§ 33-49B of this article shall, on obtaining the required passing mark for
initial employment in the City's service, have an additional five points added
to their respective passing marks obtained in their examinations, but shall
not be entitled to such additional five points in any promotional examination
for promotion to a higher position in the service after they have already
been in the City's employment. Any veteran who is restored to a position
in the City service after having left the City service to perform military
duty shall be considered as having been on furlough or leave of absence
during his period of military duty. The time spent by such veteran on
military duty shall be counted as time spent in the City service for the
purpose of satisfying any period of employment required for promotion or
advancement.
§ 33-51. Veterans now in employ of the City.
All veterans now in the employ of the City and who were in such service on
the 18th day of July, 1938, shall have the benefit of this article.
A. All veterans in order to be eligible for the preference hereinafter
specified must attain a minimum passing mark specified by the Civil
Service Board for all applicants.
B. All veterans who have a service-connected disability record with the
Veterans' Bureau of Administration or the Federal Bureau of Pensions
shall, upon obtaining the required minimum grade for original
employment with the City, be granted an additional 10 points, which
shall be added to their respective passing marks as attained in their
examination.
§ 33-47 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-52
8:45
§ 33-52. National and state preference.
No provision in this article shall deprive any veteran of benefits granted by
legislation which may later be passed by the national government of the
United States or the state government of Michigan.
§ 33-53. Spouses and children of disabled veterans.
Spouses and children of veterans having federal disability records showing
them to have disabilities which prevent said veteran from properly
supporting their families shall have the same benefits in this article as apply
to veterans.
§ 33-54. Widows and widowers of veterans.
Widows and widowers of veterans shall have the same rights under this
article as the veteran had at the time of his death, provided he or she
was married to the veteran prior to the 1st of January 1945 or, in case of
marriage after that date, if he or she lived with said veteran at least five
years prior to his or her death.
§ 33-52 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-54
8:46
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Personnel and Personnel Program
§ 33-55. Administration.
§ 33-56. Promulgation of rules.
The Human Resource Director shall draft, in consultation with the City
Manager and the Civil Service Board, such rules as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter. These rules shall be submitted for
adoption by resolution of the Civil Service Board and shall have the force
and effect of law. Amendments to the rules shall be made in accordance with
the above procedure. A copy of such rules shall be filed with the City Clerk.
§ 33-57. Job classification.
A. There is hereby created a Human Resource Department, and the
Human Resource Program hereby established shall be administered by
a Human Resource Director appointed by the City Manager. The
position of Human Resource Director may be combined with any other
position at the discretion of the City Manager. In addition to the duties
set forth elsewhere in this article, the Human Resource Director shall:
(1) Advise the Civil Service Board, the City Manager, and the City
Commission on matters of civil service administration policy, and
problems of personnel administration, including the development
of personnel rules, a job classification plan, and a uniform pay plan.
(2) Administer provisions of this chapter.
(3) Represent the interests of the public and City employees in the
management of personnel.
B. The City Commission upon recommendation of the Human Resource
Director and the City Manager may contract with any qualified person
or agency for the performance of such technical services as may be
required in the operation of the personnel program.
A. The Human Resource Director shall make an analysis of the duties and
responsibilities of all positions in the classified service and shall
recommend to the Civil Service Board a job classification plan. Each
position in the classified service shall be assigned to a job class on the
basis of the rank and level of duties and responsibilities to the end that
all positions in the same class shall be sufficiently alike to permit use of
a single descriptive title, the same qualification requirements, the same
test of competence, and the same pay range.
B. A job class may contain one position or more than one position. The
Human Resource Director shall thereafter allocate each position to its
appropriate class.
§ 33-55 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 33-57
8:47
§ 33-58. Compensation; pay plan.
§ 33-59. Training of employees.
The Human Resource Director shall encourage the improvement of the City
service by providing employees with opportunities for training which need
not be limited to training for specific jobs but may include training for
advancement and for general fitness for public service.
C. The Human Resource Director shall present proposed revisions of the
classification plan to the Civil Service Board from time to time as
changing conditions require. Such revisions may consist of the addition,
abolishment, consolidation, division, or amendment of existing
classifications.
A. The Human Resource Director under the direction of the City Manager
shall prepare a uniform pay plan and rules for its administration. The
rate or range for each position or class shall be such as to reflect fairly
the differences in duties and responsibilities and shall be related to
compensation for comparable positions in other places of public and
private employment.
B. Following the approval of the pay plan and rules for its administration
by the City Manager, the Human Resource Director shall administer the
plan in accordance with the rules. The Human Resource Director shall
assign each position to one of the pay ranges provided in the pay plan.
C. The pay plan may be amended from time to time as circumstances
require either through adjustment of rates or by reassignment of job
classes to different pay ranges.
§ 33-57 ROYAL OAK CODE § 33-59
8:48
Chapter 36
COMMISSION FOR THE ARTS
§ 36-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Royal Oak
Commission for the Arts Ordinance."
§ 36-2. Statement of purpose.
The importance of arts and culture to the City of Royal Oak has been
recognized by the City Commission through the adoption of an objective
to "develop a plan to encourage artists and promote public art in Royal
Oak" as part of a greater community goal to "preserve neighborhoods by
encouraging community involvement and family activities; and further, to
be recognized as a destination for entertainment, recreation and cultural
opportunities." This is a chapter to establish the Royal Oak Commission for
the Arts to encourage and support arts and culture in the City of Royal Oak.
§ 36-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
ARTS — A term meant to represent all art disciplines and creative artistic
expressions, including, but not limited to, visual art, literary art, or
performing art. Examples include painting, drawing, sculpture,
photography, architecture, poetry, prose, theater, film, music, comedy, and
dance.
CULTURE — The diverse customs, values, attitudes, characteristics,
traditions, behaviors, and beliefs represented throughout humanity which
are often expressed through the arts.
PUBLIC ART — Any works of art or creative artistic expression displayed or
presented on, in, or as a part of public spaces, public assets, public property,
or public rights-of-way.
§ 36-4. Creation.
In order to encourage and support arts and culture in the City of Royal Oak,
there is hereby created the Royal Oak Commission for the Arts.
§ 36-5. Membership.
The Commission shall consist of seven voting members who have
experience or interest in the propagation, creation, design, performance,
instruction, or study of the arts. One of the seven voting members shall be
a member of the City Commission. The City Manager or his/her designee
shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member of the Commission.
§ 33-59 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 36-6
8:49
§ 36-6. Terms of appointment.
Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Commission for terms of three years. The initial Commission shall
be staggered, with four members appointed for three years and three
members appointed for two years. Members of the Commission shall be
eligible for reappointment. Term limits, appointments, reappointments,
appointment terminations, and vacancy rules are subject to applicable
ordinance provisions. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
and confirmation by the City Commission.
§ 36-7. Powers and duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Commission to develop a long-term plan and
annual goals that serve to form and implement a strategy for
encouraging and supporting arts and culture in the City of Royal Oak.
In December of each year, all goals shall be submitted to the City
Commission for approval along with a report detailing the progress on
previously established goals.
B. It shall be the duty of the Commission to propose arts policies,
programs, projects, initiatives, and events that fulfill established goals
to the City Commission for review and approval. The Commission shall
be responsible for managing or developing and implementing a
management plan for the execution of approved arts policies,
programs, projects, initiatives, and events.
C. The Commission shall have the authority to raise funds for arts and
culture programs, projects, and events through the application of
grants, private sponsorships, donations, and other fund-raising
strategies; including the authority to interact with donors on behalf of
the City of Royal Oak. Funds raised and held by the Commission are
public funds, and shall be reserved for the purposes of this chapter.
D. The Commission shall have the authority to create and bestow artsfocused
awards upon individuals and organizations on behalf of the City
of Royal Oak.
E. The Commission shall promote the public awareness of arts and
cultural opportunities in Royal Oak including arts policies, programs,
projects, initiatives, and events.
F. The Commission shall, with the assistance of the ex officio nonvoting
staff member, create and submit a policy for the City Commission's
approval that governs the review, selection, acceptance, donation,
liability, display, placement, de-accession and maintenance of
temporary and permanent public art on, in, or as a part of Royal Oak
assets, property, and rights-of-way. The Commission shall be
responsible for suggesting updates to the policy when deemed
necessary.
§ 36-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 36-7
8:50
§ 36-8. Organization; meetings; records.
Chapter 39
COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appointments to advisory boards,
commissions and committees — See Ch. 12.
Royal Oak Opportunity to Serve
Foundation — See Ch. 26.
Historic District Study Committee — See Ch.
82, Art. I.
G. The Commission shall work with local organizations, nonprofits, and
businesses to encourage and support arts and cultural development in
Royal Oak, including the display of public art.
A. The Commission shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary, and
any other officers deemed necessary at the beginning of the first
meeting of each year. The Chairman shall preside over meetings and
will serve as a voting member of the Commission. The Vice Chairman
shall perform the duties of the Chairman in his/her absence. The
Secretary shall record the proceedings of the Commission.
B. At least four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the approval of motions and transaction of its business. The
Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business which
shall provide for the time and place of holding meetings.
C. The concurring affirmative vote of four members shall constitute
approval of any formal action taken by the Commission, including, but
not limited to, the approval of goals, plans, or applications before the
Commission for review.
D. The business that the Commission or subcommittees of the Commission
may perform shall be conducted in compliance with the State Open
Meetings Act.
E. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and actions. A
writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the
Commission or subcommittees of the Commission in the performance of
an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance
with the State Freedom of Information Act.8
8. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 36-7 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 36-8
8:51

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)9
§ 39-1. through § 39-8. (Reserved)
9. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Municipal Cable Access Committee, adopted 12-5-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-22, as amended, was repealed 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-16.
§ 39-1 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-1
8:53

ARTICLE II
Parking Committee
[Adopted 8-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-20; amended in its entirety
6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1]
§ 39-9. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Parking Committee
Ordinance."
§ 39-10. Statement of purpose.
This is an ordinance to establish a Parking Committee to function in an
advisory capacity to the City Commission on all matters affecting public
parking in the Central Business District (CBD) of the City of Royal Oak.
§ 39-11. Creation of Committee.
In order to carry out the purposes of this article, there is hereby created a
Parking Committee.
§ 39-12. Membership.
The Downtown Development Authority shall assume the role as the Parking
Committee for the City of Royal Oak.10
§ 39-13. Rules of Committee; records; meetings.
The business that the Committee may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting in compliance with the State Open Meetings Act.11 A
meeting agenda shall be part of the notice. A writing prepared, owned,
used, in the possession of, or retained by the Committee in the performance
of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance
with the State Freedom of Information Act.12
§ 39-14. Responsibilities of Committee.
The Committee will make policy recommendations by formal resolution
to the City Commission on parking issues in the CBD. Such policy
recommendations shall include, but are not limited to, the periodic review
of meter rates and times; an assessment of the parking situation in the CBD
to ensure the needs of citizens, patrons and business owners are addressed;
initiating and/or reviewing studies, needs assessments or special reports.
The Committee shall provide a public comment period at their regular
meetings to receive citizens' concerns on parking-related issues.
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 52, Art. I, Downtown Development Authority.
11.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 39-9 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-15
8:55
§ 39-15. Responsibilities of staff.
City staff, under the direction of the City Manager's office, including but
not limited to the City Parking Supervisor, the Police Department, the
Engineering Department, and the Planning Department, shall be
responsible for administrative functions, daily operations and oversight
of parking issues in the City of Royal Oak. Staff will meet periodically
to discuss these issues. Staff shall also regularly attend Downtown
Development Authority (DDA) meetings to give reports on the
implementation of policy recommendations made by the DDA and approved
by the City Commission.
§ 39-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 39-15
8:56
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)13
§ 39-16. through § 39-21. (Reserved)
13.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Farmers Market Committee, adopted 6-30-1997 by Ord. No.
97-9, was repealed 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 39-16 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-16
8:57

ARTICLE IV
Naming Committee
[Adopted 10-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
§ 39-22. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Naming Committee
Ordinance."
§ 39-23. Statement of purpose.
This article is intended to establish a Naming Committee to function in
an advisory capacity to the City Commission on all matters concerning the
naming of public properties within the City of Royal Oak.
§ 39-24. Creation of Committee; composition.
In order to carry out the purposes of this article, there is hereby created a
Naming Committee composed of five residents to be appointed by the City
Commission.
§ 39-25. Membership.
The Naming Committee shall be composed of five residents of the City of
Royal Oak.
§ 39-26. Term of appointment.
Of the five Committee members, one shall be appointed for a term of three
years, two shall be appointed for a term of four years, and two shall be
appointed for a term of five years. Thereafter, a member shall be appointed
for a period of five years or until a successor is appointed.
§ 39-27. Rules of Committee; records; meetings.
The business that the Committee performs shall be conducted at a public
meeting in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.14 Notice shall be posted
in at least three places at least one week prior to the public meeting. A
meeting agenda shall be part of the notice. A writing prepared, owned,
used, in the possession of, or retained by the Committee in the performance
of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance
with the Freedom of Information Act.15
§ 39-28. Procedure for naming properties.
The naming of a public property may be initiated by any resident of the
City of Royal Oak by submitting a written recommendation to the Naming
14.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 39-22 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-28
8:59
Committee. Upon consideration of the Naming Committee, the City
Commission shall have the authority to name the property.
§ 39-29. Criteria for naming properties.
A public property may be named for any of the following:
A. An event directly affecting or having significant meaning to the people
of the City of Royal Oak.
B. A person, living or deceased, of good character who has made a
significant contribution to the betterment of the City of Royal Oak, or
who is or was of historical significance to the City of Royal Oak, the
County of Oakland, the State of Michigan, or the United States of
America.
C. A donor or group of donors of land or property that was either
substantial in nature or represented a substantial sacrifice to the donor
or donors.
D. A place that tends to identify the location or character of the facility.
§ 39-28 ROYAL OAK CODE § 39-29
8:60
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)16
§ 39-30. through § 39-34. (Reserved)
16.Editor’s Note: Former Art. V, Insurance Committee, adopted 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2,
was pursuant to a resolution adopted 12-6-2010, which resolution dissolved the Insurance
Committee.
§ 39-30 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-30
8:61

ARTICLE VI
Traffic Committee
[Adopted 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2]
§ 39-35. Creation of Committee; composition.
The City of Royal Oak establishes a Traffic Committee. The Traffic
Committee shall consist of seven regular members and one alternate
member selected by the City Commission from the public at large. The
alternate member shall not vote nor serve except in the absence of regular
members. The Director of Public Safety, Fire Chief and City Engineer or
their designated representatives shall be ex officio members of the
Committee without voting privilege.
§ 39-36. Compensation.
Members shall serve without pay or extra compensation.
§ 39-37. Powers of City Engineer.
The powers of the Traffic Engineer as specified in this article shall be
exercised by the City Engineer.
§ 39-38. Powers of Committee.
The Traffic Committee is vested with advisory powers with respect to
proposed traffic regulations and traffic safety issues. It shall be the duty
of Traffic Committee to advise the City Manager and City Commission on
amendments to this article.
§ 39-35 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-38
8:63

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)17
§ 39-39. through § 39-43. (Reserved)
17.Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Liquor Control Committee, adopted 3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-5, as amended, was repealed 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-18.
§ 39-39 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-39
8:65

ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)18
§ 39-44. through § 39-48. (Reserved)
18.Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, Hotel-Motel Committee, adopted 3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-6, was repealed 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-20.
§ 39-44 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-44
8:67

ARTICLE IX
Animal Shelter Committee
[Adopted 9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-30]
§ 39-49. Short title.
This article is also known as, and may be cited as, the "Animal Shelter
Committee Ordinance."
§ 39-50. Statement of purpose. [Amended 9-16-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-15]
This article establishes the Animal Shelter Committee to act in an advisory
capacity to the City Commission on all matters concerning the operation of
the Royal Oak Animal Shelter.
§ 39-51. Composition; appointments. [Amended 9-20-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-19]
The City Commission shall appoint Committee members. The Committee
shall be composed of one or two members of the City Commission, six Royal
Oak residents and one ex officio nonvoting member appointed by the City
Manager. One member of the Committee may be a doctor of veterinary
medicine, licensed to practice in the State of Michigan, without having
established Royal Oak residency.
§ 39-52. Terms of appointment.
§ 39-53. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet at least once a month.
A. The term of appointment of a City Commission representative shall
correspond to the term of the City Commission.
B. Committee members serving in the positions reserved for residents of
the City of Royal Oak shall serve in staggered, four-year terms. Two
positions reserved for residents of the City of Royal Oak shall serve
initial two-year terms, two for three-year terms and two positions for
four-year terms. Thereafter these positions shall serve four-year terms.
C. The City Commission shall appoint members to serve in these terms,
designating the member serving for two-, three- and four-year initial
terms. The terms of the resident members shall expire December 31,
2005, December 31, 2006, and December 31, 2007, respectively.
D. Members serving in positions reserved for residents of the City of Royal
Oak are eligible for reappointment.
E. Appointments to this Committee shall otherwise comply with Chapter
12, Appointments to Advisory Boards, Commissions and Committees.
§ 39-49 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-54
8:69
§ 39-54. Bylaws.
The Committee shall comply with the August 18, 2003, Model Bylaws
Resolution of the City Commission.
§ 39-55. Duties.
The Committee shall establish policies to manage the animal shelter and
coordinate with any volunteer groups wishing to raise funds or desiring to
provide volunteer staffing for the shelter.
§ 39-54 ROYAL OAK CODE § 39-55
8:70
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)19
§ 39-56. through § 39-62. (Reserved)
19.Editor’s Note: Former Art. X, Ice Arena Oversight Committee, adopted 4-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-04, as amended, was repealed 7-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08.
§ 39-56 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-56
8:71

ARTICLE XI
Veterans' Events Committee
[Adopted 6-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-09; amended in its entirety
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
§ 39-63. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Veterans Events
Committee Ordinance."
§ 39-64. Statement of purpose.
This is an article to establish a Veterans Events Committee to function in
an advisory capacity to the City Commission on all matters concerning the
City of Royal Oak Memorial Day Parade, Memorial Day Service, Veterans
Day Service and any other events honoring veterans, active military service
members, or first responders as the City Commission may desire.
§ 39-65. Creation.
To carry out the purpose of this article, there is hereby created a Veterans
Events Committee.
§ 39-66. Membership.
The Veterans Events Committee shall be composed of 10 members: the City
Manager or his/her designee, and nine individuals appointed by the City
Commission. The City Manager or his/her designee shall be an ex officio
nonvoting member of the Committee. Of the nine individuals appointed by
the City Commission, at least three shall be at-large residents of the City
of Royal Oak. In filling the remaining positions, preference shall be given
to representatives of community groups, who may or may not be Royal
Oak residents, involved in veterans events or services, including but not
limited to the American Legion, the Royal Canadian Legion, the Royal Oak
Historical Society, the Royal Oak Memorial Society, the Veterans of Foreign
Wars, and the Downtown Development Authority.
§ 39-67. Terms of appointment.
Of the nine individuals appointed to the Committee by the City Commission,
three shall be appointed for terms of one year, three shall be appointed
for terms of two years and three shall be appointed for terms of three
years, with said terms to expire on December 31 of the respective years.
Thereafter, a member shall be appointed for three years or until his/her
successor is appointed.
§ 39-68. Conduct of business.
The business that the Committee performs shall be conducted at public
meetings in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.20 A meeting agenda
shall be part of the notice. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the
§ 39-63 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-68
8:73
possession of, or retained by the Committee in the performance of an
official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the
Freedom of Information Act.21
20.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
21.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 39-68 ROYAL OAK CODE § 39-68
8:74
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
Chapter 52
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Committee — See Ch. 39, Art. II.
§ 39-68 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 39-68
8:75

ARTICLE I
Downtown Development Authority
[Adopted 11-1-1976 by Ord. No. 76-26]
§ 52-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Downtown
Development Authority Ordinance."
§ 52-2. Definitions.
§ 52-3. Determination of necessity.
The City Commission of the City hereby determines that it is necessary
for the best interests of the City to halt property value deterioration and
increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the
City, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic
growth by establishing a Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Act
197.
A. The terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as given to
them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the
context clearly indicates to the contrary.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Royal Oak Downtown Development Authority
created by this article.
ACT 197 — Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 as now
in effect or hereafter amended.22
BOARD or BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the
Authority, the governing body of the Authority.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER — The City Manager of the City.
CITY — The City of Royal Oak, Michigan.
COMMISSION or CITY COMMISSION — The City Commission of the
City.
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT TAX — The tax authorized by this article
pursuant to Act 197 to be imposed by the Authority in the downtown
area.
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT — The Downtown District designated by this
article as now existing or hereafter amended.
22.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1651 et seq.
§ 52-1 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-4
8:77
§ 52-4. Creation of Authority; powers.
There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197 a Downtown Development
Authority for the City of Royal Oak, Michigan. The Authority shall be a
public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under
title of "Royal Oak Downtown Development Authority." The Authority may
adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess
all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its corporation as
provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this
article or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general
powers of the Authority.
§ 52-5. Description of Downtown District. [Amended 12-12-1977 by
Ord. No. 77-22; 6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 88-7; 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-19; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as
provided by Act 197 shall consist of the following described territory in the
City of Royal Oak, Michigan, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be
made pursuant to this article and Act 197
A. Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Lincoln Avenue and
the west right-of-way line of Main Street, thence south along the west
right-of-way line of Main Street to the north right-of-way line on
Kenilworth Avenue, thence west along the north right-of-way line of
Kenilworth Avenue to the easterly right-of-way line of Woodward
Avenue, thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of
Woodward Avenue to the northerly right-of-way line of Interstate
Highway 696, thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way line of
I-696 to the east right-of-way line of Main Street, thence north along the
east right-of-way of Main Street to the south lot line of Lot 14 of Hannan
& Webber’s Sunset Park Subdivision, thence east along the south lot
line of Lot 14 to the west lot line of Lot 61 of Hannan & Webber’s Sunset
Park Subdivision, thence north along the west lot line of Lot 61 of
Hannan & Webber’s Sunset Park Subdivision, thence north along the
west lot line of Lot 62 of Hannan & Webber’s Sunset Park Subdivision,
thence north along the west lot line of Lot 105 of Hannan & Webber’s
Sunset Park Subdivision, thence north along the west lot line of Lot 106
of Hannan & Webber’s Sunset Park Subdivision, thence north along the
west lot line of Lot 115 of Hannan & Webber’s Sunset Park Subdivision
to the northwest lot corner of Lot 115, thence northerly to the
southwest corner of Lot 116 of Hannan & Webber’s Sunset Park
Subdivision, thence northerly from the southwest corner of Lot 116
along the west lot line of Lot 116 to the west lot line of Lot 51 of
Donnelly’s Subdivision, thence north along the west lot line of Lot 51 to
the north right-of-way line of Kenilworth Avenue, thence westerly along
the north right-of-way of Kenilworth Avenue to the east right-of-way line
of Main Street, thence north along the east right-of-way line of Main
Street to the center line of Lincoln Avenue, thence east along the center
line of Lincoln Avenue to the center line of Troy Street, thence north
§ 52-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 52-5
8:78
§ 52-6. Board of Trustees.
along the center line of Troy Street to the south right-of-way line of
Fourth Street, thence east along the south right-of-way line of Fourth
Street to the east right-of-way line of Knowles Street, thence north
along the east right-of-way line of Knowles Street to the most northerly
right-of-way line of Third Street, thence west 33.04 feet along the north
right-of-way line of Third Street, thence north 262.16 feet along the
west property line of Lot 29 of Assessor’s Plat No. 9, thence easterly
along the north line of Lot 29 35.20 feet to the beginning of the east
right-of-way line of Knowles Street at the northeast corner of Lot 29
of Assessor’s Plat No. 9, thence north along the east right-of-way line
of Knowles Street to the north right-of-way line of Eleven Mile Road,
thence west along the north right-of-way line of Eleven Mile Road to
the center line of Troy Street, thence north along the center line of
Troy Street to the center line of Pingree Boulevard, thence west along
the center line of Pingree Boulevard to the center line of Main Street,
thence south along the center line of Main Street to the center line
of Eleven Mile Road, thence west along the center line of Eleven Mile
Road to the center line of West Street, thence south along the center
line of West Street to the center line of Lincoln Avenue, thence easterly
along the center line of Lincoln Avenue to the point of beginning.
B. Said property is legally described as Lots 2 through 10 and the west
105.93 feet of Lot 11, Assessor’s Plat No. 12; plus Lots 1 through 13,
High School Addition Subdivision; plus Blocks 1 through 42, Assessor’s
Plat No. 20; plus Lots 17 through 24 and Lots 46 through 91, Hudson &
Hannan Subdivision No. 2; plus Lots 20 through 23 and Lots 34 through
36, Lucking’s Subdivision; plus Lots 1 through 18, Royal Court
Subdivision; plus Lots 1 through 15, Royal Court Extension Subdivision;
plus Lots 1 and 2, Donnelley’s Subdivision; plus Lots 1 through 14,
Hannan & Webber’s Sunset Park Subdivision; plus Lots 1 through 6,
Connor’s Subdivision; plus Lots 7 through 18 and 30 of Assessor’s Plat
No. 9; plus Lots 1 through 13 of Hamilton Court Subdivision; plus lots
635 through 671 of Fourth Avenue Subdivision No. 1; and the
Allenhurst Avenue, California Avenue, Center Street, Eleven Mile Road,
Fifth Street, Fourth Street, Kenilworth Avenue, Knowles Street,
Lafayette Avenue, Lincoln Avenue, Main Street, Maryland Avenue,
Pingree Boulevard, Rhode Island Avenue, Second Street, Seventh
Street, Sherman Drive, Sixth Street, Third Street, Troy Street,
University Avenue, Washington Avenue, West Street, Williams Street,
Interstate Highway 696, Grand Trunk Western Rail Road, and adjacent
alley rights-of-way as described above.
A. The City of Royal Oak Downtown Development Authority shall be under
the supervision and control of a Board consisting of the City Manager
and eight or 10 members as determined by the City Commission.
Members shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to approval
by the City Commission. Not less than a majority of the members shall
be persons having an interest in property located in the Downtown
§ 52-5 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-6
8:79
§ 52-7. Powers of Authority. [Amended 2-4-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-0423]
The Downtown Development Authority may:
District. Not less than one of the members shall be a resident of
the Downtown District, if the Downtown District has 100 or more
persons residing within it. Of members first appointed, one shall be
appointed for one year, one for two years, one for three years and
one for four years. A member shall hold office until the member's
successor is appointed. Thereafter, a member shall serve for four years.
An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the City Manager
subject to approval by the City Commission for the unexpired term.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for actual or necessary expenses. The Chairman of the
Board shall be elected by the Board. [Amended 1-10-1994 by Ord.
No. 93-18; 2-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2; 2-21-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-02]
B. Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify by taking
and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.
C. The Board shall adopt rules governing its procedure and the holding of
regular meetings, subject to the approval of the City Commission of the
City of Royal Oak. Special meetings may be held when called in the
manner provided in the rules of the Board and in accordance with
applicable state law. Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
D. Pursuant to notice and an opportunity to be heard, a member of the
Board may be removed for cause by the City Commission of the City of
Royal Oak. Removal of a member is subject to review by the Circuit
Court.
E. All expense items of the Authority shall be publicized monthly, and the
financial records shall always be open to the public.
A. Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the downtown
district.
B. Study and analyze the impact of metropolitan growth upon the
downtown district.
C. Plan and propose the construction, renovation, repair, remodeling,
rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, or reconstruction of a public
facility, an existing building, or a multiple-family dwelling unit which
may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the
opinion of the board, assists in the economic growth of the downtown
district.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. No. 2010-05, the 2010 amendment to the
Downtown Development Authority Ordinance.
§ 52-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 52-7
8:80
D. Plan, propose, and implement an improvement to a public facility within
the development area to comply with the barrier free design
requirements of the state construction code promulgated under the
Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230,
MCLA §§ 125.1501 to 125.1531.
E. Develop long-range plans, in cooperation with the City Commission
and/or the Planning Commission, designed to halt the deterioration of
property values in the downtown district and to promote the economic
growth of the downtown district, and take such steps as may be
necessary to persuade property owners to implement the plans to the
fullest extent possible.
F. Implement any plan of development in the downtown district necessary
to achieve the purposes of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1975 (MCLA § 125.1651 et seq., as amended) and this chapter, in
accordance with the powers of the Authority as granted by the state
act.
G. Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the exercise of
its powers and the performance of its duties.
H. Acquire by purchase or otherwise, on terms and conditions and in a
manner the Authority considers proper, or own, convey, or otherwise
dispose of, or lease as lessor or lessee, land and other property, real or
personal, or rights or interests in property, which the Authority
determines is reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of Act No.
197, and to grant or acquire licenses, easements and options with
respect to that property.
I. Improve land and construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, restore and
preserve, equip, improve, maintain, repair, and operate any building,
including multiple-family dwellings, and any necessary or desirable
appurtenances to that property, within the downtown district for the
use, in whole or in part, of any public or private person or corporation,
or a combination of them.
J. Fix, charge, and collect fees, rents, and charges for the use of any
building or property under its control or any part thereof, or facility
therein, and pledge the fees, rents, and charges for the payment of
revenue bonds issued by the Authority.
K. Lease any building or property under its control, or any part of a
building or property under its control.
L. Accept grants and donations of property, labor, or other things of value
from a public or private source.
M. Acquire and construct public facilities.
N. Create, operate, and fund marketing initiatives that benefit only retail
and general marketing of the downtown district.
§ 52-7 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-7
8:81
§ 52-8. Fiscal year; budget; financial reports; annual audit.
[Amended 1-10-1994 by Ord. No. 93-18]
§ 52-9. Downtown development tax.
O. Contract for broadband service and wireless technology service in the
downtown district.
P. Operate and perform all duties and exercise all responsibilities
described in this section in a qualified township, as defined in Act 197, if
the qualified township has entered into an agreement with the City
under Act 197.
Q. Create, operate, and fund a loan program to fund improvements for
existing buildings located in the downtown district to make them
marketable for sale or lease. The board may make loans with interest at
a below-market rate, as determined by the Board.
R. Create, operate, and fund retail business incubators in the downtown
district.
A. The fiscal year of the Authority shall commence on the first day of July
in each year.
B. The Board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the
City Commission on or before the first day of May prior to the ensuing
fiscal year.
C. The Authority shall submit financial reports to the City Commission on a
quarterly basis. The Authority shall be audited annually by the same
independent auditors auditing the City, and copies of the audit report
shall be filed with the Commission.
A. The Authority is hereby authorized by the City to impose an ad valorem
tax on all taxable property in the Downtown District for the purposes
provided by Act 197. The tax shall not exceed two mills on the value of
taxable property in the Downtown District as finally equalized.
B. In order to impose the tax, the Board shall include in its budget each
year an estimate of the amount necessary to be raised from the
Downtown Development tax. The amount of tax imposed shall not
exceed the amount necessary as estimated in the budget and approved
by the City Commission. The Board shall certify to the proper tax
assessing official of the City the amount so determined in the same
manner and at the same time as general City taxes are certified for
collection.
C. The City shall collect the Downtown Development tax at the same time
and in the same manner as other City taxes are collected. The tax shall
be paid to the Treasurer of the Authority and credited to the general
fund of the Authority for the purpose provided by Act 197. The City
Commission may assess a reasonable pro rata share of the funds for the
§ 52-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 52-9
8:82
§ 52-10. Instrumentality of City.
The Authority shall be deemed an instrumentality of the City of Royal Oak.
cost of handling and auditing the funds against the funds of the
Authority, other than those committed, which cost shall be paid
annually by the Board pursuant to an appropriate item in its budget.
§ 52-9 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-10
8:83

ARTICLE II
Downtown Development Area24
[Adopted 11-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-7]
§ 52-11. Definitions. [Amended 2-14-1983 by Ord. No. 83-3;
5-2-1983 by Ord. No. 83-10; 3-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-6; 8-14-1989
by Ord. No. 89-14; 11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 90-18; 12-5-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-20; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-02; 4-5-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-11]
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
BASE YEAR ASSESSMENT ROLL — The base year assessment roll prepared
by the City Assessor in accordance with § 52-14 of this article.
CAPTURED ASSESSED VALUE — The amount in any one year by which
the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the
Downtown Development Area exceeds the initial assessed values.
DEVELOPMENT AREA — The area legally described in Exhibit A and which
is hereby made a part of this article.25
DEVELOPMENT FUND — The Downtown Development Authority
Development Fund established pursuant to § 52-16 of this article.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The Downtown Development and Tax Increment
Financing Plan, consisting of the former Barton/Lafayette Tax Increment
Financing and Development Plan dated September 1980, as modified by
amendments dated February 1, 1983, April 20, 1983, February 15, 1984,
June 7, 1989, and November 7, 1990; the former Woodward/I-696 Tax
Increment Financing and Development Plan dated March 1989; and
Downtown Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan Amendments
dated October 19, 1994, September 18, 2002, and April 15, 2004; and
transmitted to the City Commission by the Royal Oak Downtown
Development Authority, copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (DDA) — The City of Royal Oak
Downtown Development Authority.
INITIAL ASSESSED VALUE — The most recently assessed value as finally
equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the
Development Area at the time of adoption of this article.
TAXING JURISDICTION — Each unit of government levying an ad valorem
property tax on property in the Development Area.
24.Editor's Note: Art. II, Barton/Lafayette Development Area, was renamed Downtown
Development Area 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09.
25.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 52-11 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-12
8:85
§ 52-12. Approval and adoption of Development Plan.
The Development Plan as submitted by the Downtown Development
Authority is hereby approved and adopted by the City Commission. The
duration of the plan shall be 30 years from the date of issuance of the last
series of bonds issued pursuant to the Development Plan, except as it may
be extended by subsequent amendment of the plan and this article. A copy
of the plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the
City Clerk's office and cross-indexed to this article.
§ 52-13. Boundaries of Development Area. [Amended 3-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-6; 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-20; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-02; 4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-09]
The boundaries of the Downtown Development Area as described in the
Development Plan, and the attached Exhibit A,26 are hereby adopted and
confirmed.
§ 52-14. Preparation of base year assessment roll.
§ 52-15. Preparation of annual base year assessment roll.
Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the
Barton/Lafayette Development Area, the Assessor shall prepare an updated
base year assessment roll. The updated base year assessment roll shall
show the information required in the initial base year assessment roll and,
in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual
base year assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Assessor to the same
persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that
it has been prepared in accordance with this article and the Development
plan.
A. Within 60 days of the effective date of this article, the City Assessor
shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The initial base year
assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in which the Barton/
Lafayette Development Area is located, the initial assessed value of the
Barton/Lafayette Area on the effective date of this article and the
amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad
valorem taxes on the property in the Development Area.
B. The Assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base year assessment
roll to the City Treasurer, County Treasurer, Downtown Development
Authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the
assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this article and
the tax increment financing plan contained in the Development Plan
approved by this article.
26.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 52-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 52-16
8:86
§ 52-16. Establishment of Development Fund; approval of
depository.
The Treasurer of the Downtown Development Authority shall establish a
separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts
in a bank or banks approved by the City Treasurer of the City of Royal
Oak to be designated Downtown Development Authority Barton/Lafayette
Development Fund. All moneys received by the Downtown Development
Authority pursuant to the Development Plan shall be deposited in the
Development Fund. All moneys in that fund and earnings thereon shall be
used only in accordance with the Development Plan and this article.
§ 52-17. Payment of tax increments to Downtown Development
Authority.
The City and County Treasurers shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected
on the property in the Development Area, pay that proportion of the taxes,
except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value
bears to the initial assessed value to the Treasurer of the Downtown
Development Authority for deposit in the Development Fund. The payments
shall be made on the date or dates on which the City and County Treasurers
are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions.
§ 52-18. Use of moneys in Development Fund.
A. The money credited to the Development Fund and on hand therein from
time to time shall annually be used in the following manner and
following order of priority:
(1) To pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all outstanding
series of bonds issued pursuant to this plan an amount equal to the
interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether
by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection
of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement
fund.
(2) To establish a reserve account for payment of principal and interest
on bonds issued pursuant to this plan, an amount equal to one-fifth
of the largest combined annual principal and interest payments due
on bonds issued pursuant to this plan until the amount to the credit
of the reserve account is equal to the largest combined annual
principal and interest requirements on bonds issued pursuant to
this plan. Any amounts to the credit of the reserve account at the
beginning of a fiscal year in excess of the requirement of the
preceding sentence shall be considered tax increment revenue for
that year.
(3) To pay, to the extent determined desirable by the City Commission
based upon the recommendation of the DDA, the cost of the initial
stage and second stage public improvements as set forth in the
§ 52-16 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-18
8:87
§ 52-19. Annual report.
Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Downtown Development
Authority shall submit to the City Commission, with copies to each taxing
jurisdiction, a report on the status of the Development Fund. The report
shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount
and purpose of expenditures from the account, the initial assessed value
of the Barton/Lafayette Development Area, the captured assessed value
of the Barton/Lafayette Development Area, the tax increments received
and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional
information requested by the City Commission or deemed appropriate by
the Downtown Development Authority. The Secretary of the Downtown
Development Authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once
in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Development Plan to the extent those costs are not financed from
the proceeds of bonds.
(4) To pay administrative and operating costs of the DDA to the extent
provided in the annual budget of the DDA.
(5) To reimburse the City for funds advanced to acquire property, clear
land, make preliminary plans, and improvements necessary for the
development of the Development Area in accordance with this plan.
B. Any tax increment receipts in excess of those needed under the
preceding paragraphs shall revert proportionately to the taxing
jurisdictions.
§ 52-18 ROYAL OAK CODE § 52-19
8:88
ARTICLE III
Woodward/I-696 Development Area
[Adopted 3-31-1989 by Ord. No. 89-7]
§ 52-20. Definitions.
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
BASE YEAR ASSESSMENT ROLL — The base year assessment roll prepared
by the City Assessor in accordance with § 52-23 of this article.
CAPTURED ASSESSED VALUE — The amount in any one year by which
the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the
Woodward/I-696 Development Area exceeds the initial assessed value.
DEVELOPMENT AREA — The area legally described in Exhibit A and which
is hereby made a part of this article.27
DEVELOPMENT FUND — The Downtown Development Authority
Development Fund, established pursuant to § 52-25 of this article.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The Woodward/I-696 Tax Increment Financing
and Development Plan dated March 1989, as transmitted to the City
Commission by the Royal Oak Downtown Development Authority for public
hearing, copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY — The City of Royal Oak
Downtown Development Authority.
INITIAL ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value as equalized of all the
taxable property within the boundaries of the Development Area at the time
of adoption of this article, as shown by the most recent assessment roll of
the municipality for which equalization has been completed at the time this
article is adopted.
TAXING JURISDICTION — Each unit of government levying an ad valorem
property tax on property in the Development Area.
§ 52-21. Approval and adoption of Development Plan.
The Development Plan, as submitted by the Downtown Development
Authority, is hereby approved and adopted by the City Commission. The
duration of the plan shall be 30 years from the date of issuance of the last
series of bonds issued pursuant to the Development Plan, except as it may
be extended by subsequent amendment of the plan and this article. A copy
of the plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the
City Clerk's office and cross-indexed to this article.
27.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 52-20 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-22
8:89
§ 52-22. Boundaries of Development Area. [Amended 3-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-6; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
The boundaries of the Downtown Development Area as described in the
Development Plan, and the attached Exhibit A,28 are hereby adopted and
confirmed.
§ 52-23. Preparation of base year assessment roll.
§ 52-24. Preparation of annual base year assessment roll.
Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the
Woodward/I-696 Development Area, the Assessor shall prepare an updated
base year assessment roll. The updated base year assessment roll shall
show the information required in the initial base year assessment roll and,
in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual
base year assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Assessor to the same
persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that
it has been prepared in accordance with this article and the Development
Plan.
§ 52-25. Establishment of Development Fund; approval of
depository.
The Treasurer of the Downtown Development Authority shall establish a
separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts
in a bank or banks approved by the City Treasurer of the City of Royal
Oak to be designated Downtown Development Authority Woodward/I-696
Development Fund. All monies received by the Downtown Development
Authority pursuant to the Development Plan shall be deposited in the
Development Fund. All monies in that fund and earnings thereon shall be
used only in accordance with the Development Plan and this article.
A. Within 60 days of the effective date of this article, the City Assessor
shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The initial base year
assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in which the
Woodward/I-696 Development Area is located, the initial assessed value
of the Woodward/I-696 Development Area on the effective date of this
article and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing
jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the Development
Area.
B. The Assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base year assessment
roll to the City Treasurer, County Treasurer, Downtown Development
Authority, and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the
assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this article and
the tax increment financing plan contained in the Development Plan
approved by this article.
28.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 52-22 ROYAL OAK CODE § 52-26
8:90
§ 52-26. Payment of tax increments to Downtown Development
Authority.
The City and County Treasurers shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected
on the property in the Development Area, pay that proportion of the taxes,
except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value
bears to the initial assessed value to the Treasurer of the Downtown
Development Authority for deposit in the Development Fund. The payments
shall be made on the date or dates on which the City and County Treasurers
are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions.
§ 52-27. Use of monies in Development Fund.
A. The money credited to the Development Fund and on hand therein from
time to time shall annually be used in the following manner and
following order of priority:
(1) To pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all outstanding
series of bonds issued pursuant to this plan, an amount equal to the
interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal, whether
by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection
of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement
fund.
(2) To establish a reserve account for payment of principal and interest
on bonds issued pursuant to this plan, an amount equal to that
required by P.A. 197 of 1975, as amended, from time to time.29 Any
amounts to the credit of the reserve account at the beginning of a
fiscal year in excess of the requirement of the preceding sentence
shall be considered tax increment revenue for that year.
(3) To pay the cost of public improvements as set forth in the
Development Plan on a pay-as-you-go basis, to the extent those
costs are not financed from the proceeds of bonds.
(4) To pay administrative and operating costs of the DDA to the extent
provided in the annual budget of the DDA.
(5) To reimburse the City for any funds advanced to the Downtown
Development Authority for use in financing those public
improvements, or any portion thereof, indicated in the
Development Plan. To the extent the City may be called upon to
meet any debt service insufficiencies, tax increment revenues will
be used to reimburse the City in the amount of any such advance it
has made.
B. Any tax increment receipts in excess of those needed under the
preceding paragraphs shall revert proportionately to the taxing
jurisdictions.
29.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1651 et seq.
§ 52-26 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-28
8:91
§ 52-28. Annual report.
Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Downtown Development
Authority shall submit to the City Commission, with copies to each taxing
jurisdiction, a report on the status of the Development Fund. The report
shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount
and purpose of expenditures from the account, the initial assessed value of
the Woodward/I-696 Development Area, the captured assessed value of the
Woodward/I-696 Development Area, the tax increments received and the
amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information
requested by the City Commission or deemed appropriate by the Downtown
Development Authority. The Executive Director of the Downtown
Development Authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once
in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
§ 52-28 ROYAL OAK CODE § 52-28
8:92
Chapter 58
ELECTIONS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Registration, nominations, elections and
recalls — See Ch. 4.
§ 52-28 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-28
8:93

ARTICLE I
Filing of Nominating Petitions
[Adopted 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-4; amended in its entirety
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-08]
§ 58-1. Due date for filing petition; filing fee.
Nominating petitions for elective City offices shall be filed with the City
Clerk not later than 4:00 p.m. on the 12th Tuesday preceding the election
in question. Each nominated candidate shall file with the City Clerk an
acceptance of nomination and an affidavit as to qualifications, and a filing
fee of $35 shall be paid to the City Treasurer, not later than 4:00 p.m. on the
12th Tuesday preceding the election in question.
§ 58-2. Impact on Charter provisions.
All City Charter provisions concerning the nomination of elective City
offices, other than those provisions directly altered by § 58-1 of this article,
shall continue in effect. The City Commission hereby determines that the
alterations accomplished by § 58-1 are required by the Michigan Election
Law, MCLA 168.644e, as amended.
§ 58-1 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 58-2
8:95
Chapter 63
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 251.
§ 63-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Emergency Management Ordinance."
§ 63-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
ACT — The Michigan Emergency Management Act, Act No. 390 of the
Public Acts of 1976, as amended.30
DISASTER — An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made
cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm,
tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility
failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation
accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight,
drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary
action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or
civil disorders.
DISASTER RELIEF FORCE — All agencies of county and municipal
government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and
employees, and all other persons or groups of persons identified in the
Oakland County Emergency Operations Plan as having duties to perform or
those called into duty or working at the direction of a party identified in the
plan to perform a specific disaster or emergency-related task during a local
state of emergency.
DISTRICT COORDINATOR — The Michigan Department of State Police
District Emergency Management Coordinator. The District Coordinator
serves as liaison between local emergency management programs and
the Michigan State Police Emergency Management Division in all matters
pertaining to the mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery of
emergency and disaster situations.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR — The person appointed to
coordinate all matters pertaining to emergency management within the City
of Royal Oak. The Emergency Management Coordinator for Royal Oak is the
Oakland County Emergency Management Coordinator.
30.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 30.401 et seq.
§ 58-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 63-2
63:96
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A program established to
coordinate mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities for
all emergency or disaster situations within a given geographical area made
up of one or several political subdivisions. Such a program has an appointed
Emergency Management Coordinator and meets the program standards
and requirements as established by the Michigan Department of State
Police Emergency Management Division. The City of Royal Oak has elected
to be a part of the Oakland County emergency management program.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN — The plan developed and maintained
by Oakland County and political subdivisions included in the emergency
management program area for the purpose of responding to all emergency
or disaster situations by identifying and organizing the disaster relief force.
GOVERNOR'S STATE OF DISASTER — An executive order or proclamation
by the Governor that implements the disaster response and recovery
aspects of the Michigan Emergency Management Plan and applicable local
plans of the county or municipal programs affected.
GOVERNOR'S STATE OF EMERGENCY — An executive order or
proclamation by the Governor that implements the emergency response
and recovery aspects of the Michigan Emergency Management Plan and
applicable local plans of the county or municipal programs affected.
LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY — A declaration by the Mayor pursuant
to the Act. This declaration implements the response and recovery aspects
of the Oakland County Emergency Operations Plan and authorizes certain
actions as described in this chapter.
VITAL RECORDS — Those records that contain information needed to
continue the effective functioning of a government entity (jurisdiction,
agency, department) and for the protection of the rights and interests
of persons under emergency conditions in the event of an emergency or
disaster situation.
§ 63-3. Emergency Management Coordinator; appointment.
§ 63-4. Emergency Management Coordinator; duties.
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall comply with the standards
and requirements as established by the Department of State Police,
A. By the authority of this chapter, the Mayor hereby appoints the Oakland
County Emergency Management Coordinator as the Emergency
Management Coordinator for the City of Royal Oak. In addition to
acting for, and at the direction of, the Oakland County Executive, the
Emergency Management Coordinator will also act for, and at the
direction of, the Mayor of Royal Oak.
B. A line of succession for the Oakland County Emergency Management
Coordinator shall be established and shall be listed in the Oakland
County Emergency Operations Plan.
§ 63-2 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 63-4
63:97
Emergency Management Division, under the authority of the Act, in
accomplishing the following:
§ 63-5. Emergency Management Liaison; duties.
A. Direct and coordinate the development of the Oakland County
Emergency Operations Plan, which shall be consistent with the
Michigan Emergency Management Plan.
B. Specify departments or agencies which must provide an annex to the
plan or otherwise cooperate in its development.
C. Identify departments and agencies to be included in the Emergency
Operations Plan as part of the disaster relief force.
D. Develop and maintain a County Resource Manual.
E. Coordinate the recruitment, appointment, and utilization of volunteer
personnel.
F. Assure the emergency management program meets eligibility
requirements for state and federal aid.
G. Coordinate and/or conduct training and exercise programs for the
disaster relief force within the county and to test the adequacy of the
Emergency Operations Plan.
H. Through public information programs, educate the population as to the
actions necessary for the protection of life and property in an
emergency or disaster.
I. Assist in the development of mutual aid agreements.
J. Assist the Royal Oak Emergency Management Liaison with the
development of standard operating procedures which are consistent
with the Oakland County Emergency Operations Plan.
K. Oversee the implementation of all functions necessary during an
emergency or disaster in accordance with the Oakland County
Emergency Operations Plan.
L. Coordinate Oakland County emergency management activities with
those of municipalities included in the county emergency management
program, other municipalities, the state, and adjacent counties.
M. Coordinate all preparedness activities, including maintaining primary
and alternate emergency operations centers.
N. Identify mitigation opportunities within the County and encourage
departments/agencies to implement mitigation measures.
A. By authority of this chapter the Mayor shall appoint a liaison for the
purpose of assisting the Oakland County Emergency Management
§ 63-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 63-5
63:98
§ 63-6. Powers and duties of Mayor.
Coordinator in coordinating the emergency management activities
within Royal Oak. The duties of the liaison are as follows:
(1) Coordinate Royal Oak emergency management activities with
those of Oakland County and adjacent jurisdictions.
(2) Assist the Oakland County Emergency Management Coordinator
with the development of the County Emergency Operations Plan
and the incorporation of municipal resources within the plan.
(3) Identify Royal Oak departments and agencies to be included in the
Emergency Operations Plan as part of the disaster relief force.
(4) Identify Royal Oak resources and forward information to the
Oakland County Emergency Management Coordinator for inclusion
in the Oakland County resource manual.
(5) Coordinate the recruitment, appointment, and utilization of
volunteer resources.
(6) Assist the Oakland County Emergency Management Coordinator
with administering training programs.
(7) Coordinate Royal Oak participation in exercises conducted by
Oakland County.
(8) Assist in the development of mutual aid agreements.
(9) Assist in educating the population as to actions necessary for the
protection of life and property in an emergency or disaster.
(10) Encourage departments/agencies within Royal Oak to identify and
implement procedures to mitigate the effects of potential disasters.
(11) Assist in the assessment of the nature and scope of the emergency
or disaster and collect damage assessment information and
forward to Oakland County.
(12) Coordinate the vital records protection program.
(13) Develop municipal standard operating procedures for disaster
response which are consistent with the Oakland County Emergency
Operations Plan.
B. The Mayor shall appoint a minimum of two persons as successors to the
position of the Royal Oak Emergency Management Liaison. The line of
succession shall be supplied to the Oakland County Emergency
Management Coordinator.
A. On an annual basis, the Mayor shall review the eligibility and
performance of the Oakland County Emergency Management
Coordinator and make recommendations to the City Commission.
§ 63-5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 63-6
63:99
B. The Mayor shall review the effectiveness of the Oakland County
Emergency Operations Plan as the plan relates to the City of Royal Oak
once every two years. With the assistance of the Municipal Liaison, he
or she shall make recommendations to the Oakland County Emergency
Management Coordinator of any changes which may be needed. After
this review and incorporation of necessary changes, the Mayor shall
certify the plan current and adequate for the City of Royal Oak the
ensuing two years.
C. When circumstances within the City of Royal Oak indicate that the
occurrence or threat of occurrence of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property from natural or humanmade cause
exists, the Mayor may declare a local state of emergency. Such a
declaration shall be promptly filed with the Oakland County Emergency
Management Office, who shall forward it to the Department of State
Police, Emergency Management Division. This declaration shall not be
continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except with
the consent of the City Commission.
D. If the Mayor invokes such power and authority, he or she shall, as soon
as reasonably expedient, convene the City Commission for one or more
emergency meetings in accordance with the Open Meetings Act31 to
perform its normal legislative and administrative duties as the situation
demands, and will report to that body relative to emergency activities.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the
powers of the Royal Oak City Commission unless specifically provided
herein.
E. The Mayor may do one or more of the following under a local state of
emergency:
(1) Direct the Oakland County Emergency Management Coordinator to
implement the Oakland County Emergency Operations Plan.
(2) Issue directives as to travel restrictions on local roads within the
municipality.
(3) Relieve Royal Oak employees of normal duties and temporarily
reassign them to other duties.
(4) Activate mutual aid agreements.
(5) Direct the municipal disaster relief effort in accordance with the
Oakland County Emergency Operations Plan and municipal
standard operating procedures.
(6) Notify the public of the situation and recommend in-place or
evacuation protective measures.
31.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
§ 63-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 63-6
63:100
§ 63-7. Governor declaration request.
If a disaster or emergency occurs that has not yet been declared to be a
state of disaster or a state of emergency by the Governor, and the Mayor
determines that the situation is beyond the control of the City, he or she
may request the Governor to declare that a state of disaster or state of
emergency exists in the municipality in accordance with this Act. This
shall be done by immediately contacting the Oakland County Emergency
Management Coordinator. The Oakland County Emergency Management
Coordinator shall immediately contact the Michigan State Police
Emergency Management Division District Coordinator. The District
Coordinator, in conjunction with the Emergency Management Coordinator
and the Royal Oak Emergency Management Liaison, shall assess the nature
and scope of the disaster or emergency, and they shall recommend state
(7) Request a state of disaster or emergency declaration from the
Governor as described in § 63-7.
(8) When obtaining normal approvals would result in further injury or
damage, the Mayor may, until the City Commission convenes, waive
procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the
following:
(a) For a period of up to seven days, send municipal employees
and resources to the aid of other communities as provided by
mutual aid agreements.
(b) For a period of up to seven days, appropriate and expend funds
from the Disaster Contingency Fund created in § 63-9 up to
$2,000.
(c) For a period of up to seven, days make contracts, obtain and
distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster
purposes.
(d) Employ temporary workers.
(e) Purchase and distribute supplies, materials, and equipment.
(f) Make, amend, or rescind ordinances or rules necessary for
emergency management purposes which supplement a rule,
order or directive issued by the Governor or a state agency.
Such an ordinance or rule shall be temporary and, upon the
Governor's declaration that a state of disaster or state of
emergency is terminated, shall no longer be in effect.
F. If a state of disaster or emergency is declared by the Governor, assign
and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of
the City of Royal Oak within or without the physical limits of Royal Oak
as ordered by the Governor or the Director of the Michigan Department
of State Police in accordance with the Act.
§ 63-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 63-7
63:101
personnel, services, and equipment that will be required for its prevention,
mitigation, or relief.
§ 63-8. Volunteers; appointment.
Each department, commission, board, or other agency of Royal Oak
government is authorized to appoint volunteers to augment its personnel
in time of emergency to implement emergency functions assigned in the
Oakland County Emergency Operations Plan. Such individuals are part of
the disaster relief force and shall be subject to the rules and operational
control set forth by the respective department, commission, board, or
agency through which the appointment was made, and shall be reimbursed
for all action and necessary travel and subsistence expenses.
§ 63-9. Disaster Contingency Fund.
A Disaster Contingency Fund is hereby created in the budget of not less
than $2,000. Money may be expended for the purpose of paying the disaster
relief force, purchase of supplies and services, repair costs, or other needs
required specifically for the mitigation of the effects of, or in response to,
the emergency or disaster.
§ 63-10. Rights of disaster relief force.
In accordance with the Act, personnel of the disaster relief force while on
duty shall have the following rights:
§ 63-11. Temporary seat of government.
The City Commission shall provide for the temporary movement and
reestablishment of essential government offices in the event that existing
facilities cannot be used.
§ 63-12. Liability.
As provided for in the Act and this chapter, the City, or the agents or
representatives of the City, shall not be liable for personal injury or property
damage sustained by the disaster relief force. In addition, any member of
the disaster relief force engaged in disaster relief activity shall not be liable
in a civil action for damages resulting from an act or omission arising out
of and in the course of a person's good faith rendering of that activity,
unless the person's act or omission was the result of that person's gross
A. If they are employees of Royal Oak, or other governmental agency
regardless of where serving, have the powers, duties, rights, privileges,
and immunities and receive the compensation incidental to their
employment.
B. If they are not employees of Royal Oak or another governmental agency,
be entitled to the same rights and immunities as are provided for by
law.
§ 63-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 63-12
63:102
negligence or willful misconduct. The right of a person to receive benefits
or compensation to which he or she may otherwise be entitled to under the
workers' compensation law, any pension law, or act of congress will not be
effected as a result of said activity.
Chapter 66
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appointments to advisory boards,
commissions and committees — See Ch. 12.
Charitable contributions for public
purposes — See Ch. 26.
Committees — See Ch. 39.
Housing Commission — See Ch. 87.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 128.
Plan Commission — See Ch. 134.
Recreation and Pubic Service
Department — See Ch. 142.
§ 66-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Royal Oak
Ethics Ordinance."
§ 66-2. Purpose. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards of conduct for all
elected and appointed City officials to enhance public confidence in the
government of the City, to avoid unethical conduct by City officials, and to
avoid even the appearance of impropriety by City officials.
§ 66-3. Findings. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
The City Commission finds that the citizens of Royal Oak are entitled to
have a fair, ethical and accountable local government that has the public's
full confidence. Furthermore, in order for local government to function
effectively, public officials need to comply with both the letter and the spirit
of the laws and policies affecting the operations of government. Public
officials need to be independent, impartial and fair in their judgments and
actions, and to act in the public good, not for private gain. Unless legally
confidential, deliberation by public officials needs to be conducted openly,
in an atmosphere of respect and civility.
§ 66-4. Definitions. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
As used in this chapter, the following statements shall have the following
meanings:
COMMERCIAL GAIN — A public official's use of any City resource,
including but not limited to the City's time, equipment, facilities, supplies,
§ 63-12 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 66-4
63:103
or staff, which results in or is intended to result in private gain to the
official.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Any information that has been obtained
by a public official in the course of his or her actions as a public official that
is not available to the public pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act,
MCLA § 15.231 et seq., as amended, or pursuant to other law, regulation,
policy, or procedure recognized by law, and that the official is not authorized
to disclose.
DECISION — A determination, action, vote, or other disposition upon a
motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, or ordinance by the City
Commission, or a board, commission, or committee appointed by the City
Commission.
DOMESTIC PARTNER — One of two adults who:
HAVE A COMMON RESIDENCE — Both domestic partners share the same
residence. Two people can have a common residence even if one or both
have additional residences, or if both domestic partners do not possess legal
title to the common residence. Domestic partners do not cease to have a
common residence if one leaves the common residence but intends to return
to it.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY —
A. Have a common residence;
Agree to be jointly responsible for each other's basic living expenses
incurred during the domestic partnership;
B.
Are not legally married or are not a member of another domestic
partnership;
C.
Are not related by blood in a way that would prevent them from being
married to each other in the State of Michigan;
D.
E. Are at least 18 years of age;
Have chosen to share one another's lives in an intimate and committed
relationship of mutual caring; and
F.
G. Are capable of consenting to the domestic partnership.
A. A public official's spouse or domestic partner;
A public official's relative by marriage, lineal descent, or adoption who
receives, directly or indirectly, more than 1/2 of his or her support from
the public official, or from whom the public official receives, directly or
indirectly, more than 1/2 of his or her support; or
B.
An individual claimed by a public official or the public official's spouse
as a dependent under the United States Internal Revenue Code.
C.
§ 66-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 66-4
63:104
JOINT RESPONSIBILITY — Each domestic partner agrees to provide for the
other partner's basic living expenses if the partner is unable to provide for
himself or herself.
OWNERSHIP INTEREST — A financial or pecuniary interest that a public
official has in the affairs of:
PRIVATE GAIN — Any benefit which is accepted or received by a public
official, or is reasonably perceived to be accepted by a public official, as
remuneration for the purpose of improperly influencing a public official's
action in a specific manner or for refraining from the performance of an
official action in a specific manner, or as an inducement for the public
official to act in favor of some interest other than the public interest. Unless
this standard is violated, the following types of benefits, monetary payments
or reimbursements, gifts, or awards may be received by a public official:
Any business entity in which the official, a member of his or her
immediate family, or a relative is an officer, director, member, or
employee;
A.
Any business entity in which the public official, a member of his or her
immediate family, or a relative controls, or directly or indirectly owns,
in excess of 5% of the total stock or an interest totaling $50,000 or more
in value; or
B.
Any person or business entity with whom the public official has a
contract.
C.
Payment of salary, compensation, or benefits to the official by the City,
or the payment of salary, compensation, or benefits to the official by an
employer or business other than the City pursuant to a contract where
the payment is unrelated to the official's status with the City;
A.
Authorized reimbursement by the City to the public official for actual
and necessary expenses incurred by the official;
B.
Fees, expenses, or income, including those resulting from outside
employment, which are permitted to be earned by, or reimbursed to,
the public official in accordance with the City Code, policies, rules, and/
or regulations;
C.
Campaign or political contributions which are made and reported by a
public official in accordance with Michigan law;
D.
Admission or registration fees, travel expenses, entertainment, meals,
or refreshments that are furnished to a public official by the sponsor
of an event, appearance, or ceremony which is related to official City
business in connection with such an event, appearance, or ceremony
and to which one or more members of the public are invited, or that are
furnished to a public official in connection with a speaking engagement,
teaching, or the provision of assistance to an organization or another
governmental entity as long as the City does not compensate the official
E.
§ 66-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 66-4
63:105
for admission or registration fees, travel expenses, entertainment,
meals or refreshments for the same activity;
Admission, regardless of value, to a charitable or civic event to which
a public official is invited in his or her official capacity where any
admission required of all persons attending the event is waived or paid
for the public official by a party other than the City or the public official;
F.
An award publicly presented to the public official by an individual or a
nongovernmental entity or organization in recognition of public service,
acts of heroism, or crime solving;
G.
An award, gift, or other token of recognition presented to the public
official by representatives of a governmental body or political
subdivision who are acting in their official capacities;
H.
A gift received from a public official's relative or immediate family
member, provided that the relative or immediate family member is not
acting as a third party's intermediary or an agent in an attempt to
circumvent this chapter;
I.
A registration fee for a seminar or other informational conference that
a public official attends in a capacity other than as a speaker, panelist,
or moderator, where such registration fee that is charged for the public
official's attendance is waived or paid for the official by a party other
than the City or the official;
J.
Expenses or gratuities, including but not limited to admission fees,
lodging, meals, or transportation, that are paid for the public official
and are related to the official's participation at a seminar, conference,
speaking engagement, or presentation in his or her official capacity
as a speaker, panelist, or moderator where such expenses are waived
or paid for by a party other than the City or the official, provided
that, within five business days after the conclusion of the seminar,
conference, speaking engagement, or presentation, the official files
with the City Clerk a statement which contains the following
information for each expense that is paid for or waived or for each
gratuity that is provided:
(1) A description of the expense or the gratuity;
(2) The amount of the expense or the gratuity;
The date that the expense was incurred, or that the gratuity was
received;
(3)
The date that the expense was paid or waived, or that the gratuity
was received; and
(4)
The name and address of the party who paid or waived the expense
or provided the gratuity;
(5)
K.
§ 66-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 66-4
63:106
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — The Mayor, a City Commissioner, or any member of
any City authority, board, commission, or committee that is established
pursuant to state law, City Charter, City Code, or resolution (including
alternate members).
RELATIVE — A person who is related to the public official as spouse or as
any of the following, whether by marriage, blood, or adoption: parent, child,
brother, sister, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, grandparent, grandchild, fatherin-
law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, half-sister,
brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.
Meals or beverages provided to a public official by an individual or a
nongovernmental organization during a meeting related to official City
business;
L.
Anything of value, regardless of the value, presented to or received by
a public official on behalf of the City where the thing of value is offered
to, and accepted by, the City;
M.
A gift to a public official that is either returned to the donor or is
donated to the City or to a charitable organization within 30 days of the
public official's receipt of the gift, provided that the public official does
not claim the donation as a charitable contribution for tax purposes;
N.
Complimentary single copies of trade publications, books, reports,
pamphlets, calendars, periodicals, or other informational materials that
are received by a public official;
O.
Compensation paid to a public official for a published work which did
not involve the use of the City's time, equipment, facilities, supplies,
staff, or other resources where the payment is arranged or paid for by
the publisher of the work;
P.
Compensation paid to a public official for a published work which did
not involve the use of the City's time, equipment, facilities, supplies,
staff, or other resources where the payment of the compensation to the
public official is lawfully authorized by the City Commission;
Q.
Receipt by the public official of anything of value, where the payment,
gift, or other transfer of value is unrelated to, and does not arise from,
the public official's holding or having held a public position, and where
the activity or occasion for which the payment, gift or other transfer
of value given does not involve the use of the City's time, equipment,
facilities, supplies, staff, or other resources in any manner or degree
that is not available to the general public;
R.
Hospitality that is extended to a public official by an individual, or by an
organization, for a purpose unrelated to City business, including a gift
of food, beverage, or lodging; and
S.
T. Receipt of a devise, bequest, or inheritance by a public official.
§ 66-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 66-5
63:107
§ 66-5. Standards of conduct. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
A. Conflicts of interest.
(1) A public official shall not intentionally take or refrain from taking
any action, or induce or attempt to induce any other public official
to take or refrain from taking any official action on any matter
before the City which would result in a financial benefit not shared
with a substantial segment of the public for any of the following:
(a) The public official;
(b) A member of the public official's immediate family;
(c) A relative of the public official;
(d) The public official's employer;
(e) Any business in which the public official, a member of the
official's immediate family, or a relative of the public official
has a financial interest; or
(f) Any business with which the public official, a member of the
public official's immediate family, or a relative of the public
official is negotiating or seeking employment or any other
business or professional relationship.
(2) A public official who is aware or reasonably should be aware that
he or she has a conflict of interest shall disclose the conflict on the
public record, abstain from voting on the matter, and refrain from
making statements which may influence the vote on the matter.
B. Disclosure. Within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, the
members of the City Commission, the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the Downtown Development Authority, the Historic
District Commission, the Historic District Study Committee, and the
Rehabilitation Board of Appeals shall complete and file a disclosure
form with the City Manager identifying any interest in real property
located within the City and any ownership interest that the official may
have. In the future, members of the same bodies shall file a disclosure
form within 30 days of appointment and within 30 days after a property
interest or ownership interest subsequently arises.
C. Impartiality. A public official shall treat all members of the public with
courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality.
D. Improper use of position. A public official shall not, either publicly or
privately, use or attempt to use his or her position to secure, request, or
grant any privilege, exemption, advantage, or preferential treatment
for himself or herself, or any other person. A public official shall not act
as an agent, attorney, or representative for another person or entity in
any matter that is pending before the City.
§ 66-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 66-5
63:108
§ 66-6. Retaliation prohibited.
E. Incompatible employment. A public official shall not engage in or
accept employment, or render services, for a public or private interest
where such employment or service is incompatible or in conflict with
the proper discharge or performance of the official's duties and
responsibilities, or where such employment or service can be
reasonably expected to impair the official's independence of judgment
or action in the discharge of his or her official duties and
responsibilities.
F. Nepotism. A public official shall not cause the employment or any
favorable employment action as to any member of the official's
immediate family or relative, nor participate in any employment
decision regarding a member of his or her immediate family or relative.
This section shall not prohibit a public official from approving a budget
that includes compensation for an immediate family member or
relative.
G. Personal interests. A public official shall not act in an official capacity
on any matter in which he or she has a private financial interest that is
clearly separate from that of the general public.
H. Political activity. A public official shall not use any City time, equipment,
facilities, supplies, or staff for his or her own political benefit, or for the
political benefit of any other person seeking elective office, other than
the use of property or facilities made available to the general public on
an equal basis for due consideration.
I. Public information.
(1) A public official shall not knowingly use confidential information for
actual or anticipated personal gain, nor for the actual or
anticipated personal gain of any other person.
(2) A public official shall not knowingly disclose to any unauthorized
person confidential information that is acquired in the course of his
or her position with the City, including but not limited to
information provided, obtained, or discussed in closed session.
J. Public property and personnel. Except as provided by law, a public
official shall not, directly or indirectly, use, attempt to use, or permit
another to use any City time, equipment, facilities, supplies, or staff for
personal gain or commercial gain.
K. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a public official
from appearing on his or her own personal or business behalf in any
matter that he or she may have pending before the City.
A. The City shall not discipline, discharge, threaten, or otherwise
discriminate against an employee in regards to the terms and
conditions of his or her employment because the employee, or a person
§ 66-5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 66-6
63:109
§ 66-7. Validity of decisions; recovery of value.
§ 66-8. Collective bargaining agreements.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to diminish or impair the rights
of any employee under any provision of a collective bargaining agreement
in effect on the effective date of this chapter, nor the City's obligation to
comply with any collective bargaining agreement.
§ 66-9. Notification.
§ 66-10. Compliance with standards of conduct. [Added 4-1-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-06]32
A public official shall not violate, or make an effort to violate, the standards
of conduct contained in § 66-5.
§ 66-11. Investigation of complaints; hearing. [Amended 4-1-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-06]
acting on behalf of the employee, has reported, is believed to have
reported, intends to report, or is believed to intend to report, either
verbally or in writing, a violation or suspected violation of this chapter,
unless the employee knows or reasonably should know that the report
is false.
B. The City shall not discipline, discharge, threaten, or otherwise
discriminate against an employee in regards to the terms and
conditions of his or her employment because the employee is requested
by the City to participate in an investigation or hearing regarding an
alleged violation of this chapter.
A. A violation of the chapter shall not be a basis to challenge the validity of
a decision of the City Commission.
B. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the standards
set forth in this chapter may be recovered by and on behalf of the City
of Royal Oak.
A. The City Clerk shall deliver, by mail or otherwise, a copy of this chapter
to newly elected and appointed public officials prior to the time that
those officials take office.
B. Any time that this chapter is amended, the City Clerk shall deliver, by
mail or otherwise, a copy of the amended chapter to all current public
officials prior to the effective date of the amendment.
A. Complaints against a member of the City Commission. Upon acquiring
reasonable suspicion of a violation of § 66-5 by a member of the City
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 66-10 and
66-11 as §§ 66-11 and 66-12, respectively.
§ 66-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 66-11
63:110
§ 66-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
A member of the City Commission violating this chapter is subject to
censure by the unanimous vote of the remaining members of the City
Commission. Any other public official violating this chapter is subject to
censure by the unanimous vote of the City Commission. The penalties
imposed under this chapter are not exclusive remedies, and any and all
penalties or forfeitures provided for by law may also be enforced.
Chapter 70
FIRE DEPARTMENT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Supervision of Fire Department — See Ch. 3,
Sec. 27.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 340.
Commission, the Mayor or any other two members of the Commission
shall refer the complaint to the City Attorney, who shall refer the
complaint to outside counsel for investigation. When that investigation
is complete, outside counsel shall provide the remaining members of
the Commission with the results of his or her investigation. By a
majority vote of the remaining members that are present, the City
Commission may call for a hearing at a regular or special meeting of
the City Commission to determine whether or not a violation did in fact
occur and, if so, what penalties shall be imposed for the violation.
B. Complaints against a member of another City authority, board,
commission, or committee. Upon acquiring reasonable suspicion of a
violation of § 66-5 by a member of another City authority, board,
commission, or committee, the Mayor or any other two members of the
Commission shall refer the complaint to the City Attorney, who shall
investigate the complaint. When that investigation is complete, the City
Attorney shall provide the remaining members of the Commission with
the results of his or her investigation. By a majority vote of the
remaining members that are present, the City Commission may call for
a hearing at a regular or special meeting of the City Commission to
determine whether or not a violation did in fact occur and, if so, what
penalties shall be imposed for the violation.
§ 66-11 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 66-12
70:111

ARTICLE I
Establishment; Organization
[Adopted 1-27-1919 by Ord. No. 85; amended in its entirety
8-9-1926 by Ord. No. 154]
§ 70-1. Establishment of Fire Department.
There shall be a Fire Department in the City of Royal Oak, under supervision
of the City Manager, consisting of a Chief and such number of firemen as
may be deemed necessary by the City Manager.
§ 70-2. Appointments.
The firemen shall be appointed by the City Manager, and the City Manager
may appoint from among their number a Captain and a Lieutenant.
§ 70-3. Duties; chain of command.
The Captain and Lieutenant of the Fire Department shall assist the Chief of
the Fire Department and the City Manager in establishing and maintaining
discipline and efficiency, and the Captain shall, in case of the absence or
disability of the Chief, succeed to his authority and be charged with his
duties. In the absence of the Chief and the Captain, the Lieutenant shall
have charge of and be responsible for the care, maintenance, efficiency and
discipline of the Fire Department. All officers of the Fire Department shall
be responsible for all matters pertaining to said Fire Department to the City
Manager.
§ 70-4. Responsibilities of City Manager.
The City Manager shall have the entire control and supervision of the Fire
Department and the care and custody of all fire apparatus and the property
of the City belonging to the Fire Department. He shall have the power and
authority to enforce such rules in the Department and rules relating thereto
as shall be established and approved by the City Commission.
§ 70-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 70-4
70:113

ARTICLE II
Workweek
[Adopted 11-4-1958 by Ord. No. 58-23; amended in its entirety
11-3-1959 by Ord. No. 59-8]
§ 70-5. Hours.
Hereafter, no fire fighter in the employ of the Royal Oak Fire Department
who is engaged in fire fighting or subject to the hazards thereof shall be
required to be on duty in such employment more than 24 consecutive hours
out of any forty-eight-hour period; provided that all such firemen shall be
entitled to an additional 24 consecutive hours off duty in every six-day
period, thus requiring such fire fighter to work not more than an average of
56 hours per week.
§ 70-5 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 70-5
70:115
Chapter 76
FUNDS
§ 70-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 70-5
76:116
ARTICLE I
Public Improvement Reserve Fund
[Adopted 1-2-1945 by Ord. No. 453]
§ 76-1. Fund created.
Pursuant to authority vested in the City of Royal Oak by Act No. 177 of the
P.A. of 1943,33 there is hereby established and created in the City of Royal
Oak a fund to be hereafter known as the "Public Improvement Reserve
Fund."
§ 76-2. Uses of fund.
The Public Improvement Reserve Fund shall be used for acquiring,
extending, altering or repairing any public improvement which the City of
Royal Oak by charter or by general law is authorized to acquire, extend,
alter, repair or enlarge; provided only that said purposes shall be of general
benefit to the people of the City at large.
§ 76-3. Moneys allocated to fund.
The Director of Finance of the City of Royal Oak is hereby authorized and
directed, immediately upon the adoption and taking effect of this article, to
allocate and credit the Public Improvement Reserve Fund with moneys and
securities now on hand or hereafter acquired, which are derived from the
following sources:
§ 76-4. Appropriations of money permissible.
The City Commission may annually, by and in accordance with the
budgetary procedure set forth in the Charter, include in the annual budget
an item of money to be raised by taxation in the ensuing year, which said
money, when collected, shall be credited to the Public Improvement Reserve
Fund and may during any fiscal year direct that any miscellaneous revenues
derived from sources other than taxation, and not otherwise encumbered,
be credited to said fund.
A. The cash securities and assessments receivable belonging to the
general fund which are now carried in an account known as the "Public
Improvement Fund," and which amounted as of May 31, 1944, to
$24,280.44, subject, however, as of that date, to certain liabilities
amounting to $4,936.17; provided any liabilities against the last
mentioned fund shall remain liabilities against the new fund hereby
created.
B. Any other moneys or securities belonging to the City of Royal Oak and
not otherwise pledged or encumbered, which the City Commission, by
resolution, may hereafter order paid into said fund.
33.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.261 et seq.
§ 76-1 FUNDS § 76-5
76:117
§ 76-5. Limitations on use of funds.
Any and all moneys or credits hereinafter assigned, transferred or
appropriated to the Public Improvement Reserve Fund shall be held in said
fund as a reserve for the use by the City for general public improvements
hereinafter specifically authorized by the City Commission. Moneys so
accumulated in said fund shall not be transferred, encumbered or otherwise
disposed of except for the construction of public improvements as provided
in § 76-2 of this article.
§ 76-6. Investments.
The moneys accumulated in said fund shall from time to time and upon
authority of the City Commission be invested by the Director of Finance in
such securities as are authorized by the Charter and general laws of the
State of Michigan as lawful for the investment of public funds.
§ 76-7. Procedure for expenditure of money from fund.
Whenever the Commission of the City of Royal Oak determines the need and
advisability to acquire, construct, extend, alter, repair or enlarge any public
improvement, the cost of which is to be defrayed wholly or in part from
the Public Improvement Reserve Fund, the provisions of the Charter of the
City of Royal Oak in regard to the preparation of maps, plans, specifications
and estimates of cost of the proposed improvements shall be fully complied
with and the Commission shall adopt a specific resolution determining
to acquire, construct, extend, alter, repair or enlarge such improvement.
Separate proceedings shall be taken for each separate type or kind of
public improvement to be authorized. The Commission shall provide in such
resolution for payment of all or such part as it may determine of the costs of
such improvement from the Public Improvement Reserve Fund. In the case
of any public improvement to be paid for in part by special assessments
against the property benefited, payment may be made from the Public
Improvement Reserve Fund for that portion of the cost of such improvement
which by Charter or general law in force in the City of Royal Oak is required
to be paid by the City at large, or such part as shall have been determined to
be of general benefit to the City at large, but the portion of the cost thereof
deemed to be of private, special, or local benefit shall be assessed against
the property benefited.
§ 76-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 76-7
76:118
Chapter 82
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appointments to advisory boards,
commissions and committees — See Ch. 12.
Cemetery — See Ch. 229.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 76-7 FUNDS § 76-7
76:119

ARTICLE I
Historic District Study Committee
[Adopted 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 94-21]
§ 82-1. Short title.
This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Historic District Study
Committee Ordinance."
§ 82-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUREAU — The Bureau of History of the Michigan Department of State.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources
that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION — The identification, evaluation, establishment,
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — A publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the City of Royal Oak,
the State of Michigan, or the United States.
RESOURCE — One or more publicly or privately owned historic or
nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces
located within an historic district.
§ 82-3. Statement of purpose.
This is an ordinance to establish an Historic District Study Committee and
provide for the establishment of historic districts in carrying out the public
purpose of historic preservation in the City of Royal Oak, consistent with
the State of Michigan Local Historic Districts Act, MCLA § 399.201 et seq.,
as amended.
§ 82-4. Establishment of Committee; composition.
The City of Royal Oak Historic District Study Committee is hereby
established. The Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by
the City Commission to serve without compensation. The Committee shall
contain a majority of persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest in
a knowledge of historic preservation and shall contain representation from
one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations.
§ 82-1 FUNDS § 82-5
76:121
§ 82-5. Terms.
A member shall be appointed for a term of three years, ending the last
day of December, of the third year after appointment, provided that the
membership of the first Committee shall be staggered with three members
appointed for one year, two members appointed for two years, and two
members appointed for three years.
§ 82-6. Organization.
On an annual basis the Committee shall at its first meeting elect a
Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary, and such other officers as may be
necessary for the proper conduct of its affairs from its membership. The
Committee shall adopt its own rules of procedure in compliance with all
the rules and regulations promulgated by the City Commission that are
applicable to boards and commissions.
§ 82-7. Meetings.
The Historic District Study Committee shall hold at least one public meeting
in each quarter on such date, time and place as may be established by
resolution of the Committee. Special meetings may be called by the
Secretary on the written request of the Chairman or any two members of
the Committee, with at least two days' notice. Meetings of the Committee
shall be held in compliance with the State Open Meetings Act,34 and a
meeting agenda shall be part of the notice provided.
§ 82-8. Records.
The Historic District Study Committee shall keep a written or printed record
of its proceedings which shall be a public record and property of the
City. Writings prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by
the Committee in the performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with the State of Michigan Freedom of
Information Act.35
§ 82-9. General powers and duties. [Amended 6-17-1996 by Ord. No.
96-14]
The Historic District Study Committee shall do the following:
A. Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed
historic district following procedures established or approved by the
Bureau.
B. Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the
historic resources located within that district.
34.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 82-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-9
76:122
§ 82-10. Public hearing.
Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary
report, the Committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Act
No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being §§ 15.261 to 15.275
of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Public notice of the time, date and place
of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the
Public Acts of 1976, as amended. Written notice shall be mailed by first
class mail not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners
of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls
of the local unit.
§ 82-11. Recommendation; City Commission review.
After the date of the public hearing, the Committee and the City
Commission shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized
by the City Commission, to take the following actions:
C. Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within
a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of
that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the
Committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation
issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of
resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36
CFR Part 60, and criteria established or approved by the Bureau, if any.
D. Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report that
addresses at a minimum all of the following:
(1) The charge of the Committee.
(2) The composition of the Committee membership.
(3) The historic district or districts studied.
(4) The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on
maps.
(5) The history of each proposed historic district.
(6) The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient
number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of
resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation
criteria.
E. Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the City of Royal Oak Plan Commission, to the
Bureau, to the Michigan Historical Commission, and to the State
Historic Preservation Review Board.
F. Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant
to § 82-8.
§ 82-9 FUNDS § 82-11
76:123
§ 82-12. Grants and gifts; benefit programs.
The Historic District Study Committee may, with the consent of the City
Commission, accept and administer state and federal grants for purposes of
historic preservation, participate in state and federal programs that benefit
historic preservation, and accept public and private gifts for purposes of
historic preservation.
A. The Committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its
recommendations and recommendations, if any, of the Planning
Department to the City Commission. If the recommendation is to
establish an historic district or districts, the final report shall include a
draft of a proposed ordinance or ordinances.
B. After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of an
historic district or districts, the City Commission, at its discretion, may
introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If the
Commission passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one or
more historic districts, a copy of that ordinance or those ordinances,
including a legal description of the property or properties located
within the historic district or districts, shall be filed with the register of
deeds. The Commission shall not pass an ordinance establishing a
contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the
property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the
tax rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment of the
historic district pursuant to a written petition.
§ 82-11 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-12
76:124
ARTICLE II
Historic District Commission
[Adopted 9-11-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13]
§ 82-13. Short title.
This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Historic District
Commission Ordinance."
§ 82-14. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is as follows:
§ 82-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not
change its basic size or shape.
BUREAU — The Bureau of History of the Michigan Department of State.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a
resource.
COMMISSION — The City of Royal Oak Historic District Commission.
COMMITTEE — The City of Royal Oak Historic District Study Committee.
DEMOLITION — The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a
resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — Neglect in maintaining, repairing, or
securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the
resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.
DENIAL — The written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.
A. To safeguard the heritage of the City of Royal Oak by preserving
historic districts in the City that reflect elements of the City's history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture;
B. To stabilize and improve property values in each district and the
surrounding areas;
C. To foster civic beauty;
D. To strengthen the local economy; and
E. To promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Royal Oak and the State of
Michigan.
§ 82-13 FUNDS § 82-15
76:125
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or a group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources
that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION — The identification, evaluation, establishment,
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — A publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the City of Royal Oak.
NOTICE TO PROCEED — The written permission from the Historic District
Commission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that
adversely affects a resource.
OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal
or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer
between other resources.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to
time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the
external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the
usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not
constitute work for purposes of this article.
PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or group of areas not
necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries
and that is under review by the Historic District Study Committee for the
purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established
as an historic district or added to an established historic district.
REPAIR — To restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound
condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of
a resource constitutes work for purposes of this article.
RESOURCE — One or more publicly or privately owned historic or
nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces
located within an historic district.
WORK — Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or
demolition.
§ 82-16. Creation of Commission.
In order to execute the purposes of this article, there is hereby created
a Commission to be called the "City of Royal Oak Historic District
Commission."
§ 82-17. Membership; appointments; terms.
A. The Historic District Commission shall consist of seven members
serving without compensation whose residence is located in the City of
§ 82-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-17
76:126
§ 82-18. Powers and duties.
Royal Oak. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated
interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. At least two members
shall be appointed from a list of citizens submitted by one or more duly
organized local historic preservation organizations. The Commission
shall include as a member, if available, a graduate of an accredited
school of architecture who has two years of architectural experience
or who is an architect registered in the State of Michigan. The
Commission shall include at least one member of the Historical
Commission or of the Historic District Study Committee.
B. A member shall be appointed by the City Commission for a term of
three years, ending the last day of December of the third year after
appointment, provided that the membership of the initial Commission
shall be staggered with three members appointed for one year, two
members appointed for two years, and two members appointed for
three years. Initial members shall be appointed within six months after
this article becomes effective. Members of the Commission shall be
eligible for reappointment.
C. A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled within 60 calendar days by
an appointment of the City Commission for the unexpired term of the
original appointment.
D. An appointment to the Commission may be terminated pursuant to
Chapter 12, Appointments to Advisory Boards, Commissions and
Committees, § 12-14.
A. It shall be the duty of the Commission to review all plans for the
construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or
demolition of resources in an historic district. The Commission must
approve a plan before a permit for that activity may be issued.
B. In reviewing these plans, the Commission shall follow the US Secretary
of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for
rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR Part 67, or their
equivalent as established or approved by the Bureau of History of the
Michigan Department of State. The Commission shall also consider all
of the following:
(1) The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource
and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area.
(2) The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the
rest of the resource and to the surrounding area.
(3) The general compatibility of design, arrangement, texture and
materials proposed to be used.
(4) Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission finds
relevant.
§ 82-17 FUNDS § 82-18
76:127
§ 82-19. Organization; meetings; records; annual report.
C. The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a
resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements
unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the
resource. The Commission shall not disapprove any plan for any reason
other than those set forth in Subsection B of this section.
D. The Commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to the Chief
Building Inspector or his designee. The Commission shall provide
specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness
under this subsection. On a quarterly basis, the Commission shall
review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued by the Chief
Building Inspector or his designee to determine whether or not the
delegated responsibilities should be continued.
E. If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a
resource the Commission considers valuable to the City of Royal Oak,
and the Commission determines that the alteration or loss of that
resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the City, the
Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource
an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource.
F. If all efforts by the Commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is
determined by the City Commission that public ownership is most
suitable, the City Commission, if considered to be in the public interest,
may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts,
grants, or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition
shall be based upon the recommendation of the Commission. Upon
recommendation of the Commission, the City Commission may sell
resources acquired under this section with protective easements
included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate.
G. The Commission may, in the name of the City of Royal Oak, accept and
administer state or federal grants for historic preservation purposes,
may participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic
preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for historic
preservation purposes. There may be appropriated in the annual
budget of the City of Royal Oak a sum of money for use by the
Commission in accordance with the City Charter and state law. A
separate accounting of these funds shall be made and provided at least
quarterly to the City Commission. All expenditures of funds shall be
made in compliance with the City Charter and state law.
H. The Commission may make recommendations to other appointed City
boards and committees on matters concerning the character of historic
districts.
A. The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer at its first meeting each year. The
§ 82-18 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-19
76:128
§ 82-20. Procedure for review of plans.
Chairman shall preside over the meeting and have the right to vote. The
Vice Chairman shall perform the duties of the Chairman in his absence.
The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of the proceedings of the
Commission. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of Commission funds
and shall account for any expenditure of Commission funds.
B. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly, and at the call of the
Chairman, Secretary, or two members of the Commission. The
Commission shall conform to all rules and regulations promulgated by
the City Commission that are applicable to boards and commissions.
C. At least four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of its business. The Commission shall adopt rules for the
transaction of its business which shall provide for the time and place of
holding meetings.
D. The Commission shall adopt and may amend design review standards
and guidelines for resource treatment to carry out its duties under
applicable law.
E. The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with the State
Open Meetings Act.36 Public notice of the time, date, and place of the
meeting shall be given. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and
shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or
considered by the Commission.
F. The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and
actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by the Commission in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with the State
Freedom of Information Act.37
G. The concurring affirmative vote of four members shall constitute
approval of plans before the Commission for review or for the adoption
of any resolution or other action of the Commission.
H. The Commission shall submit an annual report of its activities to the
City Commission each April.
A. Application for a permit to construct, add to, alter, repair, move,
excavate, or demolish a resource in an historic district shall be made to
the Chief Building Inspector. The application shall state whether or not
the property is in an historic district. Plans shall be submitted showing
the resource in question and also showing its relation to adjacent
resources.
36.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 82-19 FUNDS § 82-20
76:129
B. Upon the filing of such application, the Chief Building Inspector shall
immediately refer the application with all supporting materials that
make the application complete to the Commission.
C. The Commission shall meet within 15 days after notification by the
Chief Building Inspector of the receipt of a complete application, unless
otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Commission.
At that meeting the Commission shall review the plans according to the
duties and powers specified herein. In reviewing the plans, the
Commission may confer with the applicant, the Chief Inspector, the
Planning Director, and any other public official or employee who may
assist the Commission in its activities.
D. The Commission shall approve or disapprove such plans. If the plans
are approved, the Commission shall issue a certificate of
appropriateness which is to be signed by the Chairman or Vice
Chairman, attached to the application for a building permit, and
immediately forwarded to the Chief Building Inspector. The Chairman
or Vice Chairman shall also stamp all plans submitted to the
Commission signifying approval or disapproval.
E. If the Commission disapproves of such plans, it shall state its reasons
for doing so and shall transmit a record of such action and reasons
therefor in writing to the Chief Building Inspector and to the applicant.
The Commission shall advise as to alternatives that may be appropriate
if it disapproves of the plans submitted. The applicant may make
modifications to his plans and shall have the right to resubmit his
application at any time after so doing. If the requested permit is denied
by the Commission, the Chief Building Inspector shall disapprove the
application. Notice of denial shall also include notice to the applicant of
his rights of appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board and
to the Circuit Court.
F. The failure of the Commission to approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove of a plan within 60 days from the date a complete
application is filed, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon in writing by
the applicant and the Commission, shall be deemed to constitute
approval of the application, and the Chief Building Inspector shall
proceed to process the application without regard to a certificate of
approval from the Commission.
G. Work within an historic district shall be permitted through the issuance
of a notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following
conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a
finding of the Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or
correct any of the following conditions:
(1) The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to
the structure's occupants.
(2) The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that
will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant
§ 82-20 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-20
76:130
§ 82-21. Appeals.
§ 82-22. Demolition by neglect.
Upon a finding by the Commission that an historic resource within an
historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and
approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may do
either of the following:
proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning
approvals, financing, and environmental clearances.
(3) Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the
owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events
beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible
alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include
offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the
resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been
attempted and exhausted by the owner.
(4) Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the
community.
H. After the certificate of approval, notice to proceed, and permit are
issued, the Chief Building Inspector or his designee shall inspect the
construction or alteration in accordance with the procedures
established by the Building Inspection and Code Enforcement
Departments of the City of Royal Oak.
I. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until
the Commission has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of
appropriateness or a notice to proceed or has failed to act within 60
days of the date of the filing of a completed application as provided in
this article.
J. If the Commission grants a permit for demolition, it shall notify the
Royal Oak Historical Commission so that body may consult with the
owner about obtaining anything of historical significance from the
property.
A. Any permit applicant aggrieved by a decision of a Commission
concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the State
Historic Preservation Review Board of the Michigan Historical
Commission within the Department of State. The appeal shall be filed
within 60 days after the decision is furnished to the applicant.
B. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic
Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the Oakland
County Circuit Court.
A. Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing
to demolition by neglect.
§ 82-20 FUNDS § 82-22
76:131
§ 82-23. Failure to obtain a permit.
§ 82-24. Proposed historic districts. [Added 6-17-1996 by Ord. No.
96-15]
Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic
architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a
proposed historic district, the City Commission may, at its discretion, adopt
a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed
historic district be referred to the Historic District Commission for review
as provided in this article. The Historic District Commission shall review
permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed
historic district was an established historic district. The review may
continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until
such time as the City Commission approves or rejects the establishment of
the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first.
B. If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the
Commission or its agents may, upon obtaining an order from the Circuit
Court, enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to
prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to
the owner and may be levied by the City of Royal Oak as a special
assessment against the property.
A. There shall be no construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving,
excavation or demolition affecting the exterior appearance of a
resource in an historic district without first obtaining a permit as
provided in § 82-20.
B. When work has been done upon a resource without a permit and the
Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to restore the
resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate
work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of
appropriateness.
C. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification
requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek an
order from the Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the
resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies
for a certificate of appropriateness.
D. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the
Circuit Court, the Commission or its agents may, pursuant to a Circuit
Court order, enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore
the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it
qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the
Court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner and
may be levied by the City of Royal Oak as a special assessment against
the property.
§ 82-22 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-25
76:132
§ 82-25. Emergency moratorium. [Added 6-17-1996 by Ord. No.
96-15]
If the City Commission determines that pending work will cause irreparable
harm to resources located within an established historic district or a
proposed historic district, the City Commission may by resolution declare
an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed
six months. The City Commission may extend the emergency moratorium
for an additional period not to exceed six months upon finding that the
threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit
application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may
be summarily denied.
§ 82-26. Exceptions. [Amended 6-17-1996 by Ord. No. 96-15]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance
or repair of a resource within an historic district, or to prevent work on any
resource under a permit issued by the Chief Building Inspector or other duly
delegated authority before this article is enacted.
§ 82-27. Violations and penalties; restoration costs. [Amended
6-17-1996 by Ord. No. 96-15]
A. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government that violates this article is
responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.
B. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government that violates this article may be
ordered by the Court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource
unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated
or demolished.
§ 82-25 FUNDS § 82-27
76:133

ARTICLE III
Historical Commission
[Adopted 10-30-1995 by Ord. No. 95-14]
§ 82-28. Short title.
This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Historical Commission
Ordinance."
§ 82-29. Creation of Commission.
In order to advance the historical interests of the City of Royal Oak, there is
hereby created the Royal Oak Historical Commission.
§ 82-30. Membership of Commission. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-14]
The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the City
Commission who are residents of the City of Royal Oak and who shall serve
without compensation.
§ 82-31. Terms of appointment.
A member shall be appointed by the City Commission for a term of three
years, ending the last day of December of the third year after appointment,
provided that the membership of the initial Commission shall be staggered
with three members appointed for one year, two members appointed for
two years, and two members appointed for three years. Members of the
Commission shall be eligible for reappointment. Appointments may be
terminated pursuant to applicable ordinance provisions, and vacancies shall
be filled by appointment of the City Commission for the unexpired term of
the original appointment.
§ 82-32. Organization; meetings; records; annual report.
A. The Commission shall at its first meeting in January each year elect
from its membership a Chairman, Vice Chairman, Treasurer, Secretary,
and such other officers as may be necessary for the proper conduct of
its affairs.
B. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly and shall conform to all
applicable rules and regulations governing the conduct of meetings
promulgated by the City Commission. Special meetings may be called
by the Secretary on the written request of the Chairman or any two
members of the Committee, with at least two days' notice.
C. The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.38 Public
38.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
§ 82-28 FUNDS § 82-32
76:135
§ 82-33. Powers and duties.
notice of the time, date and location of the meeting shall be given, and
a meeting agenda shall be part of the notice.
D. At least four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of its business. The concurring vote of a majority of the
members present shall be necessary for the approval of motions.
E. The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and
actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by the Commission in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Michigan
Freedom of Information Act.39
F. The Commission shall on an annual basis make a report of its general
activities for the preceding year at a regular meeting of the City
Commission.
A. The Commission shall be a policy-making body advisory to the City
Commission on any activity or project which advances the historical
interests of the City.
B. It shall be the duty of the Commission to establish policy with regard to
the collection, preservation, display and accessibility of historical
material, including books, pamphlets, maps, charts, manuscripts,
papers, records, archives, paintings, statuary, and other objects and
materials related to the history of the City of Royal Oak and the
surrounding area; procurement and preservation of narratives of the
early residents of such area, the collection of materials relative to the
history, literature, progress or decay of Indian tribes; collection,
preparation and display of objects indicative of the customs, dress, and
resources of the early residents of this area, and to make available from
time to time source materials and historical studies relative to and
illustrative of the history of the area.
C. The Commission shall set policies for the use of the Orson Starr House,
3123 North Main Street.
D. The Commission may, with the approval of the City Manager, collect
reproductions of any records, files, documents, books or papers in City
offices that are of historic value.
E. The Commission may accept historical materials on behalf of the City to
carry out the historical purposes provided in this article.
F. The Commission may recommend to the City Commission purchases of
materials illustrative of the history of the City and the surrounding
area.
39.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 82-32 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-33
76:136
G. The Commission may purchase materials necessary to record history,
including but not limited to film, magnetic tape and computer discs.
H. Items collected shall be the property of the City of Royal Oak and shall
be stored at the Orson Starr House, 3123 North Main Street, or at any
other City-owned building.
I. Not later than March 1 of each year, the Commission shall furnish the
City Manager with recommendations regarding activities to advance
the historical interests of the City in the ensuing fiscal year, which the
Manager shall review and consider in preparation of the budget to be
submitted to the City Commission.
J. The Commission may undertake such other studies or projects of an
historical nature as may be requested by the City Commission.
§ 82-33 FUNDS § 82-33
76:137

ARTICLE IV
Royal Oak Savings Bank Block Historic District
[Adopted 12-4-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-25]
§ 82-34. Title.
This article shall also be known as the "Royal Oak Savings Bank Block
Historic District Ordinance."
§ 82-35. Purpose; description of properties.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic sites of the
former Royal Oak Savings Bank Building at the southwest corner of Fourth
and Main Streets and Haberman's Fabric Store on Fourth Street (also
known as the Miller Building), in the City of Royal Oak, Michigan, also
known more specifically as:
§ 82-36. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the properties described
above are eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by Article I, Historic District Study Committee, of this chapter,
as amended.
§ 82-37. Designation of historic properties.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the properties described
in § 82-35A and B as historic districts pursuant to Article I, Historic District
Study Committee, of this chapter, as amended.
§ 82-38. Certificate of appropriateness required.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-35A and B are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and Article II, Historic District
Commission, of this chapter.
A. Lot 1, inclusive of Block 22, of Assessor's Plat No. 20 of Sherman
Stevens plat, according to the plat thereof as recorded in liber 35,
pages 33 and 33a of plats Oakland County, Michigan records; and
B. Lot 8, inclusive of Block 22, of Assessor's Plat No. 20 of Sherman
Stevens plat, according to the plat thereof as recorded in liber 35,
pages 33 and 33a of plats Oakland County, Michigan records.
§ 82-34 FUNDS § 82-38
76:139

ARTICLE V
Hilzinger Block Building Historic District
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-16]
§ 82-39. Title.
This article may also be referred to as the "Hilzinger Block Building Historic
District Ordinance."
§ 82-40. Purpose; description of properties.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the historic site known as the "Hilzinger Block Building
Historic District," Royal Oak, Michigan, also known more specifically as:
§ 82-41. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the property described
above is eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by Article I, Historic District Study Committee, of this chapter,
as amended.
§ 82-42. Designation of historic properties.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the property described
in § 82-40 as an historic district pursuant to Article I, Historic District Study
Committee, of this chapter, as amended.
§ 82-43. Certificate of appropriateness required.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-40 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and Article II, Historic District
Commission, of this chapter.
A. Assessor's Plat No. 20 South 0.30 feet of East 49.5 feet of Lot 1 of Lot 4,
excluding the North 2 feet of the East 29 feet of the West 60.5 of S.D.
Lot 4.
B. Assessor's Plat No. 20 Lot 4; Blk. 3 25-21-231-013.
§ 82-39 FUNDS § 82-43
76:141

ARTICLE VI
B&C Grocery Store Historic District
[Adopted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-07]
§ 82-44. Title.
This article shall also be known as the "B & C Grocery Store Historic District
Ordinance."
§ 82-45. Purpose; description of properties.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic sites of the
former B & C Grocery Store building at 417, 419 and 421 South Main
Street and 101 East Fifth Street, in the City of Royal Oak, Michigan, also
known more specifically as: Lot 6 and the south 20 feet of Lot 7, Block 23,
Assessor's Plat No. 20, as recorded in Liber 53, Page(s) 33 and 33A of Plats,
Oakland County Records. (Tax ID: 25-22-108-013).
§ 82-46. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the properties described
above are eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances, § 82-1, et seq., the
Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-47. Designation of historic properties.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the properties described
in § 82-45 as historic districts pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1 et seq., the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-48. Certificate of appropriateness required.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-45 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1 et seq.
§ 82-44 FUNDS § 82-48
76:143

ARTICLE VII
Royal Oak Woman's Club Historic District
[Adopted 1-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1]
§ 82-49. Purpose; description of property.
§ 82-50. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby determines that the property owned
by the Royal Oak Woman's Club at 404 South Pleasant Street is eligible for
local historic designation under the guidelines established by Article I of
this chapter, Historic District Study Committee, as amended.
§ 82-51. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the property owned by
the Royal Oak Woman's Club at 404 South Pleasant Street as an historic
district pursuant to Article I of this chapter, as amended.
§ 82-52. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner of the property at 404 South Pleasant Street is required to apply
for and obtain a certificate of appropriateness before commencing any work
on the historic site. When considering an application, the Historic District
Commission will be guided by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by
the United States Secretary of the Interior.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the historic site at 404 South Pleasant Street.
B. The property consists of Lots Two Hundred Fifty-One (251), Two
Hundred Fifty-Two (252), and Two Hundred Fifty-Three (253) of the
Meadow Park Addition in the City of Royal Oak, with one building, the
Royal Oak Woman's Club. The property is designated with Sidwell
Number: 25-21-210-014 (Section 21, Block Number 210, Parcel
Number 14). The parcel is located in the west half of the northeast
quarter of Section 21, T1N, R11E.
§ 82-49 FUNDS § 82-52
76:145

ARTICLE VIII
McDowall House Historic District
[Adopted 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
§ 82-53. Title.
This article shall also be known as the "McDowall House Historic District
Ordinance."
§ 82-54. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic sites of the
McDowall House, 402 North Troy Street, in the City of Royal Oak, Michigan,
also known more specifically as: T1N, R11E, Section 15, High School add
Lot 24.
§ 82-55. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the properties described
above are eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by Chapter 82, Article I, of the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances.
§ 82-56. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the properties described
in § 82-54 as historic districts pursuant to Chapter 82, Article I of the City
of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances.
§ 82-57. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-54 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and Chapter 82, Article II of the City of
Royal Oak Code of Ordinances.
§ 82-53 FUNDS § 82-57
76:147

ARTICLE IX
Orson Starr House Historic District
[Adopted 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
§ 82-58. Title.
This article shall also be known as the "Orson Starr House Historic District
Ordinance."
§ 82-59. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic sites of the
former Orson Starr House at 3123 North Main Street, in the City of Royal
Oak, Michigan, also known more specifically as T1N, R11E, Section 9 Elmo
Park Subdivision Number 1 Lot 206, also north 38 feet of Lot 207, also part
of vacant Lawrence Avenue beginning at northeast corner of Lot 206, then
west lying 129 feet along north lot line, then north lying 1 foot at right angle
to north lot line, then east lying 129 feet parallel to north lot line, then south
1 foot at right angle to beginning. Tax Item Number: 72-25-09-226-089.
§ 82-60. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the properties described
above are eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence,
the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-61. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the properties described
in § 82-59 as historic districts pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-62. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-59 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-13, and sequence.
§ 82-58 FUNDS § 82-62
76:149

ARTICLE X
George and Anna Hilzinger House Historic District
[Adopted 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
§ 82-63. Title
This article shall also be known as the "George and Anna Hilzinger House
Historic District Ordinance."
§ 82-64. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic sites of the
former George and Anna Hilzinger House at 211 Knowles, in the City of
Royal Oak, Michigan, also known more specifically as: T1N, R11E, Section
22, Assessor’s Plat No. 9, Lot 19, also part of Lots 20 and 29, also Lot II of
Central Park Sub, all described as beginning at point distant S 89-39-00 E
797.28 ft. & S 01-19-00W 35.99 ft. & S 89-21-00 E 406.32 Ft. & S 89-50-00
E 25 ft., thence S 00-30-00 W 250 ft. from NW section corner, thence S
00-32-59 W 55.92 ft., thence N 89-49-31 W 189-79 ft., thence N 01-18-16 E
97.95 ft., thence S 89-43-52 E 7.61 ft., thence S 00-30-00 W 42 ft, thence S
89-49-31 E 25 ft., thence N 00-30-00 E 50 ft. to beginning, excluding Lot 19
4-3-00 from 026. Tax Item No.: 75-25-22-I 26-029.
§ 82-65. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the properties described
above are eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence,
the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-66. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the properties described
in § 82-64 as historic districts pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-67. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property described in § 82-64 are required to
apply for and obtain a certificate of appropriateness before commencing
any work in the historic site. When considering an application, the Historic
District Commission will be guided by the standards for rehabilitation set
forth by the United States Secretary of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and
the City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-13, and sequence.
§ 82-63 FUNDS § 82-67
76:151

ARTICLE XI
Stauch House Historic District
[Adopted 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
§ 82-68. Title.
This article shall also be known as the "Stauch House Historic District
Ordinance."
§ 82-69. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic sites of the
former Stauch House at 4620 Elmhurst Avenue, in the City of Royal Oak,
Michigan, also known more specifically as:
T1N,
R11E,
Sec
5
Norwood
Estates
Sub
N
8.50
ft
of
Lot
118
and
99
ft
of
Lot
119
§ 82-70. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the properties described
above are eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by the City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-1, and
sequence, the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-71. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the properties described
in § 82-69 as historic districts pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-68 FUNDS § 82-72
76:153
§ 82-72. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-69 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence.
§ 82-72 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-72
76:154
ARTICLE XII
Hermann's Bakery Historic District
[Adopted 10-17-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
§ 82-73. Title.
This article shall also be known as the "Hermann's Bakery Historic District
Ordinance."
§ 82-74. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic site of Hermann's
Bakery, at 317 South Main Street, in the City of Royal Oak, Michigan, also
known more specifically as: T1N, R11E, Sec. 22, Assessor's Plat. No. 20, Lot
9, Block 14.
§ 82-75. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the property described
above is eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances, § 82-1, and sequence,
the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-76. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the property described
in § 82-74 as an historic district pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-77. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-74 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence.
§ 82-73 FUNDS § 82-77
76:155

ARTICLE XIII
Baldwin Theatre Historic District
[Adopted 6-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-10]
§ 82-78. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Baldwin Theatre
Historic District Ordinance."
§ 82-79. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the building(s) and property at the historic site of the
Baldwin Theatre, at 415 South Lafayette, in the City of Royal Oak, Michigan,
also known more specifically as:
T1N, R11E, SEC 21 ASSESSOR'S PLAT NO 20 LOT 5 EXC E 111 FT,
ALSO EXC BEG AT SE LOT COR (ALSO BEING SW COR OF LOT 6),
TH N 88-56-13 W 4.82 FT, TH N 01-20-13 E 21.89 FT, TH S 88-39-47
E 4.71 FT, TH SLY ALG E LINE OF SD LOT 5 TO BEG, ALSO W 38 FT
OF LOT 7 BLK 20 1-14-05 FR 008
Tax Item No. 63-72-25-21-236-016
§ 82-80. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the property described
above is eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by the City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-1, and
sequence, the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-81. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the property described
in § 82-79 as an historic district pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-82. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-79 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-13, and sequence.
§ 82-78 FUNDS § 82-82
76:157

ARTICLE XIV
Knowles House Historic District
[Adopted 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
§ 82-83. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Knowles House Historic
District Ordinance."
§ 82-84. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic site of the
Knowles House, 524 East Lincoln Avenue, in the City of Royal Oak,
Michigan, also known more specifically as:
T1N,
R11E,
SEC
22
ASSESSOR'S
PLAT
NO
22
LOT
22
§ 82-85. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the property described
above is eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence,
the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-86. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the property described
in § 82-84 as an historic district pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-87. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-84 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-13, and sequence.
§ 82-83 FUNDS § 82-87
76:159

ARTICLE XV
Fleming Goodrich House Historic District
[Adopted 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-09]
§ 82-88. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fleming Goodrich
House Historic District Ordinance."
§ 82-89. Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and property at the historic site of the
Fleming Goodrich House, 319 Crane Avenue, in the City of Royal Oak,
Michigan, also known more specifically as:
T1N,
R11E,
SEC
16
ASSESSOR'S
PLAT
NO
4
LOT
36
§ 82-90. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the property described
above is eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence,
the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-91. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the property described
in § 82-89 as a historic district pursuant to City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-92. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owner or owners of the property or portions of the property described
in § 82-89 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of
appropriateness before commencing any work in the historic site. When
considering an application, the Historic District Commission will be guided
by the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary
of the Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of
Ordinances § 82-13, and sequence.
§ 82-88 FUNDS § 82-92
76:161

ARTICLE XVI
L.A. Young Historic District
[Adopted 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-05]
§ 82-93. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "L.A. Young Historic
District Ordinance."
§ 82-94. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preservation and/or
rehabilitation of the buildings and properties at the historic site of the L.A.
Young Historic District comprised of 14 homes on North Altadena Avenue,
in the City of Royal Oak, Michigan, also known more specifically as:
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub N 16FT of Lot 55 and all of Lot 56
(1016 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 52 (1021 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 61 (1036 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 44 (1107 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 66 (1110 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 43 (1111 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 67 (1114 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 42 (1115 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 68 (1118 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 69 (1122 North Altadena Avenue)
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Golf Homes Sub Lot 40 (1123 North Altadena Avenue)
§ 82-95. Eligibility.
The Royal Oak City Commission determines that the property described
above is eligible for local historic designation under the guidelines
established by the City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances § 82-1, and
sequence, the Historic District Study Committee Ordinance.
§ 82-96. Designation.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby designates the property described
in § 82-94 as an historic district pursuant to the City of Royal Oak Code
of Ordinances § 82-1, and sequence, the Historic District Study Committee
Ordinance.
§ 82-97. Certificate of appropriateness.
The owners of the properties or portions of the properties described in
§ 82-94 are required to apply for and obtain a certificate of appropriateness
§ 82-93 FUNDS § 82-97
76:163
before commencing any work in the historic site. When considering an
application, the Historic District Commission will be guided by the
standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States Secretary of the
Interior at 26 CFR Part 67 and the City of Royal Oak Code of Ordinances
§ 82-13, and sequence.
§ 82-98. Savings.
All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired
or incurred at the time this article takes effect are saved and may be
consummated according to the law in force when they are commenced.
§ 82-97 ROYAL OAK CODE § 82-98
76:164
Chapter 87
HOUSING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 400.
§ 87-1. Commission created; powers.
Pursuant to Public Act No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended,40 a
commission is hereby created in and for the City of Royal Oak, Michigan, to
be known as the "Royal Oak Housing Commission," possessing the power to
effectuate the purposes of said Public Act.
§ 87-2. Appointments. [Amended 3-29-1976 by Ord. No. 76-12]
The chief administrative officer of the said City of Royal Oak is hereby
directed to appoint the members of the said Royal Oak Housing Commission
as soon as possible after this article shall take effect.
Chapter 115
PARKING CITATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal civil infractions — See Ch. 1, Art.
II.
Pull-off parking — See Ch. 498.
Parking stations — See Ch. 503.
Parking system — See Ch. 507.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
§ 115-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Issuance of Civil
Infractions by Nonpolice Personnel on Private Property."
§ 115-2. Issuance of parking citations by nonpolice personnel.
A. The City, pursuant to MCLA § 257.742(6), as amended, does expressly
designate the Director of Public Safety to authorize and appoint
persons who are employed by legal entities and are not police officers
to issue and serve citations for civil infraction violations specifically
listed in § 115-3 of this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.653 et seq.
§ 82-98 HOUSING COMMISSION § 115-2
87:165
§ 115-3. Prohibited parking.
A vehicle shall not be parked, except if necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:
B. The Director of Public Safety shall maintain a list of all such persons
appointed by him or her under this section, and he or she shall have the
further express power at will to remove or add such appointments on a
continuing basis.
C. Persons appointed pursuant to Subsection A or B are hereby authorized
and empowered to enforce on such specified property the provisions of
§ 115-3 of this chapter pertaining to, regulating or restricting the
parking of motor vehicles upon such property, by way of the issuance
and service of citations.
D. Persons appointed to issue and serve civil infraction citations under this
section shall be employees of the affected legal entity and shall perform
their limited function for the City as gratuitous volunteers without any
compensation from the City. Such persons shall have no other legal
authority to act on behalf of the City in any other capacity as a result of
their expressly limited appointments and delegated authority as
conferred by this section.
A. On a sidewalk.
B. In front of a public or private driveway.
C. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
D. On a crosswalk.
E. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points
on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings.
F. In any place or in any manner so as to block immediate egress from any
emergency exit or exits which are conspicuously marked as building
emergency exits.
G. In any place or in any manner so as to block or hamper the immediate
use of an immediate egress from any fire escape which is conspicuously
marked as a fire escape and which provides an emergency means of
egress from any building.
H. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking.
I. In a parking space which is clearly identified by an official sign as being
reserved for use by handicappers and which is on public property or
private property that is available for public use, unless the person is a
handicapper as described in the Act or unless the person is parking the
vehicle for the benefit of a handicapper. A certificate of identification
§ 115-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 115-3
87:166
§ 115-4. Impoundment of illegally parked vehicle with unpaid
parking violations.
If a vehicle is illegally parked and has received more than six parking
violation notices or citations which remain unpaid, the Police Department
may call a towing agency and take the vehicle into custody. If the vehicle
is taken into custody, the Police Department must follow the procedures set
forth in MCLA § 257.252b. The Police Department may also issue a citation
to the owner of the impounded vehicle.
§ 115-5. Commercial vehicles and commercial motor vehicles.
issued under Section 675(5) of the Act41 to a handicapper shall be
displayed on the lower left corner of the front windshield. A special
registration plate issued under Section 803d of the Act42 to a
handicapper shall be displayed on the vehicle.
J. Alongside any curb painted yellow.
K. On any private property in the City of Royal Oak without the express or
implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder,
occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Complaint for
violation of this section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant,
lessee, agent or trustee of such property. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-11]
A. "Commercial vehicle" defined. "Commercial vehicle" includes all motor
vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, or
constructed or used for transportation of goods, wares or merchandise,
and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(See MCLA § 257.7.)
B. "Commercial motor vehicle" defined. "Commercial motor vehicle"
means a motor vehicle designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including a driver; a motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating
of 26,001 or more pounds; a motor vehicle with a gross combination
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, including a towed unit with a
gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds; or a motor
vehicle carrying hazardous material and on which is required to be
posted a placard as defined and required under 49 CFR Parts 100 to
199. A commercial motor vehicle does not include a vehicle used
exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for
nonbusiness purposes. (See MCLA § 257.7.)
41.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.675(5).
42.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.803d.
§ 115-3 HOUSING COMMISSION § 115-5
87:167
§ 115-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found responsible for violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay
the civil fines and costs as established by the Chief Judge of the 44th District
Court, pursuant to MCLA § 257.907.
§ 115-7. Indemnification and hold harmless.
Each affected legal entity shall enter into an agreement with the City
whereby the legal entity shall indemnify and hold harmless the City and its
employees from any and all claims, demands and causes of action, whether
for injury or alleged injuries, or for damage or alleged damage to property
arising from the actions or omissions of their employees in the course of
writing and/or issuing parking citations under this chapter.
Chapter 128
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil service merit system — See Ch. 33. Retirement — See Ch. 146.
C. No commercial vehicle or commercial motor vehicle shall be parked
upon a public street for a period of more than one hour, except when
actually engaged in loading or unloading operations.
D. The Chief of Police, or designee, for good cause, may grant special
parking permits permitting additional parking of commercial vehicles,
provided that each permit is granted for a definite period of time.
§ 115-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 115-7
128:168
ARTICLE I
Parental and Family Medical Leave
[Adopted 2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2]
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:
CHILD — A biological, adopted or foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or
a child of a person standing in loco parentis, who is under 18 years of age;
or who is 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care because of a
mental or physical disability.
CITY COMMISSION — The Royal Oak City Commission.
EMPLOYEE — Any employee who has worked a minimum of 1,250 hours
during the past 12 months and who has been employed for at least 12
months.
EMPLOYER — Includes the City of Royal Oak.
FAMILY LEAVE — Leave by reason of a serious health condition of a family
member.
FAMILY MEMBER — A parent, spouse, child, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
or the employee himself or herself.
PARENT — A biological parent of an employee or an individual who stood in
loco parentis to an employee when the employee was a child.
PARENTAL LEAVE — Leave by reason of:
SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION — A disabling physical or mental illness,
injury, impairment or condition that involves inpatient care in a hospital,
a nursing home, or a hospice; or outpatient care requiring continuing
treatment or supervision by a health care provider.
§ 128-2. Parental leave and family leave requirement.
The birth of a child of an employee and in order to care for such child;
or
A.
B. The placement of a child with an employee for adoption or foster care.
A. Every employee, as defined above, shall be entitled, upon advance
notice to his or her employer, to 12 consecutive work weeks of parental
leave or family leave in any twelve-month period. The employee shall
give at least 30 days' notice of the intended date upon which parental
leave or family leave shall commence and terminate, unless prevented
by medical emergency from giving the form and content of the
employee's notice to the employer.
B. Intermittent leave may be taken by employees when medically
necessary to care for themselves or sick children, spouses, or parents.
§ 128-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 128-2
128:169
§ 128-3. Employment and health benefits protection.
§ 128-4. Effect on existing employment benefits.
If an employee requests intermittent leave that is foreseeable based
on planned medical treatment, the employee may be temporarily
transferred to an equivalent position with equal pay and benefits that
better accommodates absences, unless precluded by union contract.
C. Parental leave or family leave granted pursuant to this article may
consist of unpaid leave. If the employer provides paid parental leave or
family leave for fewer than 12 weeks, the additional weeks of leave
added to attain the total of 12 weeks required by Subsection A of this
section may be unpaid.
D. The employer may request that the employee shall provide the
employer with written certification from a physician caring for the
person who is the reason for the employee's leave, which certification
shall specify the probable duration of the employee's leave.
A. Every employee who exercises his or her right to parental leave under
this article shall, upon the expiration of such leave, be entitled to be
restored by the employer to the position held by the employee when the
leave commenced, or to a position with equivalent seniority, status,
employment benefits, pay and other terms and considerations of
employment, including fringe and service credits that employee had
been entitled to at the commencement of leave.
B. During any parental leave or family leave taken pursuant to this article,
the employer shall maintain any existing health benefits of the
employee in force for the duration of such leave as if the employee had
continued in employment continuously from the date he or she
commenced such leave until the date he or she returns to employment
pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
C. Prior to taking such leave, the employee shall sign an agreement that
he will be responsible for repayment of all premiums paid by the
employer during the leave if the employee does not return to work after
the leave for at least 90 days. If the employee does not return to work
after such leave for at least 90 days, the City shall have the right to
deduct the cost of the premiums from any monies due the employee.
A. The taking of parental leave or family leave pursuant to this article shall
not result in the loss of any benefit accrued before the date on which
the leave commenced.
B. Except as provided in § 128-3B, nothing in this article shall be
construed to entitle any employee who takes parental leave or family
leave pursuant to this article to any benefit other than benefits to which
the employee would have been entitled had he or she not taken leave.
§ 128-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 128-4
128:170
§ 128-5. Prohibited acts.
§ 128-6. Judicial enforcement.
A civil action may be brought in Circuit Court by an employee to enforce the
provisions of this article or of any resolution issued by the City Commission
pursuant to § 128-7. The court may enjoin any act or practice that violates
or may violate any provision of this article, and may order such other
equitable relief as is necessary and appropriate to redress such violation or
to enforce any provision of this article.
§ 128-7. Enforcement powers of City Commission.
If, after giving written notice and an opportunity to be heard, the City
Commission finds that the employer has failed to comply with any provision
of this article, the City Commission may issue such resolutions as it deems
necessary to protect the rights of any employee. The City Commission shall
promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary and appropriate to
carry out the provisions of this section.
§ 128-8. Notice.
The employer shall post and keep posted in conspicuous places upon its
premises where notices to employees and applicants for employment are
customarily posted a notice, to be approved by the City Commission, setting
forth excerpts from, or summaries of, the provisions of this article and
information pertaining to the filing of a complaint.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect an employer's
obligation to comply with any collective bargaining agreement or
employment benefit plan that provides greater parental leave or family
leave rights to employees than the rights provided under this article.
D. The parental leave and family leave rights mandated by this article shall
not be diminished by any collective bargaining agreement or by any
employment benefit plan.
E. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect or diminish the
contract rights or seniority status of any other employee of the
employer covered by this article.
A. It shall be unlawful for the employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny
the exercise or the attempt to exercise any right provided by this
article.
B. It shall be unlawful for the employer to discharge, fine, suspend, expel,
discipline, or in any other manner discriminate against any employee
for exercising any right provided by this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for the employer to discharge, fine, suspend, expel,
discipline, or in any other manner discriminate against any employee
for opposing any practice made unlawful by this article.
§ 128-4 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 128-8
128:171
Chapter 134
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 134-1. Planning Commission.
A planning commission for the City of Royal Oak shall be organized under
the provisions of Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Act No. 33 of 2008,43 as
amended, and shall have the powers and duties therein specified.
§ 134-2. Membership.
Said planning commission shall consist of seven members, including the
Mayor, one member of the City Commission and five resident members who
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by a majority of the
members of the City Commission, and who shall serve for the terms herein
specified.
§ 134-3. Qualifications of members; terms; compensation.
The membership of the Planning Commission shall be representative of
important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental,
educational, and social development of the City, in accordance with the
major interests as they exist in the City, such as agriculture, natural
resources, recreation, education, public health, government,
transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be
representative of the entire territory of the City to the extent practicable.
The terms of the ex-officio members shall correspond to their respective
official tenures. The terms of the five non-officio members shall be for three
years; provided, however, that they shall serve until their successors are
appointed and qualified. No members of the Planning Commission shall
receive any compensation as such.
§ 134-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall consider and advise the City Commission
on all proposed changes in Chapter 770, Zoning, referred to it by the City
Commission, shall consider and pass upon all proposed plats referred to
it by the City Commission, and make recommendation as to the approval,
modification or disapproval thereof to the City Commission. The Planning
Commission may make such recommendations as its deems advisable to
the City Commission relative to City planning and future development of
the City and shall have all the other duties and powers vested in planning
43.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3801 et seq.
§ 128-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 134-4
128:172
commissions by virtue of the laws of the State of Michigan or ordinances of
the City of Royal Oak.
§ 134-5. Expenses.
The Planning Commission may be allowed such amount for expenses as
deemed advisable by the City Commission.
Chapter 142
RECREATION AND PUBLIC SERVICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 515.
§ 142-1. Continuation of Department.
The School District of the City of Royal Oak and the City of Royal Oak having
heretofore joined in the creation of a Parks and Recreation Department in
accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of Act 156, Public Acts for 1917
(Section 5.2423, M.S.A.),44 said Parks and Recreation Department is hereby
continued as part of the Department of Recreation and Public Service.
§ 142-2. Supervision of Department; Recreation Director and other
employees.
The said Department of Recreation and Public Service shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Manager. The City Manager shall have
the authority to employ a Recreation Director and such other employees as
may be required and to fix their compensation and determine their duties.
§ 142-3. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board; composition; terms;
duties.
A. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be composed of nine
members appointed by the City Commission, which shall include one
member of the City Commission. A member shall be appointed for a
term of three years or until his or her successor is appointed, and
appointments will be made in such manner that the terms of office of
three members of said Board will expire on December 31 of each year.
B. The City of Royal Oak Director of Recreation and Public Service or his
or her designee shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member of the
Board. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall function in the
following capacities:
44.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 123.53.
§ 134-4 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 142-3
128:173
§ 142-4. Appropriations; records; compensation.
The City Commission shall annually appropriate such sums of money for
the support of the Department of Recreation and Public Service as it may
deem necessary and proper. The money so appropriated shall be paid into
the City Treasury and shall be disbursed on order of the City Manager.
The Director of Finance shall handle the accounts of the Department of
Recreation and Public Service and shall keep suitable records of receipts
and disbursements. The compensation of all employees of the Parks and
Recreation Department shall be paid from the money so appropriated to the
use of the Recreation Department.
§ 142-5. Recreation program.
It shall be the duty of the Recreation Director, under the direction of
the City Manager and with the advice and assistance of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board, to formulate an annual recreation program
and to carry out same. The Department of Recreation and Public Service
shall have the authority to sponsor games, contests, exhibitions and other
recreational events, and shall have authority to charge admission to any
such events when deemed necessary and advisable in order to defray
the expenses of the recreational program. In connection with all such
events, the Department shall have authority to rent concessions for the
accommodation of patrons of such events.
§ 142-6. Gifts and bequests.
The Department of Recreation and Public Service may receive gifts or
bequests of money or personal property, or any donation to be applied,
either principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use, for parks
or playgrounds or any other lawful recreational purposes.
(1) In an advisory capacity to the City Manager and City Commission in
all matters affecting City parks and grounds.
(2) In an advisory capacity to the City Manager and City Commission
regarding the administration of the recreation program of the City.
(3) In an advisory capacity to the City Manager and City Commission
regarding the administration of leased recreational facilities of the
City.
(4) In an advisory capacity to the City Manager and City Commission
regarding all matters concerning the operations of the Royal Oak
Farmers Market. [Added 2-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
§ 142-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 142-6
128:174
Chapter 146
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil service merit system — See Ch. 33. Personnel policies — See Ch. 128.
§ 142-6 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 142-6
128:175

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-7-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19; amended in its entirety
6-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-06]
§ 146-1. Applicability.
This restatement will apply to individuals employed by the City on and
after the effective date of the restatement. The retirement rights of an
individual whose City employment terminated before the effective date of
this restatement will be governed by the provisions of the retirement system
in effect on the date the individual last terminated employment.
§ 146-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCUMULATED MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS — The credit balance in a
member's individual account in the Member Contribution Fund Reserve.
ACTUARIAL PRESENT VALUE — The amount of funds presently required
to provide a payment or series of payments in the future calculated in
accordance with the actuarial assumptions established from time to time by
the Retirement Board.
CITY — The City of Royal Oak, Michigan, including its offices, boards,
departments, agencies, and instrumentalities.
COVERAGE PLAN — For those members represented by a collective
bargaining association, the coverage plan shall be those benefit provisions
contained within the applicable collective bargaining agreements. For those
members not represented by a collective bargaining association, the
coverage plan shall be those benefit provisions contained within the
administrative rules of the City of Royal Oak or as otherwise adopted by
the City in accordance with applicable law. The separate coverage plans
are attached as attachments and will be updated automatically as provided
for under the applicable collective bargaining agreement or administrative
rule covering such group or category of employees.45 The provisions of the
collective bargaining agreements or administrative rules shall supersede
any provisions in the retirement ordinance or coverage plan attachments.
FINAL AVERAGE SALARY — The final average salary shall be calculated
in accordance with the provisions of the coverage plan applicable to the
member.
FORM OF PAYMENT — The form of payment of a pension selected by a
member or otherwise provided for in accordance with the provisions of the
Retirement Ordinance.
45.Editor's Note: Said attachments are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 146-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-2
128:177
INSURABLE INTEREST — Reasonable basis, founded on the relations of the
parties, either pecuniary or contractual or by blood or affinity, supporting
the continued life of the member.
MEMBER — An individual who is a member of the retirement system:
PENSION — A series of monthly payments to a retired member or survivor
pension beneficiary as provided in the Retirement Ordinance.
REFUND BENEFICIARY — A person who has been designated to be paid
accumulated member contributions in the event of the death of a member or
former member, or a residual refund of unexpended accumulated member
contributions in the event of the death of a retired member or survivor
pension beneficiary.
RETIRED MEMBER — A person who is being paid a pension on account of
membership in the retirement system.
RETIREMENT BOARD — The trustees of the retirement system.
RETIREMENT SYSTEM — The retirement system maintained in accordance
with the provisions of the Retirement Ordinance.
SALARY — The salary defined in the coverage plan applicable to the
member.
SURVIVOR PENSION BENEFICIARY — An individual who is being paid a
pension or who has been designated to be paid a pension as a result of the
death of a member or retired member.
§ 146-3. Membership requirements; exclusions; termination.
GENERAL MEMBER — A member who is not a police member or fire
member.
A.
POLICE MEMBER — A member who is employed by the City as a police
officer and who has taken the oath prescribed for police officers.
B.
FIRE MEMBER — A member who is employed by the City as a fire
fighter and who has taken the oath prescribed for fire fighters.
C.
A. Each employee of the City shall be a member of the retirement system
unless excluded from membership in accordance with Subsection B of
this section.
B. The following employees are excluded from membership:
(1) Employees designated by the City as being employed in a position
normally requiring less than 1,200 hours of work in a calendar
year;
(2) An individual serving the City under a contract which specifically
excludes the individual from membership in the retirement system;
or
§ 146-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-3
128:178
§ 146-4. Credited service requirements; forfeiture; reinstatement.
(3) An individual serving the City in a manner not subject to
withholding of federal Income tax or applicable FICA tax.
C. Employees designated as being employed in a position normally
requiring less than 1,200 hours of work in a calendar year shall be
notified in writing, by the City, of the designation and the consequences
of the designation with respect to membership, credited service and
benefits under the Retirement Ordinance. A copy of the notification
shall be filed with the retirement system within 30 days.
D. The membership of an employee shall cease upon termination of the
employee's employment with the City or upon the employee becoming
excluded from membership as provided in Subsection B of this section.
A. Service rendered the City by a member shall be credited to the
member's credited service account in accordance with Retirement
Board rules and regulations, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Service shall be credited to the nearest month;
(2) In no case shall a member be credited with a year of service for less
than 10 months of service in any period of 12 consecutive months
or more than a month of service for all service in any calendar
month or more than a year of service for all service in any period of
12 consecutive months;
(3) A member shall not be credited with a month of service unless the
member has worked the equivalent of 10 or more full-time days
during the calendar month; and
(4) Credited service shall not be granted a member for periods during
which the member was exempt from membership as provided in
the Retirement Ordinance.
B. Credited service shall be forfeited under the following circumstances:
(1) Credited service shall be forfeited if an individual incurs a break in
membership of more than 36 consecutive months and is not a
vested former member; and
(2) Credited service for which an individual has made member
contributions shall be forfeited if the individual's accumulated
member contributions are paid to the individual, the individual's
refund beneficiary or the individual's legal representative.
C. Credited service forfeited because of a break in membership of more
than 36 consecutive months, as provided in Subsection B of this section,
cannot be reinstated.
§ 146-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-4
128:179
§ 146-5. Credited service for intervening military service.
A member who left the employ of the City to enter an armed service
of the United States during time of war, period of compulsory military
service or period of national emergency recognized by resolution of the
City Commission shall be given credited service for periods of active duty
subject to the following conditions:
§ 146-6. Purchase of credited service.
D. Credited service forfeited for a reason other than a break in
membership of more than 36 consecutive months shall be reinstated if
each of the following conditions is met:
(1) The member pays the retirement system all accumulated member
contributions previously paid to the member, plus compound
interest from the date of the payment to the member to the date of
the repayment at interest rates set by the Retirement Board; and
(2) The repayment is completed within 36 months of resumption of
membership.
A. The member is reemployed by the City within one year following
termination of the period of active duty;
B. The member reinstates any forfeited credited service which can be
reinstated. The member shall repay any previously withdrawn
contributions plus interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of
repayment;
C. Contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified
military service will be provided in accordance with IRC § 414(U) and
regulations;
D. Credited service shall not be given for periods of active duty which have
been used or are usable to obtain or increase a benefit from another
retirement program; except for service that is or would be credited
under the federal government for service in the reserves; and
E. The maximum credited service which may be obtained under the
provisions of this section is six years.
A. A member may purchase service credit subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The member pays the retirement system the purchase cost
determined according to Subsection B of this section;
(2) The aggregate amount of credited service purchased under this
section cannot exceed 10 years;
(3) Credited service purchased under this section shall not be
considered for purposes of eligibility for retirement system benefits
§ 146-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-6
128:180
§ 146-7. Conditions for normal retirement; amount of pension.
and amount of retirement system benefits until the member has
acquired 10 years of credited service as a member of the
retirement system; and
(4) Credited service purchased under this section can only be used for
the meeting of eligibility requirements and the computation of
pension amounts under the retirement system but shall have no
application to any other provisions of any collective bargaining
agreement.
B. The purchase cost for each year of credited service purchased under
this section is equal to the increase in the actuarial present value of
projected benefits resulting from the additional credited service.
Payments shall be made within 60 days of the date the member is
informed of the amount of payment.
A. A member or vested former member may retire upon fulfilling the
following requirements:
(1) A written application for normal retirement, in the form prescribed
by the retirement system, is filed with the retirement system prior
to the selected date of retirement;
(2) Employment by the City is terminated prior to the selected date of
retirement;
(3) The member or vested former member selects a date of retirement;
and
(4) The member or vested former member meets an age and service
requirement for normal retirement specified in the coverage plan
applicable to the member or vested former member.
B. Except as otherwise provided by the Retirement Ordinance and the
applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, the amount of a
normal retirement pension under form of payment Option SL is
determined in accordance with the coverage plan applicable to the
member or vested former member. The pension of a member who has
credited service under each of two or more coverage plans shall be
determined in proportion to the credited service under the two or more
coverage plans applicable to the member at time of termination of
membership.
C. A member or vested former member who is retiring under the normal
retirement provisions of the Retirement Ordinance may file an election
with the retirement system at any time following application for normal
retirement and prior to the later of the date first payment of the pension
is made and the date age 60 years is attained, to be paid all or any
portion of the member's accumulated member contributions at time of
normal retirement. The election shall be made on a form furnished by
§ 146-6 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-7
128:181
§ 146-8. (Reserved)46
§ 146-9. Vested termination of membership.
§ 146-10. Disability retirement.
the retirement system. The amount of pension determined under
Subsection B of this section shall be reduced if the retiring member
elects to be paid all or any portion of the member's accumulated
member contributions as provided in this subsection. The amount of
reduction in the pension shall be the amount which has the same
actuarial present value as the amount of accumulated member
contributions paid the retiring member.
A. A member who ceases to be a member for a reason other than death or
retirement shall be a vested former member if the member meets the
following requirements:
(1) The member meets an age and service requirement for vested
termination of membership specified in the coverage plan
applicable to the member; and
(2) The member's accumulated member contributions are left on
deposit in the retirement system.
B. Eligibility for normal retirement and the amount of normal retirement
pension shall be determined according to the provisions of the
Retirement Ordinance in effect at the time of termination of
membership.
C. An election by a vested former member to be paid accumulated member
contributions shall cause forfeiture of credited service and all rights to
any benefits of the retirement system other than payment of the
accumulated member contributions.
A. Conditions for; amount of pension.
(1) Upon the application of a member or the member's department
head, a member in the employ of the City who becomes totally and
permanently incapacitated for employment by the City by reason of
a personal injury or disease and who has in force the applicable
period of credited service specified in the coverage plan applicable
to the member may be retired subject to the following:
(a) The member is medically examined by or under the direction of
the City-appointed medical director;
(b) The medical director certifies to the Retirement Board that the
member is mentally or physically totally incapacitated for
46.Editor’s Note: Former § 146-8, Normal retirement; suspension of pension, was repealed
6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04.
§ 146-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-10
128:182
continued employment by the City, that such incapacity will
probably be permanent, and the member should be retired;
and
(c) The Retirement Board concurs with the certification of the
medical director.
(2) Upon disability retirement, a member shall be paid a disability
retirement pension equal to a percent, specified for the disability
retired member's coverage plan, of the member's salary at the time
of disability retirement. The disability retirement pension is subject
to the maximum specified for the disability retired member's
coverage plan.
(3) Subject to Subsection A(4), upon attainment of the applicable age
specified for the disability retired member's coverage plan, the
amount of disability pension shall be recomputed as a normal
retirement pension based on the formula, final average salary and,
subject to Subsection C(2), credited service in effect at the time of
disability retirement.
(4) If provided by the provisions of the applicable coverage plan, a
disability retired member whose disability retirement commences
on or after attainment of age 65 years may be paid a disability
retirement pension for up to two years, but not later than
attainment of age 70 years.
B. The Retirement Board shall determine, at the time of approval, the
nature of a disability, whether duty or nonduty.
C. Disability retirement, duty-connected.
(1) A member with less than the period of credited service specified for
disability retirement shall have credited service increased to the
applicable specified period for the sole and exclusive purpose of
qualifying for disability retirement subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The Retirement Board finds the member's total and permanent
incapacity for continued City employment to be the natural and
proximate result of a personal injury or disease arising out of
and in the course of the member's actual performance of
service in the employ of the City.
(b) The member is paid workers' compensation on account of the
incapacity.
(2) Upon the expiration of a disability retired member's workers'
compensation period, the disability retired member's credited
service shall be increased by a period equal to the workers'
compensation period.
D. Continuation subject to reexamination.
§ 146-10 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-10
128:183
(1) The Retirement Board may require a disability retired member to
undergo periodic medical examination by or under the direction of
the medical director if the disability retired member has not
attained the age specified in the applicable coverage plan for
discontinuance of disability retirement reevaluation. If a disability
retired member refuses to submit to a medical examination,
payment of the disability pension may be suspended by the
Retirement Board until withdrawal of the refusal. Should refusal
continue for one year, all the disability retired member's rights in
and to a disability pension may be revoked by the Retirement
Board. A disability retired member shall be restored to active
employment with the City and the disability retirement pension
discontinued if following a medical examination the medical
director certifies that the disability retired member is mentally and
physically able and capable of resuming employment with the City
and the Retirement Board concurs with the certification of the
medical director. The City shall be allowed reasonable latitude in
placing the returned disability retired member in a position
commensurate with the position held at time of disability
retirement.
(2) The age requirements for discontinuance of disability retirement
reevaluation are as provided in the coverage plan applicable to the
member.
(3) A disability retired member who has been restored to employment
with the City as provided in Subsection D(1) of this section shall
again become a member of the retirement system. The disability
retired member's credited service at time of retirement shall be
restored to full force. Service shall be credited for the period the
disability retired member was being paid a disability pension if
within the period the disability retired member was paid workers'
compensation on account of the same disability which caused
retirement; otherwise credited service shall not be given for the
period of disability retirement.
E. Offsets. If a member's retirement is pursuant to Subsections A and C
(disability retirement), the member's straight life disability retirement
pension shall be subject to the minimums and offsets which follow:
(1) The amount of level straight life disability retirement pension
payable during the waiting or qualifying period specified in a
disability insurance contract which covers the disability retired
member shall not be less than the amount of disability benefit
which would become payable under the disability insurance
contract following expiration of the waiting or qualifying period,
reduced by any and all workers' and/or unemployment
compensation payments accruing during said qualifying period.
This minimum shall apply only to pension payments made prior to
the disability retired member's attainment of the age specified in
§ 146-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-10
128:184
§ 146-11. Survivor pensions.
the disability insurance contract as the date of termination of a
period of disability.
(2) Subject to Subsection E(3) of this section, the amount of level
straight life disability retirement pension payable during any
period other than the one specified in Subsection E(1) of this
section shall not be less than an amount computed assuming the
disability retired member had 10 years of credited service.
(3) The amount of any benefit payable pursuant to a disability
insurance contract shall be offset against and payable in lieu of any
disability retirement pension payable by the retirement system.
The offset shall be on a month-by-month basis without carryforward.
(4) The amount of disability retirement pension may be reduced for
income received from gainful employment pursuant to the terms
provided by the coverage plan applicable to the member.
A. Automatic coverage of eligible spouse and children.
(1) A survivor pension shall be paid to the eligible surviving spouse and
eligible surviving children of a deceased member who does not
have an elective survivor pension beneficiary designation in effect
under the Retirement Ordinance if the following requirements are
met:
(a) A written application for the pension, in the form prescribed by
the retirement system, is filed with the retirement system; and
(b) The deceased member had three or more years of credited
service at time of death; or
(c) The Retirement Board finds the member's death to have been
the natural and proximate result of causes arising out of and in
the course of the member's performance of duty in the employ
of the City.
(2) An eligible surviving spouse is the spouse to whom the deceased
member was married at time of death. An eligible surviving child is
an unmarried natural or adopted child of the deceased member
who is under age 19 years.
(3) If the member's death occurs prior to the date the member attains
age 60 years, the amount of survivor pension shall be calculated
using credited service equal to the sum of the member's actual
credited service and the amount of credited service the member
could have acquired between the date of death and the date age 60
would have been attained.
§ 146-10 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-11
128:185
(4) The amount of the survivor pension payable to a surviving spouse
shall be the percent, specified in the coverage plan applicable to
the member, of the amount of pension calculated in the same
manner as a normal retirement pension under form of payment
Option SL.
(5) The amount of the survivor pension payable to an eligible surviving
child shall be the percent, specified in the coverage plan applicable
to the member, of the amount of pension calculated in the same
manner as a normal retirement pension under form of payment
Option SL.
(6) An eligible surviving child's pension shall terminate upon death or
marriage, or reaching age 19 years. The pension of each remaining
eligible surviving child shall be recalculated. An eligible surviving
spouse's pension shall terminate upon death or remarriage.
(7) The aggregate amount of any workers' compensation benefits paid
a surviving spouse or surviving child on account of the death of the
member shall be deducted from and offset against the pensions
payable under the provisions of this section. The term "workers'
compensation benefits" as used in this subsection shall include
weekly benefits, redemptions of benefits and settlements in lieu of
benefits but shall not include reimbursement of medical expenses.
(8) Any amount payable under this section is not subject to the
provisions of § 146-12.
B. Survivor pension to a designated survivor pension beneficiary.
(1) A survivor pension shall be paid for life to the designated survivor
pension beneficiary of a deceased member who has elected
optional form of payment Option SL and designated a survivor
pension beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of the
Retirement Ordinance, if the following requirements are met:
(a) A written application for the pension, in the form prescribed by
the retirement system, is filed with the retirement system;
(b) The member meets an age and service requirement for
designated survivor pension beneficiary eligibility specified by
the coverage plan applicable to the member; and
(c) The designated survivor pension beneficiary is the member's
spouse or the Retirement Board finds the designated survivor
pension beneficiary to have been dependent upon the deceased
member for at least 50% of the beneficiary's financial support
due to the beneficiary's lack of financial means.
(2) The amount of pension is calculated in the same manner as a
normal retirement pension under form of payment Option SL, in
§ 146-11 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-11
128:186
§ 146-12. Maximum amount of pension.
The maximum amount of an initial normal retirement pension shall be a
percent of the retired member's final average salary reduced by a percent of
the retired member's initial monthly social security benefit. The maximum
aggregate initial monthly pensions which can be paid survivor pension
beneficiaries on account of the death of a member, vested former member
or retired member, as the case may be, shall be a percent of the deceased
member's, retired member's or vested former member's final average salary
reduced by a percent of the sum of the initial monthly social security
benefits paid the survivor pension beneficiaries. The percents shall be those
specified in the coverage plan applicable to the member, retired member
or vested former member. This section shall be applied without taking into
account cost of living increases which may be granted under the Retirement
Ordinance or social security. As used in this section, "social security" means
the Federal Old Age, Survivors, Disability and Health Insurance Program.
§ 146-13. (Reserved)47
§ 146-14. (Reserved)
§ 146-15. (Reserved)
§ 146-16. (Reserved)
§ 146-17. (Reserved)
§ 146-18. (Reserved)
§ 146-19. (Reserved)
accordance with the coverage plan applicable to the member at
time of death.
(3) An election of form of payment Option SL may be rescinded and the
designated survivor pension beneficiary may be changed by the
member at any time prior to the date a pension payment is made to
the member.
(4) If provided by the terms of the applicable coverage plan, a vested
former member shall be presumed to have elected form of payment
Option SL and designated the vested former member's spouse as
survivor pension beneficiary. Payment of the pension to the
designated survivor pension beneficiary shall commence the first
day of the calendar month following the later of the date of death of
the vested former member and the first date pension payments
could have commenced to the vested former member.
47.Editor's Note: See now "Attachments" at the end of this chapter for separate group
coverage plans formerly in §§ 146-13 through 146-23.
§ 146-11 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-20
128:187
§ 146-20. (Reserved)
§ 146-21. (Reserved)
§ 146-22. (Reserved)
§ 146-23. (Reserved)
§ 146-24. Death benefit.
In accordance with the amount specified in either the applicable labor
agreement or administrative rules at the time of retirement, the retirement
system will provide a supplemental lump sum death benefit upon the death
of the retired member.
§ 146-25. Election of form of payment of pension.
§ 146-26. Forms of payment of pension.
A. A member may elect to have pension payments made under any one of
the forms of payment provided in the Retirement Ordinance and name a
survivor pension beneficiary. The election of form of payment and
naming of survivor pension beneficiary shall be made on a form
furnished by and filed with the retirement system prior to the date the
first pension payment is made. An election of form of payment may not
be changed after the date the first pension payment is made. A named
survivor pension beneficiary of a retired member shall have an
insurable interest in the life of the retired member on the date first
payment of the pension is made. Payment shall be made under form of
payment SL if there is not a timely election of another form of payment.
B. The amount of pension under forms of payment Option SL, Option B and
Option C shall have the same actuarial present value, computed as of
the effective date of the pension, as the amount of pension under form
of payment SL.
C. Form of payment Option C is only available for election by general
members, including vested former general members.
A. Straight, life pension, form of payment Option SL. The retired member
is paid the pension for life under form of payment Option SL. All
payments stop upon the death of the retired member, except as
provided by Subsection F. The amount of pension is determined in
accordance with the coverage plan applicable to the retired member.
B. Life payments with full continuation to survivor pension beneficiary,
form of payment Option A. The retired member is paid a reduced
pension for life under form of payment Option A. Upon the death of the
retired member during the lifetime of the named survivor pension
beneficiary, the named survivor pension beneficiary is paid the full
amount of the reduced pension until death.
§ 146-20 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-26
128:188
§ 146-27. Commencement, change and termination of pension.
§ 146-28. Denial of benefit claim; appeals.
C. Life payment with 1/2 continuation to survivor pension beneficiary,
form of payment Option B. The retired member is paid a reduced
pension for life under form of payment Option B. Upon the death of the
retired member during the lifetime of the named survivor pension
beneficiary, the named survivor pension beneficiary is paid 1/2 the
amount of the reduced pension until death.
D. Life payment with amount increased to the adjustment age and reduced
thereafter, form of payment Option C. The retired member is paid an
increased pension until the retired member attains the adjustment age
specified by the Retirement Board and a reduced pension thereafter.
The amount of increase and reduction shall be determined in
accordance with procedures adopted by the Retirement Board.
E. Life payment with a specified percent continuation to surviving spouse,
form of payment Option D. The retired member is paid a pension for life
under form of payment Option D. The amount of the pension is the
amount of pension under form of payment Option SL multiplied by the
Option D percent specified by the coverage plan applicable to the
retired member at time of retirement. Upon the death of the retired
member, the surviving spouse of the deceased retired member, if any, is
paid a percent of the amount of the retired member's pension until
death. The percent is the continuation percent specified by the
coverage plan applicable to the retired member at time of retirement.
F. If all pension payments permanently terminate before there is paid an
aggregate amount equal to the former member's accumulated member
contributions at time of retirement, the difference between the amount
of accumulated member contributions and the aggregate amount of
pension paid shall be paid to the refund beneficiary. If no refund
beneficiary survives the former member, the difference shall be paid to
the estate of the former member.
A. A normal or disability pension shall commence the first day of
retirement. A pre-retirement survivor pension shall commence the first
day of the month following the date of the death resulting in the
pension. A post-retirement survivor pension shall commence the first
day of the month following the date of the death resulting in the
pension.
B. Termination of payment of a pension shall occur on the first day of the
month after the event causing termination occurs.
C. A change in the amount of a pension shall occur the first day following
the date of the event causing the change.
§ 146-26 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-28
128:189
§ 146-29. Group health insurance; continuation.
A retired member or eligible survivor pension beneficiary may continue
to be insured under the provisions of any City group health insurance
plan in effect at the time of retirement or death or under the terms of
any separate subsequent City group health insurance plan if the retired
member or eligible survivor pension beneficiary pays the periodic premium
charges which may be required and consents to have the retirement system
deduct the periodic premium charges from the retired member's or eligible
survivor pension beneficiary's pension.
§ 146-30. Accounting reserves of retirement system.
The accounting reserves of the retirement system are the "Member
Contribution Reserve," "City Contribution Reserve," "Pension Payment
Reserve," and "Undistributed Investment Income Reserve." The
maintenance of separate accounting reserves shall not require the actual
segregation of the assets of the retirement system among the various
accounting reserves.
§ 146-31. Member Contribution Reserve.
A. A benefit claimant shall be notified in writing, within 30 days, of denial
of a claim for benefits. The notification shall give the reason for the
denial. A claimant may appeal the denial and request a hearing. The
appeal shall be in writing filed with the Secretary of the Retirement
Board within 90 days of the denial. The appeal shall contain a statement
of the claimant's reason for claiming the denial to be improper. The
Secretary of the Retirement Board shall schedule a hearing of the
appeal before the Retirement Board or, at the discretion of the
Retirement Board, a committee of the Retirement Board, within 60 days
of receipt of the appeal. A final decision on the matter being appealed
shall be made by the Retirement Board.
B. Appeals from a final decision of the Retirement Board shall be to the
District Court and initiated by filing a notice of appeal with the Circuit
Court within 30 days after the Retirement Board has issued its final
decision. The review of the District Court shall be restricted to the
record made before the Retirement Board, and the District Court shall
not permit the introduction of new evidence on any of the issues
presented before the Retirement Board.
C. The decision of the Retirement Board shall be upheld by the District
Court unless the District Court finds the decision of the Retirement
Board to be unlawful, arbitrary or capricious, or not supported by
substantial evidence on the entire record as submitted by the
Retirement Board.
A. The Member Contribution Reserve is the accounting reserve in which
shall be accumulated contributions made by members and which shall
be charged with refunds and transfers of accumulated member
§ 146-28 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-31
128:190
§ 146-32. Member contributions; tax treatment.
Upon implementation, the City shall, solely for the purpose of compliance
with Section 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, pick up, for the purposes
specified in that section, member contributions required by the Retirement
contributions as provided in the Retirement Ordinance. The City shall
cause the member contributions specified by the coverage plan
applicable to a member to be deducted from the salary of each member.
The City shall remit the deducted member contributions to the
retirement system in accordance with the procedures and schedules
established by the retirement system. The retirement system may
assess an interest charge and a penalty charge on any remittance
not made by its due date. Each member shall be deemed to consent
and agree to the deductions made and provided for in this section
by continuing employment with the City. Contributions of members
shall be credited to the members' individual accounts in the Member
Contribution Reserve.
B. A member's or vested former member's accumulated contributions
shall be transferred to the Pension Payment Reserve if a pension
becomes payable upon the retirement or death of the member or vested
former member. If a disability pension is terminated for a reason other
than the death of the retired member before an amount equal to the
retired member's accumulated member contributions has been paid,
the unexpended balance of the accumulated member contributions
shall be transferred from the Pension Payment Reserve to the former
retired member's individual account in the Member Contribution
Reserve.
C. The accumulated member contributions of a former member or a
member on leave of absence from the City as a consequence of the
entry into active duty with the Armed Forces of the United States shall
be paid to the former member upon written application.
D. If a member or former member dies and no pension becomes payable
on account of the death, the deceased member's or former member's
accumulated member contributions shall be paid to the refund
beneficiary named in the most recent designation of refund beneficiary
on file with the retirement system unless that beneficiary is deceased. If
there is not a living refund beneficiary named in the most recent
designation of refund beneficiary on file with the retirement system, the
deceased member's or former member's accumulated member
contributions shall be paid to the legal representative of the deceased
member or former member.
E. Except as otherwise provided in the Retirement Ordinance, a former
member's accumulated member contributions unclaimed by the former
member or refund beneficiary shall be transferred to the Undistributed
Investment Income Reserve at the expiration of a period of five years
from the date of cessation of membership.
§ 146-31 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-32
128:191
Ordinance for all salary earned by the member after implementation.
Member contributions picked up under the provisions of this section shall
be treated as City contributions for purposes of determining income tax
obligations under the Internal Revenue Code; however, such picked-up
member contributions shall be included in the determination of the
member's gross annual salary for all other purposes under federal and state
laws. Members' contributions picked up under this section shall continue
to be designated member contributions for all purposes of the Retirement
Ordinance and shall be considered as part of the member's salary for
purposes of determining the amount of the member's contribution. The
provisions of this section are mandatory, and the member shall have no
option concerning the pickup or to receive the contributed amounts directly
instead of having them paid by the City to the retirement system.
Implementation occurs upon authorization by the retirement system. In
no event may implementation occur other than at the beginning of a pay
period. This section is applicable only to those coverage plan groups
contracting for this treatment.
§ 146-33. City Contribution Reserve; transfers to Pension Payment
Reserve.
§ 146-34. Pension Payment Reserve.
The "Pension Payment Reserve " is the reserve from which shall be paid
all pensions to retired members and survivor pension beneficiaries and all
residual refunds to refund beneficiaries of retired members and survivor
pension beneficiaries.
§ 146-35. Undistributed Investment Income Reserve.
A. The "City Contribution Reserve " is the reserve in which shall be
accumulated contributions made by the City. The City shall remit its
contributions to the retirement system in accordance with the
procedures and schedules established by the retirement system. The
retirement system may assess an interest charge and a penalty charge
on any remittance not made by its due date.
B. Each year following receipt of the report of the annual actuarial
valuation, the excess, if any, of the reported actuarial present value of
pensions being paid retired members and survivor pension
beneficiaries and residual refunds likely to be paid to refund
beneficiaries of retired members and to survivor pension beneficiaries
over the balance in the Pension Payment Reserve shall be transferred to
the Pension Payment Reserve.
A. The "Undistributed Investment Income Reserve" is the reserve to which
shall be credited all interest, dividends, rents and other income from
investments of the retirement system, all gifts and bequests, all
unclaimed member contributions and all other money the disposition of
which is not specifically provided for in the Retirement Ordinance.
§ 146-32 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-35
128:192
§ 146-36. Funding objective.
§ 146-37. Retirement Board.
There shall be paid or transferred from the Undistributed Investment
Income Reserve all administrative expenses of the retirement system
which are not paid directly by the City.
B. Distribution of Undistributed Investment Income Reserve. The
retirement system shall at least annually distribute all or a portion of
the balance in the Undistributed Investment Income Reserve to the
Member Contribution Reserve, the Pension Payment Reserve and the
City Contribution Reserve. Distribution rates shall be determined by
the Retirement Board and may vary by reserve.
A. The funding objective of the retirement system is to establish and
receive each fiscal year City contributions which are sufficient, together
with member contributions, to:
(1) Fund the actuarial cost of benefits likely to be paid on account of
credited service earned by members during the fiscal year (the
normal cost); and
(2) Fund the unfunded actuarial cost of benefits likely to be paid on
account of credited service earned by members prior to the current
fiscal year over periods of not more than 30 years. Contributions
shall be determined by annual actuarial valuation using a level
percent of payroll actuarial cost method which produces a
contribution not less than that produced by the individual entry age
actuarial cost method.
B. The Retirement Board shall certify to the City Commission and the City
Manager the amount of contribution needed to satisfy the funding
objective, and the City Council shall appropriate and cause the
contribution to be paid to the retirement system.
A. Authority; membership.
(1) The Retirement Board shall be the trustee of the retirement system
and shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Retirement
Ordinance, including, in addition to any specific powers provided
for in the Retirement Ordinance, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, the power:
(a) To administer the Retirement Ordinance, including the
management of the retirement system and making effective
the provisions of the Retirement Ordinance;
(b) To employ competent legal counsel, in addition to the services
of the City Attorney, to handle the legal matters of the
Retirement Board and the retirement system and to give
§ 146-35 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-37
128:193
advice and counsel in regard to any matter connected with the
duties of the Retirement Board and, in the discretion of the
Retirement Board, to represent the Retirement Board in legal
proceedings;
(c) To administer oaths;
(d) As required, to adopt and use a seal for authentication of
records, processes and proceedings;
(e) To create and maintain records relating to all members, the
City and all activities and duties required of the Retirement
Board;
(f) To issue subpoenas and compel the production of evidence and
attendance of witnesses in connection with any hearings or
proceedings of the Retirement Board;
(g) To make and execute contracts;
(h) To make and adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out the duties of the
Retirement Board and activities of the retirement system,
including any rules and regulations necessary to preserve the
status of the retirement system as a qualified pension plan
under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of the
United States, as amended, or under successor or related
provisions of law;
(i) To designate committees and to designate committee
members, including individuals who may not be members of
the retirement system.
(j) To determine who is a member within the meaning of the
provisions of the Retirement Ordinance and the applicable
coverage plan.
(k) To adopt the actuarial assumption of the retirement system in
consultation with its actuary.
(2) The Retirement Board shall be a quasi-judicial body consisting of:
(a) Two members of the City Commission, to be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the City Commission; and
(b) The City Manager, by virtue of the position;
(c) One general member of the retirement system, to be elected by
the general members of the retirement system; and
(d) One member of the retirement system who is either a fire
member or a police member, to be elected by the fire members
and the police members of the retirement system.
§ 146-37 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-37
128:194
(3) The City shall indemnify to the extent authorized or permitted by
law the members of the Board, their representatives, and any other
employees of the City who are deemed to be acting on behalf of the
retirement system and hold them harmless against any and all
liabilities, including legal fees and expenses, arising out of any act
or omission made or suffered in good faith pursuant to the
provisions of the plan, or arising out of any failure to discharge any
fiduciary obligation imposed, other than a willful failure to
discharge a fiduciary obligation of which the person was aware.
There shall be no duty to indemnify where such person is judicially
determined to have incurred liability due to fraud, gross neglect, or
malfeasance in the exercise and performance of their duties.
B. Election of; term of office; vacancies; compensation.
(1) The elections to select the members of the Retirement Board
elected by the members of the retirement system shall be
conducted according to rules and regulations the Retirement Board
shall from time to time adopt.
(2) The regular term of office of the members of the Retirement Board
elected by the members of the retirement system shall be four
years. The term of one member-elected Retirement Board member
shall expire biennially on May 31. Members of the Retirement
Board shall serve until their successors have qualified.
(3) A member elected to the Retirement Board who fails to attend five
consecutively scheduled meetings of the Retirement Board, unless
in each case excused for cause by the Retirement Board members
in attendance, shall be considered to have resigned from the
Retirement Board, and the Retirement Board shall by resolution
declare the office vacated as of the date of adoption of the
resolution. A vacancy occurring on the Retirement Board, except in
the case of the City Manager and appointed members, shall be
filled within 90 days for the unexpired term in the manner provided
for in this section.
(4) Members of the Retirement Board shall serve without additional
salary for their services as Retirement Board members. They shall
be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable travel expenses, and
employee members shall suffer no loss of salary or wage in fulfilling
their Retirement Board duties.
C. Meetings. The Retirement Board shall hold at least four regular
meetings each calendar year, one in each calendar quarter, and shall
designate in advance the time and place of the meetings. Special
meetings and emergency meetings of the Retirement Board may be
held upon call of the Chairperson or any three members of the
Retirement Board. Written notice of special meetings shall be sent to
each member of the Retirement Board at least 72 hours in advance of
the special meeting. Verbal notice of emergency meetings shall be
§ 146-37 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-37
128:195
given to as many members as is feasible at least eight hours before the
emergency meeting, and the meeting shall commence with a statement
of the nature of the emergency. The Retirement Board shall adopt its
own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All
meetings of the Retirement Board shall comply with the Open Meetings
Act (MCLA § 15.261 et seq.) A majority of Retirement Board members
shall constitute a quorum. Each attending member of the Retirement
Board is entitled to one vote on each question before the Retirement
Board, and at least three concurring votes shall be necessary for a
decision by the Retirement Board.
D. Officers; employment of services.
(1) The Retirement Board shall elect from its own number a
Chairperson and a Chairperson Pro Tem.
(2) The Director of Finance shall be the Secretary to the Retirement
Board and chief administrative officer for the Retirement Board
and the retirement system.
(3) The Retirement Board shall employ professional, technical, clerical
and other services as required for the operation of the retirement
system. The compensation for employed services shall be fixed by
the Retirement Board.
(4) The City Attorney shall be a legal advisor to the Retirement Board.
(5) The Director of Finance shall be the Treasurer of the retirement
system and the custodian of its assets, except as to the assets the
Retirement Board may from time to time place in the custody of a
nationally chartered bank or trust company. The general bond of
the City shall cover all liability for acts as Treasurer of the
retirement system. The Treasurer shall credit all receipts of money
and assets of the retirement system to the retirement system. No
warrant shall be drawn unless it has been previously authorized by
a general or specific resolution of the Retirement Board.
(6) The Board shall appoint an actuary who shall be the technical
advisor to the Board on matters regarding the operation of the
retirement system and who shall perform such other duties as are
required in connection therewith.
(7) The Board shall appoint as Medical Director a physician who is not
eligible for membership in the retirement system and who has not,
within five years prior to appointment as Medical Director, filled an
elective, appointive, or salaried office in the City. The Medical
Director shall be responsible to and shall hold office at the pleasure
of the Board. The Medical Director shall arrange for and pass upon
all medical examinations required under the provisions of this
retirement system; shall investigate all essential statements and
certificates of a medical nature by or on behalf of a member or
beneficiary in connection with an application for disability benefits
§ 146-37 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-37
128:196
§ 146-38. Investment of funds; types of investments.
§ 146-39. Funds not subject to process.
The right of a person to a pension, to the return of accumulated member
contributions, the pension itself, any optional benefit, and any other right
accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this chapter, and
any monies and assets belonging to the retirement system, shall not be
subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy
or insolvency law, or any other process of law whatsoever, and shall be
unassignable except as is specifically provided in this chapter and in
accordance with Public Act 100 of 2002, as amended. If a member is
covered under a group insurance or prepayment plan participated in by
the City, and should member or his or her beneficiary be permitted to and
elect to continue such coverage as a retiree or beneficiary, the member
or beneficiary may authorize the Board of Trustees to deduct required
or accidental death benefits; and shall report in writing to the
board his/her conclusions on matters referred to the Medical
Director.
A. The Retirement Board is trustee of the assets of the retirement system,
and it may invest and reinvest the assets subject to the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed by the State of
Michigan on the investments of public employee retirement systems
(Act 314, Public Acts of 1965, as amended (MCLA § 38.1132 et seq.).
B. The Retirement Board may employ outside investment counsel to
advise the Board in the making and disposition of investments.
C. All assets of the retirement system shall be held and invested for the
sole purpose of meeting the legitimate obligations of the retirement
system and shall be used for no other purpose. No part of the assets
shall be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive
benefit of members and beneficiaries prior to satisfaction of all
retirement system liabilities.
D. Members of the Retirement Board and its employees are prohibited
from: 1) having a beneficial interest, direct or indirect, in an investment
of the retirement system; 2) borrowing from the retirement system; and
3) receiving any pay or emolument from any individual or organization
providing services to the retirement system. Nothing contained herein
shall be construed to impair the rights of any member, retirant, or
beneficiary of the retirement system to benefits provided by the
retirement system.
E. In exercising its discretionary authority, the Retirement Board shall
exercise the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the
circumstances then prevailing that a person of prudence, acting in a
like capacity and familiar with such matters, would use in the conduct
of an enterprise of like characteristics and with like aims.
§ 146-37 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-39
128:197
payments to continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment
plan. The City shall have the right of setoff for any claim arising from
embezzlement by or fraud of a member, retired member or survivor pension
beneficiary.
§ 146-40. Division of benefits as marital property.
The right of an individual to a pension, to the return of accumulated
member contributions, the pension itself, or any other benefit under the
provisions of the Retirement Ordinance shall be subject to award by a court
of competent jurisdiction pursuant to Section 18 of Chapter 84, Revised
Statutes of 1846, being MCLA § 552.18 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and
to any other order of a court of competent jurisdiction pertaining to child
support. If an award or order requires the retirement system to withhold
payment of a pension, accumulated member contributions or other benefit
from the individual to whom it is due, or requires the retirement system
to make payment to a spouse, former spouse or child, the withholding
or payment provisions of the award shall be effective only against the
amounts as they become payable to the individual being paid the pension
or other benefit. These limitations shall not apply to accumulated member
contributions of an individual who is neither a member nor a vested former
member.
§ 146-41. Correction of errors.
The retirement system shall correct errors in the records and actions of
the retirement system. The retirement system shall seek to recover
overpayments and shall make up underpayments. Recovery of
overpayments may be accomplished by reducing the amount of future
payments so that the actuarial present value of actual payments is equal to
the actuarial present value of correct payments.
§ 146-42. (Reserved)
§ 146-43. Qualified plan.
A. The City intends the retirement system to be a qualified pension plan
under Section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and that
the trust be an exempt organization under Section 501 of the Internal
Revenue Code. The Retirement Board shall administer the retirement
system so as to fulfill this intent.
B. The retirement system is a governmental plan under IRC § 414(D) and
is administered for the exclusive benefit of the plan's participants and
their beneficiaries.
C. The applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code are contained in
Exhibit A which is incorporated by reference.48
48.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City's offices.
§ 146-39 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-44
128:198
§ 146-44. Gifts and bequests.
The Retirement Board is hereby authorized and empowered to receive
donations, gifts and bequests and credit them to the undistributed
investment income reserve.
§ 146-45. Subrogation rights.
In the event a member, retired member or survivor pension beneficiary
becomes entitled to a pension as the result of an accident or injury caused
by the act of a third party, the City shall be subrogated to the rights of such
member, retired member or survivor pension beneficiary against such third
party to the extent of pensions which the City pays or becomes liable to pay
on account of such accident or injury.
§ 146-46. Expenses.
The expenses of administering the retirement system shall be paid by the
retirement system.
§ 146-47. Protection against fraud; violations and penalties.
Whoever with intent to deceive shall make any statements and/or report
required under this chapter which are untrue, or shall falsify or permit to
be falsified any record or records of the retirement system or who shall
otherwise violate, with intent to deceive, any of the terms or provisions of
this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or to imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
§ 146-48. Effective provisions.
A member shall be entitled to those benefits based upon the terms and
conditions in effect at the time of separation from employment.
§ 146-49. Applicable law; mandatory bargaining subjects.
The plan and trust shall be construed pursuant to the laws of the State
of Michigan. The Board shall administer this pension trust fund consistent
with the trust fund provisions, Article 9, Section 24 of the State of Michigan
constitution and other applicable law. The Board shall have the fiduciary
obligations, limitations and authority as provided by Public Act 314 of 1965
of the state statues, as amended. The Board shall administer this pension
trust in accordance with applicable collective bargaining agreements.
§ 146-50. Reciprocal retirement system.
The retirement system is a reciprocal retirement system under the
provisions of Act 88, Public Acts of 1961 of the State of Michigan, as
amended, which were adopted August 28, 1967.
§ 146-44 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-50
128:199

ARTICLE II
Retiree Health Care Trust
[Adopted 11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
§ 146-51. Purpose.
The City of Royal Oak Retiree Health Care Trust is established for the
purpose of funding other postretirement employee benefits for eligible City
retirees and their beneficiaries (an essential governmental function). The
Retiree Health Care Trust is created and is intended to be a governmental
trust pursuant to § 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended,
and the applicable treasury regulations.
§ 146-52. Title.
This article and trust may be known and cited as the "City of Royal Oak
Retiree Health Care Trust" ("Retiree Health Care Trust").
§ 146-53. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
CITY — The City of Royal Oak, Michigan, including its offices, boards,
departments, agencies, and instrumentalities.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Reference to
any section or subsection of the Code includes reference to any comparable
or succeeding provision of any legislation which amends or replaces such
section or subsection and any regulations thereto.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT — Any written agreement,
supplemental agreement, memorandum of understanding, final arbitrator's
decision, judicial decision or decision of any public board or agency, by
and between applicable collective bargaining associations and the City, and
any amendments, continuations, or renewals, which require the City or any
other entity to make payments for retiree health care benefits.
HEALTH CARE PLAN or PLAN — The plan through which the City provides
retiree health care benefits to eligible City retirees and beneficiaries in
accordance with applicable insurance agreements, collective bargaining
agreements, personnel policies, or other documents.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The City's Director of Human Resources or
such other person, persons, firm, corporation or insurance company or
companies appointed by the City to administer the benefits of the plan.
RETIREE HEALTH CARE — Health, dental, vision, prescription drug or
other health care benefits to eligible retirees and their qualified spouses and
dependents as determined by the City and applicable collective bargaining
agreements.
RETIREE HEALTH CARE INVESTMENT BOARD — The Board of Trustees
of the City of Royal Oak Retiree Health Care Trust.
§ 146-51 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-53
128:201
RETIREE HEALTH CARE TRUST or TRUST — The City of Royal Oak Retiree
Health Care Trust established and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
TRUST ADMINISTRATOR — The City's Director of Finance or such other
person, persons, firm, corporation or insurance company or companies,
appointed by the City to administer the Trust's investments and funding.
§ 146-54. Irrevocable trust established.
§ 146-55. Use of Trust assets.
A. The Trust shall be an irrevocable trust administered consistent with
applicable federal and Michigan law, and shall constitute a
governmental trust under § 115 of the Code, as amended, Revenue
Rulings 77-261 and 90-74, and other relevant guidance. The Trust is
intended to fund the City's retiree health care obligations. The Trust
shall conform to all applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code,
the applicable collective bargaining agreements, personnel policies, the
statement of purpose in this Trust, and all statutes, ordinances, rules,
regulations, arbitrators' awards and judicial decisions interpreting the
foregoing provisions.
B. The Trust shall consist of City contributions, all investments made or
held by the Trust, and all income therefrom, both received and accrued,
and any other property, which may be received or held by reason of this
Trust.
C. The Retiree Health Care Trust is intended to be a trust governed by
Subpart E of Part I of Subchapter J of Chapter 1 of the Code and related
treasury regulations, under which the City is treated as the owner of
the Retiree Health Care Trust for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The
income accruing to the Trust shall be excluded from gross income as
such trust income is derived from the exercise of an essential
governmental function as provided for under § 115 of the Code, as
amended, and other relevant guidance.
A. All assets of the Retiree Health Care Trust shall be held and
administered, invested and reinvested, and distributed in accordance
with the provisions of this article and the plan.
B. The Trust assets shall not be used for or diverted to purposes other than
to provide the benefits contemplated under the Trust or to pay for
reasonable and necessary services, costs and expenses related to the
administration of the plan and Trust.
C. All income, profits, recoveries, contributions, forfeitures and any and all
monies, securities and properties of any kind at any time received or
held by the Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall become part of
the Retiree Health Care Trust when received, and shall be held for the
use and purposes hereof.
§ 146-53 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-55
128:202
§ 146-56. Funding.
§ 146-57. Board established.
D. No part of the principal or income of the Trust may inure to the benefit
of the City, any participant or beneficiary other than by benefit
payments pursuant to the plan or for services provided for the
administration of the plan and Trust.
A. The Retiree Health Care Trust shall receive contributions made by the
City, including the net proceeds from the City's sale of bonds, to pay the
retiree health care obligations consistent with the actuarial valuations
and calculations made by the actuary for the Trust. The City reserves
the right to fund these retiree health care obligations on a pay-as-yougo
basis and the right to provide such lesser amount as the City
determines.
B. The City, in its sole and absolute discretion, may cause additional funds
to be transferred or contributed to the Retiree Health Care Trust, and
such funds, if any, shall be subject to the terms of this Trust.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Retiree Health Care Trust ("Retiree Health
Care Investment Board") shall be vested with the authority and
responsibility for the administration, management and operation of the
Trust. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall be a quasijudicial
body comprised of five members as follows:
(1) The City Manager.
(2) Two members of the City Commission who are serving as the City
representatives on the Board of Trustees of the City of Royal Oak
Retirement System.
(3) One general member who is serving as the general member on the
Board of Trustees of the City of Royal Oak Retirement System.
(4) One police or fire member who is serving as the police or fire
member on the Board of Trustees of the City of Royal Oak
Retirement System.
B. The general administration, management and responsibility for the
proper operation of the Trust and for making effective and construing
the provisions of the Trust shall be vested in the Retiree Health Care
Investment Board established by this section, consistent with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations. A trustee, or other
fiduciary under the Trust, shall act solely in the interest of the Trust and
paying reasonable expenses of administering the Trust. A trustee shall
discharge their duties with the care, skill, and caution under the
circumstances then prevailing which a prudent person, acting in a like
capacity and familiar with those matters, would use in the conduct of an
activity of like character and purpose.
§ 146-55 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-58
128:203
§ 146-58. Trustees' terms of office.
§ 146-59. Officers and administration.
A. The regular terms of office of the trustees on the Retiree Health Care
Investment Board shall be four years or, if applicable, shall coincide
with and be identical to their terms of office as members of the Board of
Trustees of the Royal Oak Retirement System.
B. Each trustee shall serve until the expiration of their term of office or
until their death, incapacity, resignation or removal.
C. A vacancy or vacancies in the office of the trustees shall not impair the
powers of the remaining trustees to administer the affairs of the Trust,
provided there are sufficient trustees to constitute a quorum.
A. The trustees shall elect from their own membership a chairperson and
vicechairperson. The chairperson and vicechairperson shall serve a
term of one year or until a new chairperson and vicechairperson is
elected.
B. The City's director of finance shall be the secretary to the Retiree
Health Care Investment Board.
C. The City's director of finance shall be the treasurer of the Trust and the
custodian of its assets, except to the assets of the Trust that the Retiree
Health Care Investment Board may place in the custody of a nationally
chartered bank or trust company. The general bond of the City shall
cover all liability for acts as treasurer of the Retiree Health Care Trust.
The treasurer shall credit all receipts of money and assets of the Retiree
Health Care Trust to the Retiree Health Care Trust. No Trust assets
shall be transferred unless previously authorized by a general or
specific resolution of the Retiree Health Care Investment Board.
D. The Trust Administrator shall be responsible for the day-to-day
operations related to investments and funding of the plan and shall
carry out the directives of the Retiree Health Care Investment Board.
E. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall retain all professional,
technical, clerical and other services required for the operations
related to investments and funding of the Retiree Health Care Trust.
The compensation for such services shall be as determined by the
Retiree Health Care Investment Board.
F. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall appoint an actuary
who shall advise the Retiree Health Care Investment Board on the
actuarial operation of the Trust. The Retiree Health Care Investment
Board shall, from time to time, adopt such mortality and other tables of
experience and a rate or rates of regular interest as are necessary in
the operation of the Trust on an actuarial basis.
§ 146-58 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-59
128:204
§ 146-60. Board powers and duties.
G. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board may retain legal counsel to
handle the legal matters of the Retiree Health Care Trust and to give
advice and counsel with respect to any matter connected with the
duties of the Retiree Health Care Investment Board.
H. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board may utilize City staff for
such functions as personnel administration, accounting, banking, and
purchasing. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board may reimburse
the City for actual costs of these services as jointly agreed upon by the
Retiree Health Care Investment Board and the City.
A. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall be the trustee of the
Retiree Health Care Trust and shall have all the powers necessary to
carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Trust,
including, in addition to any specific powers provided for in this article,
but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power to:
(1) Administer the Retiree Health Care Trust, including the
management of its assets, and making effective its provisions;
(2) Make and adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the duties of the Retiree Health Care
Investment Board and activities of the Retiree Health Care Trust,
including rules and regulations necessary to preserve the status of
the Trust under § 115 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended,
or under successor or related provisions of law;
(3) Create and maintain the records of the Retiree Health Care Trust,
including all meeting agenda and minutes;
(4) Retain such clerical or administrative personnel to perform
whatever administrative activities are required in the proper
operation related to investments and funding of the Retiree Health
Care Trust. The Board may utilize City staff for such functions; and
(5) Make and execute contracts.
B. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall make distributions
from the Retiree Health Care Trust assets pursuant to a written
notification of the amount from the plan Administrator of the Health
Care Plan. Distributions may be made more frequently than once per
year, but in no case shall the aggregate amount distributed to the
Health Care Plan in any fiscal year exceed the estimated health care
costs for that year. Distributions pursuant to this section shall be made
from the income of the Retiree Health Care Trust and, to the extent that
the income is insufficient, from the corpus of the Retiree Health Care
Trust.
C. If the Retiree Health Care Investment Board undertakes to defend any
litigation arising in connection with the Retiree Health Care Trust, the
§ 146-59 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-60
128:205
§ 146-61. Investment.
City, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, shall indemnify
the Board and Retiree Health Care Trust against their actual costs,
expenses and liabilities (including, without limitation, reasonable and
actual attorneys' fees and expenses incurred) relating thereto and to
be primarily liable for such payments; provided however, that the City
shall not indemnify the Board for any litigation arising from any actions
that are determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
fraudulent, in bad faith, illegal or grossly negligent.
A. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall be the trustee of the
Retiree Health Care Trust and shall have the authority to carry out the
purposes of the Retiree Health Care Trust, including, but not limited to:
(1) Invest and reinvest the assets of the Retiree Health Care Trust
subject to the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions
imposed by the State of Michigan on the investments of public
employee retirement systems by the Public Employee Retirement
System Investment Act, 1965 P.A. 314, as amended (MCL 38.1132
et seq.). In exercising its discretionary authority with respect to the
management of the Retiree Health Care Trust, the Retiree Health
Care Investment Board shall be an investment fiduciary and shall
act with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under
circumstances then prevailing, that a prudent person, acting in a
similar capacity and familiar with those matters would use in the
conduct of a similar enterprise with similar aims. This shall include
diversifying the assets of the Retiree Health Care Trust so as to
minimize the risk of large losses, unless under the circumstances it
appears prudent not to do so.
B. Subject to the foregoing, the Retiree Health Care Investment Board
shall have the following rights, powers and duties with respect to the
assets of the Retiree Health Care Trust:
(1) To retain, manage, improve, repair, operate and control all
property, real or personal, at any time comprising part of the Trust;
(2) To manage, sell, contract to sell, grant options to purchase, convey,
exchange, partition, lease for any term, and otherwise dispose of
the Trust from time to time and in such manner, for such
consideration, and upon such terms and conditions as the Board, in
its discretion, shall determine;
(3) To retain all or any part of the Trust in the form in which such
assets were received or acquired by the Retiree Health Care
Investment Board;
(4) To hold all or part of the Trust in cash or in bank accounts without
the necessity of investing the same;
§ 146-60 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-61
128:206
(5) To vote any corporate stock either in person or by proxy for any
purpose; to exercise or sell any stock subscription or conversion
right; to participate in voting trusts; to consent to, take any action
in connection with, and receive and retain any securities resulting
from, any merger, consolidation, reorganization, readjustment of
the financial structure, liquidation, sale, lease or other organization
the securities of which may constitute a portion of the Trust;
(6) To keep property in the name of a nominee with or without
disclosure of any fiduciary relationship; to have evidence of
ownership of any security maintained in the records of a Federal
Reserve Bank under the Federal Reserve Book Entry System; to
deposit funds in any bank or trust company; to carry in the name of
the Retiree Health Care Trust or the nominee or nominees of the
Retiree Health Care Trust and with or without the designation of
fiduciary capacity, or to hold in bearer form, securities or other
property which are required or permitted to be registered; and to
cause any securities to be held by a depository corporation of which
the Retiree Health Care Trust shall be a member or be an agent
under a safekeeping contract; provided, however, that the books
and records of the Retiree Health Care Trust shall at all times show
that such investments are part of the Trust;
(7) To take any action with respect to conserving or realizing upon the
value of any property in the Retiree Health Care Trust; to collect,
pay, contest, compromise or abandon demands of or against the
Trust;
(8) To litigate, defend, compromise, settle, abandon, or submit to
arbitration, on such terms as the Retiree Health Care Investment
Board determines, any claims in favor of or against the Retiree
Health Care Trust;
(9) To employ such agents, experts, investment fiduciaries, legal
counsel and other persons or entities deemed by the Retiree Health
Care Board to be necessary or proper for the administration and
management of the Retiree Health Care Trust; to rely and act on
information and advice furnished by such agents, experts,
investment fiduciaries, legal counsel, and other persons or entities;
and to pay their reasonable expenses and compensation for
services to the Board from the Retiree Health Care Trust.
(10) To transfer to an investment fiduciary [as defined at MCL
38.1132c(1)] the authority and accompanying duty to direct the
investment and management of all or a portion of the Retiree
Health Care Trust, provided that such an investment fiduciary shall
acknowledge, in writing, fiduciary status with respect to the Trust;
and
(11) To make, execute, and deliver any and all such instruments, in
writing, as shall be necessary or proper to carry out any power,
§ 146-61 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-61
128:207
§ 146-62. Board meetings.
§ 146-63. Compensation.
All trustees shall serve without compensation as members of the Retiree
Health Care Investment Board, except that trustees who are City employees
shall suffer no loss in compensation on account of their services as trustees.
Trustees may also be reimbursed by the Trust for reasonable and necessary
costs and expenses in performing their duties as trustees.
§ 146-64. Board liabilities.
The Retiree Health Care Investment Board's responsibilities and liabilities
shall be subject to the following limitations and other limitations as set forth
in the Trust:
right, duty or obligation of the Board of Trustees or any disposition
whatsoever of the Retiree Health Care Trust, and to perform any
and all acts which in the judgment of the Board is necessary or
desirable for the proper and advantageous administration of the
Trust.
(12) To the extent provided by law, the Retiree Health Care Investment
Board may commingle the investment of the Trust assets with other
funds.
A. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall meet at least once per
calendar quarter. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall
determine the time for the regular meetings of the trustees and the
place or places where such meetings shall be held.
B. Notice and conduct of all meetings of the Retiree Health Care
Investment Board, both regular and special, shall be given in
accordance with applicable law, including the Open Meetings Act (MCL
§ 15.261 et seq.).
C. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Three trustees
shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the Retiree Health Care
Investment Board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on each
question before the Retiree Health Care Investment Board and at least
three concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision of the Retiree
Health Care Investment Board.
A. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board shall have no duties other
than those expressly set forth in this Trust and those imposed on the
Retiree Health Care Investment Board by applicable law.
B. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board and Trust Administrator
shall be responsible only for money and property actually received by
the Retiree Health Care Investment Board, and then only to the extent
described in this Trust.
§ 146-61 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-64
128:208
§ 146-65. Trust liabilities.
C. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board and Trust Administrator
shall not be responsible for the correctness of any determination of
payments or disbursements from the plan.
D. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board and Trust Administrator
shall have no liability for the acts or omissions of any investment
advisor; insurance company; investment fund; or independent
contractor.
E. In the event of any suit brought against the trustees or Trust
Administrator arising out of the acts within the scope and powers and
duties of the trustees or Trust Administrator, or in the event of any
lawsuit brought by the trustees, the cost of defense or prosecution of
such lawsuit shall be charged to the Trust, and shall be paid directly
from the Trust, provided such costs are not incurred by reason of bad
faith, gross negligence, or breach of a fiduciary obligation to the Trust.
F. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board may authorize the purchase
of insurance for the Trust and for the trustees and Trust Administrator
to cover liability or losses occurring for any reason, including, but not
limited to, an act or omission (errors or omissions) of a fiduciary,
including the trustees and Trust Administrator.
A. The City shall not be liable for payment to the Trust of any amount other
than those required pursuant to this Trust. The City, plan participant/
beneficiary, Trust Administrator or trustee shall not be liable for any
debts, liabilities or obligations of the Trust except as provided herein.
Neither the City nor any plan participant/beneficiary shall have any
right to the return of any money properly paid into the Trust, except as
otherwise specifically provided in the Trust.
B. Neither the Retiree Health Care Investment Board, Trust Administrator
or its trustees shall be responsible for the validity of any insurance
agreement issued in connection with the Trust or for the failure on the
part of the Insurer to make payments provided by such insurance
agreement, or for the action of any person which may delay payment or
render an insurance agreement null and void or unenforceable in whole
or in part. Notwithstanding the establishment of the Trust or anything
contained in this agreement, the trustees and Trust Administrator shall
not be empowered to interpret the rights and obligation of the City in
any collective bargaining agreements.
C. No part of the Trust or any benefits payable by the trustees shall be
subject to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, or
encumbrance by any person. No plan participant or beneficiary shall be
entitled to receive any part of the contributions made by the City or
payments required to be made by the Trust, in lieu of such benefits
provided under the plan as determined by the trustees in accordance
with the Trust.
§ 146-64 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-66
128:209
§ 146-66. Reports.
§ 146-67. Interpretation and law; construal of provisions.
A. The Retiree Health Care Investment Board, or its respective designees,
shall establish a uniform system for the timely transmission of required
reports and shall complete and provide any reports as may be required
by the Code, applicable federal, state or local law.
B. The trustees, in accordance with the requirements of law, may direct an
impartial firm of independent certified public accountants to act as
agent of the trustees to examine the records and reports as may be
necessary to determine the monies due on behalf of this Trust and to
make a written report to the trustees.
C. The trustees shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, proper books of
accounts and records of and for the administration of the Trust,
including the minutes of all meetings, and make them available for
inspection during reasonable business hours.
A. The Trust is established and shall be construed in accordance with the
laws of the State of Michigan and applicable federal laws and
regulations.
B. The Trust shall constitute a governmental trust pursuant to § 115 of the
Code, as amended, and shall be construed, enforced and administered
and the validity thereof determined in accordance with the Code and
the laws of the State of Michigan. If any provision of the Trust is held to
violate the Code or to be illegal or invalid for any other reason, that
provision shall be deemed to be null and void, but the invalidation of
that provision shall not otherwise affect the Trust.
C. Neither the establishment of the Trust, nor any modification thereof,
nor the creation of any fund or account, nor the payment of any benefits
shall be construed as giving to any person covered under the plan, or
any other person, any legal or equitable right or claim to any benefits or
assets against the City, its elected or appointed officials or employees,
the Retiree Health Care Investment Board or any individual Retiree
Health Care Investment Board member, except as may otherwise be
provided in this Trust.
D. The headings and subheadings in this Trust are inserted for
convenience of reference only and are not to be considered in the
construction of any provision of the Trust.
E. Words herein in the masculine gender shall be construed to include the
feminine gender where appropriate, and words used herein in the
singular or plural shall be construed as being in the plural or singular
where appropriate.
F. In resolving any conflict among provisions of this Trust or any
uncertainty as to the meaning or intention of any provision of this Trust,
§ 146-66 ROYAL OAK CODE § 146-67
128:210
§ 146-68. Notice.
Notice given to all interested parties shall, unless otherwise specified in
this Trust, be sufficient if in writing and delivered or sent by prepaid firstclass
mail. Except as otherwise noted, the distribution or delivery of any
statements or documents required under the Trust shall be sufficient if
delivered in person or prepaid first-class mail.
§ 146-69. Amendments and termination.
§ 146-70. Third party reliance.
Third parties may rely on the representations of the Retiree Health Care
Investment Board relating to any authority granted under the Retiree
Health Care Trust.
the interpretation that causes both the Trust to be exempt from tax and
the Trust to comply with all applicable requirements of the Code shall
prevail over any different interpretation.
G. This Trust shall be binding upon all plan participants and beneficiaries,
or their applicable heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and
assigns.
A. The City, in its sole and absolute discretion, may amend the Retiree
Health Care Trust in accordance with the provisions of § 115 of the
Internal Revenue Code, as amended, or as otherwise required pursuant
to the provisions of applicable state and federal law and regulations.
B. The Retiree Health Care Trust, though irrevocable, may be terminated
by the City, but only in the following limited circumstances:
(1) At the option of the City, the Retiree Health Care Trust's assets may
be distributed, in full, to satisfy the purpose of the Trust;
(2) If the Retiree Health Care Trust no longer has any assets; or
(3) Upon the City's satisfaction of its retiree health care liabilities.
C. Upon termination of the Retiree Health Care Trust, the remaining
assets shall be distributed to the City.
D. In no event will the Retiree Health Care Trust assets revert to any entity
that is not a state, a political subdivision of the state, or an entity whose
income is excluded from gross income under Code § 115.
§ 146-67 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 146-70
128:211
Chapter 156
VETERANS WAR MEMORIAL
§ 156-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Veterans War
Memorial Ordinance."
§ 156-2. Purpose.
This is a chapter to designate a portion of the Barbara A. Hallman Memorial
Plaza for continued use as a memorial honoring members of the American
and Canadian armed forces who have lost their lives in service to their
country.
§ 156-3. Findings.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby makes the following findings:
§ 156-4. Designation of Memorial area.
The following portion of the Barbara A. Hallman Memorial Plaza is
designated for continued use as a memorial honoring members of the
American and Canadian armed forces who have lost their lives in service to
their country:
A. In 1997, the City Commission adopted a resolution naming the area
between City Hall, the Royal Oak Public Library, Troy Street and the
Veterans' War Memorial as the Barbara A. Hallman Memorial Plaza.
B. In 2006, the Veterans' War Memorial was moved from the western end
of the Hallman Plaza to its current location between City Hall and the
Library, and was rededicated in memory of members of the American
and Canadian armed forces who have lost their lives in service to their
country.
C. The current site of the Veterans' War Memorial is an appropriate
location for the Memorial, and the designation of that area for
continued use as a memorial honoring members of the American and
Canadian armed forces who have lost their lives in service to their
country should be formalized by way of ordinance.
§ 146-70 ROYAL OAK CODE § 156-4
156:212
That portion of vacated Second Street (East of vacated Williams Street
and West of Troy Street), extending from the East line of vacated Williams
Street to the West line of Troy Street, adjacent to Lot 7, vacated public
alley, and Lot 8 in Block 1 of Assessor's Plat No. 20, and also adjacent to
Lot 1 in Block 12 of Assessor's Plat No. 20. Also including the northernmost
10.00 feet of the aforementioned Lot 1 in Block 12; all in Assessor's Plat
No. 20, T. 1N., R. 11E., City of Royal Oak, Oakland County, Michigan, as
recorded in Liber 53, Page 33 of Plats, Oakland County Records.
Part of Parcel No. 72-25-22-103-004
Chapter 160
WATER AUTHORITY, SOUTHEASTERN OAKLAND COUNTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wastewater — See Ch. 740.
Water — See Ch. 745.
Waterworks — See Ch. 752.
§ 160-1. Permission to construct on certain highways; highways
enumerated; terms. [Amended 10-5-1987 by Ord. No. 87-13]
The City of Royal Oak, Michigan, a municipal corporation hereinafter
referred to as the "City," does hereby grant to the Southeastern Oakland
County Water Authority, a public corporation hereinafter referred to as the
"Authority," permission to construct, use, maintain, replace and/or repair
water mains and appurtenances, in the following highways in said City, to
wit:
In Webster Road from Greenfield Road to Coolidge Highway
In Webster Road from Oliver Road to Woodward Avenue
In Woodward Avenue from Webster Rood to Trafford Road and thence
across Woodward Avenue to the West line thereof
In Trafford Road from Woodward Avenue to Coolidge Highway
In Oliver Road from Grand Trunk Western Railroad to Crooks Road
In Thirteen Mile Road from Authority easement along west line of
William Beaumont Hospital property to Greenfield Road
In Judson Avenue from east line of William Beaumont Hospital property
to Coolidge
In Greenfield Road from Thirteen Mile Road to Fourteen Mile Road
across Twelve Mile Road, Vinsetta Boulevard, Houstonia Avenue, Lloyd
Avenue and Northwood Boulevard, at the east line of Grand Trunk
Western Railway right-of-way
In Crooks Road from Oliver Road to Fourteen Mile Road
§ 156-4 WATER AUTHORITY, SOUTHEASTERN § 160-1
160:213
In Samoset Road from Crooks Road to the west line of Edgeland Avenue
(extended)
In the public easement over lands formerly constituting Samoset Road
(now vacated), from the west line of Edgeland Avenue to the westerly
boundary of Nordwood Estates subdivision
In Fourteen Mile Road from a point 70 feet west of the west line of
Edgeland Avenue (now vacated) to Greenfield Road
In Coolidge Highway from Webster Road to Fourteen Mile Road
Across Woodward Avenue about 65 feet south of Eleven Mile Road from
the east line of Woodward Avenue to the westerly City limits
The following are the locations of existing water mains which are a part of
the so-called "North Woodward System" to be acquired by the Authority:
In Woodward Avenue from the southerly City limits to a point opposite
Washington Avenue
Across a twenty-foot public alley lying west of Woodward Avenue, on a
line just south of the north line extended of Lot 19 of Assessor's Plat No.
3 of a part of Lucking's subdivision
In Ten Mile Road from easterly line of Main Street to westerly City limits
In Main Street from the Ten Mile Road northerly approximately 50 feet
The following are the locations of an existing 30 inches water main to be
acquired by the Authority:
Across Woodward Avenue at Washington Avenue, thence in Woodward
Avenue to Vinsetta Boulevard, thence in Vinsetta Boulevard to the
Twelve Mile Road and thence in the Twelve Mile Road to the east side of
Vinsetta Boulevard
In Eleven Mile Road from Woodward Avenue easterly approximately 48
feet
Upon the following terms and conditions, to wit:
A. The Authority before constructing the said water mains shall file plans
showing the size and location of said mains and appurtenances with the
City Engineer;
B. The Authority shall do all excavating and other work in connection with
the construction, maintenance and repair of said water mains in a
careful and workmanlike manner so as to cause as little inconvenience
as possible to the City and the users of said highways;
C. The Authority after making any excavation in the City shall restore the
surface of all highways and also all sidewalks, pavements and other
improvements and all property, both public and private, so that they will
be in as good condition as they were previous to such excavation;
D. The Authority shall not disturb any underground work now existing,
such as water mains, sewers, and other such improvements, which are
owned by the City or other public corporation, without first obtaining
§ 160-1 ROYAL OAK CODE § 160-1
160:214
§ 160-2. Extensions across highways.
Where a public highway is named above as the terminus for any water main,
the permission herein granted shall be deemed to extend across such part
of the highway as the Authority may deem necessary.
§ 160-3. Benefit of water supply declared fair compensation.
This permit, and those granted by other constituent members of the
Authority, is given so that the Authority may furnish water to such members,
and the advantages accruing to this City from having such a source of water
supply available are hereby declared fair compensation for the permission
herein granted.
§ 160-4. Permission not revocable.
This chapter shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the City and
the Authority, and their respective successors and assigns, provided they
are public corporations; and that the permission herein granted shall not
be revocable so long as said water mains shall be a part of the Authority's
water supply system or that of a successor or assignee public corporation.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 180
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278.
§ 180-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Alarm System Control
Ordinance."
the consent of such owner, and in event of such changes the same
shall be made in the manner directed and required by such owner and
the entire cost and expense thereof shall be borne by the Authority;
provided that, as to changes in such improvements belonging to the
City, the City Engineer may act for the City;
E. The Authority shall hold the City harmless against all damages resulting
from the construction, use, maintenance and repair of said water mains
and appurtenances;
F. The City will endeavor to keep other underground utility facilities at
least five feet distant from those of the Authority.
§ 160-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 180-2
180:215
§ 180-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate emergency alarms and to
prevent the disruption and interference with the telephone communication
system of the Royal Oak Police and Fire Departments by allowing alarm
systems which, when activated, connect with the communication center of
the Royal Oak Police and Fire Departments by means of the Departments'
telephone system. It is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent audible
and/or visible alarms from becoming a nuisance, by requiring persons with
audible or visible alarms to provide the Royal Oak Police Department with
information as specified in § 180-5 of this chapter, which will assist the
Department in deactivating such false alarms. In addition, it is the purpose
of this chapter to allow the City to recover a portion of the costs to the City
of responding to excessive false alarms as provided for in § 180-6 of this
chapter.
§ 180-3. Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this chapter:
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices, or a single
device, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard or situation requiring
urgent attention and to which Police or Fire Departments are expected to
respond.
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE ALARM SYSTEM — A device, or combination
thereof, that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by
other means initiate the automatic calling, dialing or connection to any
telephone number assigned to the Royal Oak Police or Fire Department
by a public telephone company for the purpose of delivering a recorded
message.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm condition which is registered at the Police
Department, Fire Department or elsewhere through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or user
of an alarm system or of his employee or agent. Also included is any
alarm condition registered at the Police Department, Fire Department or
elsewhere not resulting from criminal activity for which the alarm was
intended, or in case of a fire alarm, any alarm condition which is registered
at the Fire Department or elsewhere not resulting from a fire or potential
fire condition.
PERSON — Refers to any individual, joint venture, partnership, firm,
corporation or proprietorship.
§ 180-4. Automatic telephone alarm systems prohibited.
No person shall install, use, maintain or operate an automatic telephone
alarm system as defined herein.
§ 180-5. Audible and/or visible alarms; locating information;
duration limited.
§ 180-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 180-5
180:216
§ 180-6. False alarms; fees.
Notwithstanding any penalties provided for in the event of a conviction for
a violation of this chapter, in order to defray the cost of responding to false
alarms, the owner or lessee of an alarm system experiencing more than
three false alarms, as described above, within one calendar year, shall pay
to the City of Royal Oak a false alarm fee for each separate occurrence, and
the amount of that fee shall be that which is established by resolution of the
Royal Oak City Commission. After receiving the third false alarm, the police
shall notify the owner or lessee of the premises in writing of this chapter
and the amount of the fee at that time charged for subsequent occurrences
during that calendar year.
§ 180-7. Exceptions to false alarms.
A fee shall not be charged in the following cases:
§ 180-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with § 180-4 or
180-5 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed
$500, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the court.
A. No person shall maintain an alarm system which, when activated,
causes an audible and/or visible signal, which signal can be heard or
seen outside the premises protected by said alarm system, and which
signal is disturbing to the peace and quiet of the surrounding area,
unless that person has first provided the Director of Public Safety of the
City of Royal Oak with his name, telephone number and address of the
premises where the alarm system is located, and also the names and
telephone numbers of at least three other persons who can be reached
at any time, day or night, and who, within a thirty-minute response
time, will open the premises in which the alarm system is located and
deactivate the audible and/or visible signal.
B. No person shall maintain an alarm system which emits a sound and/or
visual signal for a period longer than 15 minutes from the time of the
initial signaling of the devices.
A. Three false alarms in calendar year.
B. Alarm conditions being activated by persons working on the alarm
system with prior notification to the City of Royal Oak Police
Department or Fire Department.
C. Alarm conditions activated by severe weather or other violent
conditions beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm
system.
§ 180-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 180-8
180:217
Chapter 188
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 188, Amusements, comprised of Art. I, Midget Auto
Tracks and Go-Carts, adopted 7-5-1961 by Ord. No. 61-14, and Art.
II, Places of Public Amusement; Amusement Devices, adopted
8-31-1981 by Ord. No. 81-8, as amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 195
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal Shelter Committee — See Ch. 39, Art.
IX.
Horse-drawn carriages — See Ch. 388.
Nuisances caused by animals — See Ch. 484.
Dogs in parks and playgrounds — See Ch.
515.
§ 180-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 180-8
180:218
ARTICLE I
Chickens and Fowl at Large
[Adopted 1-27-1919 by Ord. No. 84]
§ 195-1. Running at large prohibited. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-01]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to permit any chickens or
other fowls owned by them or in their possession or under their control to
run at large within the corporate limits of the City of Royal Oak.
§ 195-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, on conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $25, or, in default of the
payment of such fine, the offender shall be punished by imprisonment in the
county jail for a period of not more than 60 days unless such fine is sooner
paid.
§ 195-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-2
180:219

ARTICLE II
Rabbits, Fowl and Poultry
[Adopted 6-8-1942 by Ord. No. 412]
§ 195-3. Locking or tying wings prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, by himself or
another, to lock or tie the wings of any chicken, turkey, goose, duck or other
domestic fowl for the purpose of weighing or handling or cause the same to
be done.
§ 195-4. Crowding and improper care.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to overcrowd in any
crate, box or other receptacle rabbits, domestic fowl or poultry or to fail to
provide proper food, water, shelter, or sanitation for the same.
§ 195-5. Artificial coloring and novelty sales prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, by himself or
another, to sell, or offer for sale, barter or give away baby chicks, rabbits,
ducklings, or other fowls as pets or novelties, whether or not dyed, colored
or otherwise artificially treated. This article shall not be construed to
prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in proper brooder
facilities by hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same
to be raised for commercial purposes.
§ 195-6. Seizure; payment of costs.
In the case of any violation of this article, it shall be the duty of any fully
appointed humane officer, peace officer, sheriff or health officer to seize
such fowl or pets and provide the necessary care and attention, and such
fowl or pets shall not be returned until all expenses for such care and
attention shall have been paid.
§ 195-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-01]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine not exceeding the sum
of $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 195-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-7
180:221

ARTICLE III
Dogs
[Adopted 5-14-1973 by Ord. No. 73-4]
§ 195-8. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Dog Ordinance."
§ 195-9. Definitions. [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07;
5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
The following terms when used in this article shall have the definitions set
forth in this section:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under reasonable
control.
DOG — Any dog, whether male, female or unsexed.
DOG LITTER — Fecal matter or excrement issuing from dogs.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include every
person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps
or harbors such dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits such
dog to remain in or about any premises occupied by him.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, building, sidewalk, driveway, parking
lot, street, roadway or roadbed, park, playground or other recreation area
which is not owned or leased by the City of Royal Oak, or any other such
property not owned or leased by the State of Michigan, Oakland County,
the Royal Oak Board of Education or any agency thereof, which property is
located within the geographic boundaries of the City of Royal Oak.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any land, building, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot,
street, roadway or roadbed, park playground or other recreation area which
is either owned or leased by the City of Royal Oak or any other such
property owned or leased by the State of Michigan, Oakland County, the
Royal Oak Board of Education or any agency thereof, which property is
located within the geographic boundaries of the City of Royal Oak.
REASONABLE CONTROL — Keeping a dog on a suitable leash, cord, chain
or rope of sufficient strength while under control of the owner, member
of the owner's family or other responsible person who has the owner's
permission, in all cases other than while confined upon the owner's property
or while dog is confined in a closed automobile or shipping receptacle.
§ 195-10. License required. [Amended 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11;
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, or harbor any
dog six months of age or over without first having obtained a license
therefor. [Amended 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
§ 195-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-10
180:223
§ 195-11. Application for dog license; certificate of vaccination
prerequisite to issuance. [Amended 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11;
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07]
§ 195-12. License fee; exemption; expiration. [Amended 4-14-1975
by Ord. No. 75-6; 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 77-16; 9-17-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-17; 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-07]
B. Any person becoming the owner of any dog six months or older which
has not already been licensed in the City of Royal Oak shall, within 30
days, apply for and secure a license for such dog.
C. The owner of a dog which has been duly licensed in another jurisdiction
shall make application for a City of Royal Oak dog license within 30
days after such dog has been brought within the City of Royal Oak.
A. Individual dog licenses to own or harbor a dog shall be issued by the
City Clerk upon application and payment of a license fee. An application
for a license shall be accompanied by proof of vaccination of the dog in
the form of a valid certificate of vaccination for rabies, with a vaccine
license by the United States Department of Agriculture, signed by an
accredited veterinarian.
B. If a valid certificate of rabies vaccination states that the dog has been
given a one-year inoculation with in the past six months, a two-year
inoculation within the past 18 months or a three-year inoculation within
the past 30 months, then a one-year license may be issued.
C. If a valid certificate of rabies vaccination states that the dog has been
given a two-year inoculation within the past six months or a three-year
inoculation within the past 18 months, then a two-year license may be
issued.
D. If a valid certificate of rabies vaccination states that the dog has been
given a three-year inoculation within the past six months, then a threeyear
license may be issued.
A. The amount of the fee for a dog license shall be set by resolution of the
City Commission. [Amended 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
B. This section does not apply to any dog which is used as defined in MCLA
§ 393.351 for a blind person as defined in MCLA § 393.351, to a hearing
dog for a deaf or audibly impaired person as defined in MCLA § 752.61,
or to a service dog for a physically limited person as defined in MCLA
§ 125.1351. [Amended 10-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-09]
C. All dog licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on the
expiration date of the rabies vaccination stated on the proof of
vaccination presented at the time of license application.
§ 195-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-13
180:224
§ 195-13. Tags. [Amended 4-14-1975 by Ord. No. 75-6; 9-17-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-17; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07; 10-16-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-09; 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
Upon the issuance of a license, the Clerk shall deliver to the licensee a
license tag of metal or other suitable material, containing the number of
the license duly stamped or engraved thereon, and the year that the dog's
rabies vaccination expires. Absence of a license tag from any dog shall be
prima facie evidence that the dog is not licensed, and any person finding
such dog on his premises or running at large may seize and deliver such dog
to the pound. No person shall remove any license tag from any dog without
the consent of the person owning or harboring the dog, and no tag shall be
used on the collar or harness of any dog other than the dog for which the
tag was issued. In the case of the loss of a tag, the owner may secure a
duplicate from the City Clerk upon payment of a fee set by resolution of the
City Commission.
§ 195-14. Barking dogs; dogs known or suspected to have rabies.
[Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07; 5-6-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-07]
§ 195-15. Sanitation; removal of dog litter. [Amended 7-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-07]
A. No person shall harbor or keep any dog which by loud, or frequent, or
habitual barking, yelping or howling shall cause a serious annoyance to
the neighborhood or to people passing to and fro upon the streets.
B. No person shall own or harbor a dog that has been bitten by any animal
known to have been afflicted with rabies. Any person who shall have in
his possession a dog which has contracted or is suspected of having
contracted rabies, or which has been bitten by any animal suspected of
being afflicted with rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall, upon
demand of the Animal Control Officer, produce and surrender up said
dog to the said Animal Control Officer to be held for observation for a
period of 10 days; provided that, with the approval of the Animal
Control Officer, any such dog may be surrendered to a registered
veterinarian or to any approved, nonprofit corporation organized for
the purpose of sheltering dogs, or may be confined for a period of 10
days at the owner's home. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove
or allow the removal from his premises of a dog so confined for
observation without the written permission of the Animal Control
Officer. Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining that a dog is
rabid, shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer or a police
officer, who shall either remove the dog to the pound or summarily
destroy it. Whenever any dog is brought to the pound for having bitten a
person, the Animal Control Officer may, if deemed necessary and after
holding such dog for a sufficient length of time to meet the
requirements of the Health Department, cause such dog to be
destroyed as a dangerous animal.
§ 195-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-15
180:225
§ 195-16. Running at large.
It shall be unlawful for:
A. Duties of dog owners. Every dog owner or person in possession of a dog
shall collect any dog litter left by their dog by retrieving same
immediately following its deposit by the dog and thereafter disposing of
such dog litter by flushing it down the toilet connected to a sanitary
sewer system, by placement in an appropriate disposal system
manufactured for the purpose of dog litter disposal, or by disposal on
the dog owner's property or the property of the person in possession of
the dog.
B. Excrement removal device required. No person owning or possessing a
dog shall cause or permit that dog to be in any area of any public
property unless that person has in his immediate possession an
appropriate device for the retrieval of dog excrement and an
appropriate depository for the transmission of dog excrement to a
receptacle located on property possessed or owned by that person.
C. No person shall remove dog litter from any place and thereafter cause it
to be deposited on any public property or the private property of third
parties.
D. No person shall place, deposit, throw or insert dog litter into any storm
drain or storm sewer system in the City of Royal Oak.
A. Any owner of any female dog to permit said female dog to go beyond the
premises of such owner when she is in heat, unless said female dog is
held properly in leash; or
B. Any owner to allow any dog to stray beyond his premises unless under
reasonable control as defined by this article; or
C. Any owner to allow any dog to leave his premises under any conditions,
unless such dog has been immunized against rabies; provided that
nothing herein shall be interpreted to prevent an owner taking his dog
to the offices of a veterinarian for purposes of having said dog
immunized; or [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07]
D. Any owner to cause or permit any dog owned by him or under his
control or custody to enter any park where a sign or signs are posted
bearing the legend "No Dogs Allowed," or other words to that effect.
This section does not apply to any dog which is used as defined in
§ 393.351 for a blind person as defined in MCLA § 393.351, to a hearing
dog for a deaf or audibly impaired person as defined in MCLA § 752.61,
or to a service dog for a physically limited person as defined in MCLA
§ 125.1351. [Added 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07]
§ 195-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-17
180:226
§ 195-17. Cruelty.
No person owning or harboring any dog, or any other person, shall treat a
dog in a cruel or inhuman manner, or wilfully or negligently cause or permit
any dog to suffer unnecessary torture or pain. Failure to provide food, water
or shelter shall be construed as cruelty.
§ 195-18. Animal pound.
The City of Royal Oak shall provide and maintain a pound, and it shall be the
duty of the Dog Warden, or any other person employed by the City Manager
for that purpose, and of any police officer of the City, to promptly seize, take
up and place in said pound all dogs that may be found running at large, or
being kept or harbored any place within the City of Royal Oak contrary to
the provisions of this article.
§ 195-19. Claiming impounded dogs; unclaimed dogs. [Amended
6-26-1978 by Ord. No. 78-14]
§ 195-20. Dog canvass; impounding unlicensed dogs. [Amended
9-17-1984 by Ord. No. 84-17; 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11;
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07; 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, or other person designated
by the City Manager for the purpose, to make diligent inquiry as to the dogs
owned, harbored, or kept, or kennels operated, in the City of Royal Oak, and
whether such dogs or kennels are licensed. Any dog found without a valid
license may be seized and impounded by the Animal Control Officer or other
authorized person.
A. The owner of a dog impounded under the provisions of this article may
claim said dog by properly identifying himself as the owner of said
animal and upon meeting the following conditions:
(1) Payment of an impounding fee, a boarding fee and such other fees
as shall be established by resolution of the City Commission.
(2) The showing of a dog license for said dog, or if such dog has no
license, then the securing of such a license and the showing of
proof of vaccination of said dog for rabies.
B. It shall be the duty of the Dog Warden to destroy in a humane manner
all impounded dogs which are not claimed and released within one
week after being impounded; provided, however, if in his judgment said
dog is valuable or otherwise desirable for keeping, the Dog warden may
dispose of said dog to any reasonable person who will undertake to
remove said dog from the City or keep and harbor said dog within the
City in accordance with the provisions of this article. The bodies of all
dogs destroyed at the pound or elsewhere in the City shall be disposed
of by the Dog Warden in a manner approved by the Health Department.
§ 195-17 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-21
180:227
§ 195-21. Liability for damages caused by dogs.
Every owner of a dog shall be liable for damages for any and all injuries to
person or property caused by such dog, to be determined and collected in
appropriate civil proceedings, and nothing in this article shall be construed
to impose any liability upon the City of Royal Oak, its agents or employees,
for damages caused by such dog.
§ 195-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1984 by Ord. No.
84-17; 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07]
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions, except those
provided for in Subsection B of this section, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not to exceed $500 or imprisonment of
not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
B. Violation of § 195-15.
(1) A person violating § 195-15 for the first occasion is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil fine of
not less than $200, plus costs.
(2) A person violating § 195-15 for a second occasion is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil fine of
not less than $300, plus costs.
(3) A person violating § 195-15 for the third or subsequent occasions is
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to fines of not more than $500
and/or not more than 90 days in jail, and costs, at the discretion of
the court.
C. Exceptions. This section does not apply to any dog which is used as
defined in MCLA § 393.351 for a blind person as defined in MCLA
§ 393.351, to a hearing dog for a deaf or audibly impaired person as
defined in MCLA § 752.61, or to a service dog for a physically limited
person as defined in MCLA § 125.1351.
§ 195-21 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-22
180:228
ARTICLE IV
Dangerous Dogs
[Adopted 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
§ 195-23. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the following meanings:
ANIMAL REVIEW BOARD — A board consisting of the Chief of Police or his
designee, the City Manager or his designee, and a City resident appointed
by the City Commission that shall assemble for the purpose of conducting
hearings under this article.
DANGEROUS DOG —
FINAL DETERMINATION DATE — The 15th day after the date of the
notice of the Animal Control Officer's classification of a dog as a dangerous
dog or a potentially dangerous dog under § 195-24; provided, however,
that if a request for a hearing before the Animal Review Board has been
timely submitted pursuant to § 195-24 and the Review Board determines
that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the final
determination date shall mean the effective date of the Board's
determination under § 195-24.
ON A SUITABLE LEASH — Both that the dog is attached to a leash that is no
more than four feet in length and of such material that the leash is capable
A. Any dog that bites or attacks a person; or
Any dog that bites or attacks a dog or other domestic animal and causes
serious injury to the other dog or domestic animal while the other dog
or domestic animal is on the property or under the control of its owner.
B.
A dangerous dog does not include any of the following:
A dog that bites or attacks a person while being used by a law
enforcement official for a legitimate law enforcement purpose;
(1)
A dog that bites or attacks a person who is committing or
attempting to commit a crime, including knowingly trespassing on
the property of the dog's owner;
(2)
A dog that bites or attacks a person who provokes or torments
the dog, or who can be shown to have repeatedly provoked or
tormented the dog in the past;
(3)
A dog that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and
reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a
person if that person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject
of an assault; or
(4)
A dog that is responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself
or its offspring.
(5)
C.
§ 195-23 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-23
180:229
of and does restrain the type and size of dog to which it is attached; and
that such a leash is continuously held by a person who is reasonably able
to and does restrain and prohibit the dog from being out of that person's
physical control. A leashed dog that chases a person or domesticated animal
a greater distance than four feet or that bites a person or domesticated
animal constitutes prima facie evidence that such dog is not kept on a
suitable leash.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or organization that owns or
harbors a dog.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — A dog that poses a threat to public
safety as demonstrated by any of the following behaviors:
PROPER ENCLOSURE — Secure confinement indoors or secure
confinement in a locked, fenced pen, yard, or structure measuring at least
six feet in width, 12 feet in length, and six feet in height, capped if there is
a doghouse inside or if a dog can climb the fence, with secure sides, which
provides proper protection from the elements for the dog, prevents the
entry of young children, and is designed to prevent the dog from escaping.
An invisible fence does not constitute a proper enclosure.
PROVOKE and PROVOCATION — To perform a willful act or omission that
an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate
the bite or attack by an ordinary dog or other animal.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — A person who is familiar with the dog and has
the size and experience to be able to keep the dog under complete control
at all times.
SERIOUS INJURY — Permanent, serious disfigurement; serious impairment
of health; or serious impairment of a bodily function.
TORMENT — An act or omission that causes unjustifiable pain, suffering,
and distress to a dog, or causes mental and emotional anguish in the dog as
evidenced by its altered behavior, for a purpose such as sadistic pleasure,
coercion, or punishment that an ordinary and reasonable person would
conclude is likely to precipitate the bite or attack.
§ 195-24. Determination of dangerous dog.
Causing an injury to another dog or domestic animal that is less severe
than a serious injury;
A.
Without provocation, chasing or menacing a person, another dog or
domestic animal in an aggressive manner;
B.
Running at large and impounded by an animal control agency or
agencies three or more times within any twelve-month period; or
C.
Acting in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced yard or enclosure
that the dog reasonably appears to be able to jump over or escape.
D.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to make a
determination that a dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous, as
§ 195-23 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-24
180:230
defined in this article, upon the complaint of any person that a dog is
dangerous or potentially dangerous. When the Animal Control Officer
classifies any dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog
under this article, the Animal Control Officer shall notify the dog's
owner of such classification as follows:
(1) The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the
owner's last known address. If a dog has more than one owner,
notice to any one owner shall be sufficient.
(2) The notice shall include a summary of the findings that form the
basis for the dog's classification as dangerous or potentially
dangerous.
(3) The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner has a right
to request a hearing on the classification within 15 days from the
date of the notice.
(4) The notice shall state that if a hearing is requested on the
classification, the Animal Review Board shall conduct the hearing.
(5) The notice shall state that if the owner does not request such a
hearing within 15 days from the date of the notice, the
classification of the dog as dangerous or potentially dangerous
shall be final and conclusive for all purposes under the City Code.
(6) The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the
Animal Review Board and shall provide specific instructions on
mailing or delivering such a request.
B. When the Animal Review Board receives a request for a hearing from an
owner, a hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days of receipt of the
request. At least five days prior to the hearing, the owner shall be
provided written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. At
the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and to
present evidence. The Animal Review Board shall also receive such
other evidence and hear such other testimony as it may find reasonably
necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify or overrule the
classification of the dog by the Animal Control Officer. The Animal
Review Board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its
determination on the matter. If the determination is made that the dog
is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall
specify the date upon which that determination is effective.
C. If the identity of the owner of a dog that the Animal Control Officer has
classified as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog cannot be
determined, the dog shall be immediately confiscated, with notice of
same and a description of the dog given to the Police Department and
the City of Royal Oak Animal Shelter. If the dog's owner claims such
dog, the dog shall be released to its owner, together with a copy of the
notice specified in Subsection A of this section. If the dog remains
unclaimed for seven days, the dog shall be turned over to a local animal
§ 195-24 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-24
180:231
§ 195-25. Requirements for possession of dangerous dog.
§ 195-26. Requirements for possession of potentially dangerous
dog.
welfare organization or examined by a veterinarian and/or a local
animal welfare organization to determine the viability of the dog or
appropriate course of destruction of the dog, if necessary.
A. Any owner of a dangerous dog shall be jointly and severally responsible
with all other owners of such dog for compliance with the requirements
of this section.
B. No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody or control
of a dangerous dog, except in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
(1) A dangerous dog shall not be permitted to remain in the City unless
it is properly registered as provided in this article and as otherwise
required by law or ordinance.
(2) Except under the circumstances otherwise specifically permitted
by this article, a dangerous dog shall at all times be maintained
inside a proper enclosure.
(3) The premises where a dangerous dog is kept shall be posted with a
clearly visible sign warning that there is a dog on the premises that
presents a danger to human beings. Such sign shall also include a
symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is
a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings.
(4) The owner of a dangerous dog shall, at the owner's option and
expense, by or under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian,
have an identification number tattooed upon the animal or have a
microchip injected under the animal's skin. An identification
number shall be tattooed on the upper inner left rear thigh of the
dog by means of indelible or permanent ink.
(5) The owner of a dangerous dog shall at all times maintain a policy of
insurance in a minimum amount of $1,000,000 to cover claims for
any personal injuries inflicted by the dog, which policy shall be
issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the State of
Michigan.
(6) Within 30 days after the final determination date, the owner of a
dangerous dog and the dangerous dog shall begin attending, and
within 90 days after the final determination date, successfully
complete an animal obedience class approved by the Animal
Review Board and produce evidence of such attendance and
successful completion.
§ 195-24 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-26
180:232
§ 195-27. Registration of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous
dogs.
A. Any owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall be jointly and severally
responsible with other owners of such dog for compliance with the
requirements of this section.
B. No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody of a
potentially dangerous dog except in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
(1) A potentially dangerous dog shall not be permitted to remain in the
City unless it is properly registered as provided in this article and
as otherwise required by law or ordinance.
(2) Except under the circumstances otherwise specifically permitted
by this article, a potentially dangerous dog shall at all times be
maintained inside a proper enclosure.
(3) The premises where a potentially dangerous dog is kept shall be
posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dog on the
premises that is potentially dangerous to human beings. Such sign
shall also include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the
message that there is a dog on the premises that presents a
potential danger to human beings.
(4) Within 30 days after the final determination date, the owner of a
potentially dangerous dog and the potentially dangerous dog shall
begin attending, and within 90 days after the final determination
date, successfully complete an animal obedience class approved by
the Animal Review Board and produce evidence of such attendance
and successful completion.
A. No dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be permitted to
remain in the City unless it is registered in accordance with this article.
In addition to the annual registration and/or licensing fees otherwise
required by law and ordinance, the owner of a dangerous dog or a
potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee to be set
by resolution of the City Commission and shall register the dog with the
Police Department as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog,
according to the classification and determination previously made
under this article. No dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall
be registered unless the owner can provide sufficient evidence that all
of the provisions in § 195-25 or § 195-26, as applicable, have been and
are being met.
B. The registration provided by this section shall be nontransferable. The
registration shall be renewed annually or upon the earlier of the
transfer of ownership or possession of the dog or a change in the
location of the dog's primary habitat.
§ 195-26 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-28
180:233
§ 195-28. Transfer of ownership or possession.
Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog, the transferor shall provide the Police
Department with the name, address and telephone numbers of the new
owner of the dog and the effective date of the transfer. Any transferee of
a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be presumed to have
notice of the dog's classification as such.
§ 195-29. Notice to Police Department.
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify
the Police Department in person or by telephone within 24 hours of the
occurrence of any of the following events:
§ 195-30. Restraints when outside proper enclosure.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially
dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless
the dog is properly muzzled (if a dangerous dog), restrained on a suitable
leash, and under the physical restraint of a responsible person at all times.
If muzzled, the muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury
to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent the
dog from biting any person or animal.
§ 195-31. Confiscation and disposition of dogs.
A. The dog has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the
owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such dog to be physically
secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent
adult.
B. The dog has attacked a human being.
C. The dog has been sold, given or otherwise transferred to the ownership
or possession of another person.
D. The dog has died.
E. The dog's primary habitat will no longer be in the City of Royal Oak.
A. A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Police
Department upon the determination that one or more of the following
circumstances exists:
(1) The owner of the dog does not have the proper liability insurance
required by § 195-25.
(2) The dog is not validly and currently registered as is required by
§ 195-27.
(3) The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as is required by
§ 195-25.
§ 195-28 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-31
180:234
§ 195-32. District Court action.
(4) The dog is not under the restraints required by § 195-30, whether
or not such dog is then in the custody or possession of its owner.
(5) The owner has failed to take the dog to obedience classes as
required by § 195-25.
B. A potentially dangerous dog shall immediately be confiscated upon the
determination that one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The dog is not validly and currently registered as required by
§ 195-27.
(2) The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as is required by
§ 195-26.
(3) The dog is not under the restraints required by § 195-30, whether
or not such dog is then in the custody or possession of its owner.
(4) The owner has failed to take the dog to obedience classes as
required by § 195-26.
C. Any dog that is confiscated under either Subsection A or B of this
section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with
the provisions of this article and upon the payment of the actual costs of
boarding the dog, plus a confiscation fee to be established by resolution
of the City Commission. The foregoing shall be in addition to any
penalties otherwise provided for under this article.
D. If the confiscated dog remains unclaimed for a period of seven days
after written notice of the confiscation to the owner, or if the identity of
the owner cannot be determined and seven days have passed after a
description of the dog has been given to the Police Department and the
Royal Oak Animal Shelter, then the dog shall be turned over to a local
animal welfare organization or examined by a veterinarian and/or a
local animal welfare organization to determine the viability of the dog
or appropriate course of destruction of the dog, if necessary.
A. In lieu of the notice and hearing requirements in this article, the Animal
Control Officer may file a sworn complaint in the District Court alleging
that the dog has, without provocation, attacked a person, or has
attacked a dog or other domestic animal and has caused serious injury
or death to the dog or domestic animal. The District Court shall issue a
summons ordering the owner to appear to show cause why the dog
should not be destroyed.
B. Upon the filing of a sworn complaint as provided in Subsection A, the
District Court shall order the owner to immediately turn the dog over to
a proper animal control authority, an incorporated humane society, a
licensed veterinarian, or a boarding kennel, at the owner's option, to be
retained by them until a hearing is conducted and a decision is made for
§ 195-31 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-32
180:235
§ 195-33. Review of potentially dangerous dog classification.
The owner of a dog that has been determined to be a potentially dangerous
dog shall be given the opportunity to request that the classification of the
dog as a potentially dangerous dog should be reconsidered and removed.
Such request may be granted by the District Court or Animal Review Board,
as applicable, if the owner demonstrates that the dog has been incident-free
for more than 18 months, the dog and owner have successfully completed
obedience training approved by the Board, and the owner has complied in
all respects with the provisions of this article of the Code and any applicable
Court orders.
§ 195-34. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any penalties set forth elsewhere in this article and any
penalties set forth in state law, the owner of a dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog that fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500, up to 90 days
in jail, or both, in the discretion of the Court.
the disposition of the dog. The owner shall notify the person who retains
the dog under this section of the complaint and order. The expense of
the boarding and retention of the dog is to be borne by the owner.
C. After a hearing, the Court may order the destruction of the dog at the
expense of the owner, if the dog is found, without provocation, to have
attacked a person, or to have attacked a dog or domestic animal and
caused serious injury or death to the dog or domestic animal. If the
Court does not order the destruction of the dog, the Court shall order
the owner of the dog to take whatever action the Court deems
necessary to protect the public from the dog.
D. After a hearing, if the Court finds that the dog, without provocation, did
not attack a person, or did not attack a dog or domestic animal and
cause serious injury to the dog or domestic animal, but that the dog is a
potentially dangerous dog, the Court shall notify the Royal Oak Police
Department of its finding, and shall order the owner of the dog to take
whatever action the Court deems necessary to protect the public from
the dog.
§ 195-32 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-34
180:236
ARTICLE V
Retail Pet Store Sales
[Adopted 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
§ 195-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings, unless the context otherwise requires:
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code whose mission and practice is, in whole or significant part,
the rescue and placement of animals into permanent homes; and which does
not breed animals. "Animal rescue organization" does not include any entity
which: 1) is located on the same premises as a person, as defined under
MCLA § 287.331(q), that breeds dogs, cats, rabbits, or ferrets; 2) has any
personnel in common with such a person, including, but not limited to, any
employee, manager, or board member; 3) obtains any dogs, cats, rabbits, or
ferrets from such a person; or 4) facilitates the sale of dogs, cats, rabbits,
or ferrets that were obtained from such a person.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
FERRET — A member of the species of domestic ferret, Mustela putorius
furo.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, exchange for consideration, advertise for the
sale of, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise dispose of a dog, cat, rabbit,
or ferret.
RABBIT — A member of the species of domestic rabbit, Oryctolagus
cuniculus.
RETAIL PET STORE — A commercial establishment where animals are
sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general
public at retail, and shall not include any "breeder," as defined under MCLA
§ 287.891(5).
§ 195-36. Sale of dogs, cats, rabbits and ferrets by retail pet stores
prohibited.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, it shall be unlawful for a retail
pet store to sell or offer for sale a dog, cat, rabbit, or ferret. A retail pet
store may provide space to an animal control shelter, as defined in MCLA
§ 287.331(f), or an animal rescue organization, as defined in this article, to
offer to the public dogs, cats, rabbits, or ferrets, provided that the retail pet
store shall not have any ownership interest in the animals offered and shall
not receive any fee for providing space or for the adoption of any of the
animals.
§ 195-35 ALARM SYSTEMS § 195-37
180:237
§ 195-37. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both, in the discretion of the court.
§ 195-37 ROYAL OAK CODE § 195-37
180:238
Chapter 201
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 201, Auctions, Public, adopted 2-6-1933 by Ord. No.
278, as amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 213
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 213, Books, Magazines and Videos, Sale of, adopted
2-8-1954 by Ord. No. 751, as amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 222
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Cable Access Committee — See Ch.
39, Art. I.
§ 195-37 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 195-37
222:239

ARTICLE I
Short Title; Purpose; Necessity of Franchise; Definitions
§ 222-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Cable Communications
Ordinance."
§ 222-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the furnishing of a
high quality but economical cable communications service to the residents
of the City and to regulate such service in the public interest.
§ 222-3. Necessity of franchise.
No person shall own or operate a cable system, as defined herein, in the
City, except by franchise granted by the City, which franchise shall comply
with all the requirements of this chapter.
§ 222-4. Definitions. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7;
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
For purposes of this chapter, any subsequent ordinance dealing with cable
communications, any franchise agreement between the City and a cable
communications company, and any application or proposal submitted
pursuant to an RFP or otherwise, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein unless defined
differently in such ordinance, franchise agreement or proposal. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be
given their common and ordinary meaning.
ACCESS CABLECASTING — Services provided by a cable television system
on its public, education, local government, licensed or other access
channels.
APPLICANT — The person or company submitting a proposal for the
franchise of a cable communications system.
BASIC SERVICE — All subscriber services provided by the grantee,
including the delivery of broadcast signals, covered by the regular monthly
charge, if any, paid by all subscribers, excluding optional services for which
a separate charge is made.
CABLECAST — To distribute programs, both from broadcasting sources and
original programs, through the community system by means of coaxial cable
or other electrical conductors or fiber optical transmitters.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The business, in whole or in part,
of receiving directly or indirectly over the air, and amplifying or otherwise
§ 222-1 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-4
222:241
modifying signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more signals,
sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any
other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light
impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals
off the air, and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to
members of the public.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CATV or SYSTEM
— A system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors or fiber optical
cables and equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television
or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via
cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination,
receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures,
visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit
transmission by means of electrical impulses, whether or not directed to
originating signals or receiving signals off the air.
CITY — The local government of Royal Oak and all the territory within its
corporate limits.
CITY COMMISSION — The governing body of the local unit of government.
COMMUNITY SPECIFIC CABLECASTING — Programming or channel
allocation which selectively cablecasts to individual communities to meet
their unique needs or interests. "Community" refers to any unit with
common needs or interests such as individual cities or neighborhoods,
school districts or groups with common characteristics.
CONNECTION — The attachment of the drop to the first radio or television
set of the subscriber.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber
and, by an appropriate channel selector, also permits a subscriber to view
all basic subscriber signals included in the basic service delivered at
designated converter dial locations. The converter may also allow reception
of additional programming and/or services at extra cost to the subscriber.
DROP — The cable that connects the subscriber terminal to the nearest
feeder cable of the cable system.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
FEEDER — Intermediate line of cable system that carries signals from trunk
line to drops.
FRANCHISE — The rights of a grantee to construct and operate a cable
system in the City, subject to the City Charter, this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The agreement between cable operator and
the City setting specific rights and responsibilities of each for construction
and operation of a cable system.
§ 222-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-4
222:242
FRAUD OR DECEIT — Not limited to common law fraud and deceit, but
includes the meaning of those words under federal securities law.
GRANTEE — A person to whom a cable communications franchise has been
granted.
GROSS REVENUES — All revenue derived directly or indirectly by the
grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, and/or any person in which the
grantee has a financial interest of 5% or more from or in connection with
the operation of the system in the City, including, but not limited to, basic
subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, converter rentals, studio
rental, production equipment, personnel fees, and advertising revenues.
The term does not include:
HEAD END — The equipment at the antenna site in a master antenna or
cable system. The point of origination that collects all the signals (from
broadcast stations, cable stations, and satellite stations) and sends them to
the subscribers.
HUB — One of two or more elements in a large cable system from which
trunk lines originate, from which programming and data is sent out via
trunk lines, and where upstream messages are received and where
switching is accomplished. Large systems may have multiple hubs linked to
each other and/or to master head end.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to the
point of connection.
INTERACTIVE SYSTEM — A two-way operational system. See also "two-way
capability."
INTERCONNECT — To link cable systems or head ends so that subscribers
to different cable systems can see the same programming simultaneously.
LOCAL ORIGINATION — Programs produced locally, the content of which
may be original or produced elsewhere and sold or licensed to a grantee for
use.
LOCAL PUBLIC ACCESS — Refers to the public opportunity to use cable
channels which are dedicated to that purpose and are not under control of
the grantee.
LOCKOUT DEVICE — A device which prevents reception of one or more
channels at an individual drop.
LOOP — A completely interactive closed-circuit net connecting specified
municipal, educational, medical or commercial facilities within a system
Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee and imposed directly
upon any subscriber or user by the state, City or other governmental
unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of said governmental unit;
and
A.
Any dividends, distributions, interest or payments for services between
grantee and its affiliates, subsidiaries and parent.
B.
§ 222-4 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-4
222:243
which should also have the capacity to be interconnected to the main cable
system.
PAY TV — Cable channels that require an additional subscriber fee.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity as the
context may indicate.
POINT TO POINT TRANSMISSION — A signaling path provided by a system
to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point
in the system.
PRODUCER — A user providing input services to the cable system for
receipt by subscribers.
PROPOSAL — An applicant's response to an RFP.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS — Channels which are dedicated to the public
interest, according to the following categories:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any real property owned by the City other than a
street.
RFP — A request by the City for a proposal from applicants for a cable
system.
SECURITY SYSTEM — Optional two-way service(s) offered to cable
subscribers which may alert authorities and/or subscribers of potential
emergencies in the subscriber's home or public or private building.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person 62 years old or older.
STREET, HIGHWAY — The surface of and the space above and below any
public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way, alley, court,
sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of-way now or
hereafter held by City which shall, within its proper use and meaning in the
sole opinion of City, entitle the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose
of installing, or transmitting over, poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other
property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system.
SUBSCRIBER — A person who pays an installation charge and a monthly fee
to a cable system operator for connections to the system and for programs
and services carried on the cable.
SUBSCRIBER SERVICE DROP — The same as "drop."
A. Community;
B. Education;
C. Local government;
D. Health and medical;
E. Other.
§ 222-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-4
222:244
TRUNK, TRUNK LINE — The main line of the cable system that carries
signals from the head end to extremities of the cable system.
TWO-WAY CAPABILITY — The ability of the cable system to conduct signals
to the head end as well as from the head end. See also "loop."
USER — A person or organization utilizing a system channel as a producer,
for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, or as a
subscriber, for purposes of receipt of material.
§ 222-4 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-4
222:245

ARTICLE II
Selection of Franchisee
§ 222-5. Award of franchise.
The City Commission may award a franchise to an applicant only after a
public hearing on the application and proposal, notice of which hearing
shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 20
days prior to the date of the hearing. The City Commission may reject all
applicants.
§ 222-6. Franchise application; form; contents; fees. [Amended
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
All proposals shall be submitted in writing and shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee of $6,000. If the City issues an RFP with respect to a
grant of a franchise, all proposals shall contain the information called for by
the RFP in the manner prescribed by the RFP.
A. Such proposals may include, without limitation, the following:
(1) Information regarding the identity of the applicant.
(2) Biographical data of the applicant's principal owners and proposed
management, including the experience of such persons in the cable
communications field.
(3) Audited financial statements for the applicant's last fiscal year
together with the applicant's most current interim financial
statements, which interim statements need not be audited but
which shall be reviewed by a certified public accountant in
accordance with standards established by the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants and which interim statements shall be
accompanied by the accountant's report thereon.
(4) A financing plan for the proposed system and a projection, covering
the term of the franchise, of revenue and expense in sufficient
detail to permit a determination to be made of the financial viability
of the applicant's proposal.
(5) A detailed description of the system and facilities proposed for the
City, including the matters to which a response is specifically
required by Articles IV and V of this chapter.
(6) A detailed timetable for the construction and commencement of
operation of the system, including the matters to which a response
is specifically required by Article VI of this chapter.
B. An RFP, if issued, shall consist of an application which may be adopted
by City Commission resolution.
C. The City shall be entitled to verify any information furnished by the
applicant in response to the RFP or in response to other requests for
§ 222-5 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-6
222:247
§ 222-7. Criteria for selection. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
The award of a franchise to an applicant shall be based upon the
information contained in the applicant's proposal and such other relevant
information as may be obtained by the City regarding such applicants and
the proposals. Such award shall be based upon the criteria set forth below
together with such other factors as the City may deem relevant.
information regarding the applicant and the applicant's affairs. The City
may exercise such right by requiring reports from the applicant, or
from third parties having knowledge of the applicant, or by conducting
such other kinds of investigation as the City may deem proper. In
such cases the applicant shall furnish the City with such written
authorization regarding release of information as may be necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of the foregoing provisions. All of the
foregoing provisions shall also be applicable to a grantee as well as
an applicant, it being deemed to be in the public interest that the City
remain knowledgeable regarding the grantee and the operation of the
system throughout the term of the franchise.
D. No applicant, nor any person on behalf of any applicant, shall, in
responding to an RFP or in responding to any other request for
information by the City or by any officer or agency thereof, make any
untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the
circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. A violation
of this provision shall constitute a fraud upon the City.
A. The experience of the applicant in the cable communications field and
the credentials of its owners and managers.
B. The applicant's financial resources, including both present financial
condition and the availability of committed funding to finance the
applicant's proposed system; and the specificity and credibility of the
applicant's projections of the revenue and expenses attributable to the
construction and operation of the system.
C. The applicant's system design including channel capacity and ability to
provide a broad range of services in conformity with the highest quality
standards of the cable industry.
D. The applicant's response to specific local concerns or needs, whether
formulated by the City and made known to applicants or whether
ascertained by the applicant.
E. The extent to which the applicant meets community needs, including
such factors as enhancing competition and customer choice.
§ 222-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-7
222:248
ARTICLE III
Franchise Agreement; Grant of Franchise
§ 222-8. Franchise agreement.
The franchise agreement shall be in such form and contain such terms and
provisions as shall be approved by the City Commission. The agreement
may be adopted, and amended, by resolution of the City Commission or by
any other mode of adoption or amendment authorized or required by law.
§ 222-9. Grant of franchise.
A grantee shall be awarded a franchise, pursuant to the provisions of
§ 222-5 of this chapter, either by resolution of the City Commission or
by any other means authorized or required by law. The grantee shall be
promptly notified of the award by the City by written notice thereof, sent
by registered or certified mail, which notice shall be accompanied by one or
more copies of the franchise agreement.
§ 222-10. Execution and delivery of franchise agreement by
grantee. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7; 6-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-7]
§ 222-11. Execution and delivery of franchise agreement by City.
[Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
Upon timely receipt by the City from the grantee of the properly executed
franchise agreement, together with the acceptance fee and such other
monies, documents and instruments as may be required in accordance with
§ 222-10 of this article, the City may execute the agreement and, upon
execution thereof, shall deliver one fully executed copy to the grantee;
provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit the City from revoking the
award of the franchise prior to delivery of an executed copy of the franchise
A. The franchise agreement shall be properly executed and delivered to
the City by the grantee on or before 15 days after the date the City
sends written notice of the award to the grantee, which fifteen-day
period may be extended by the City Commission for good cause;
provided, however, that the franchise agreement shall not become
effective until that specific date set forth in the franchise agreement.
B. At the time of delivery of the franchise agreement by the grantee to the
City, the grantee shall pay to the City all costs incurred by the City in
the franchise process. All other payments which are to be made to the
City by the grantee shall be made in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise agreement.
C. At the time of delivery of the franchise agreement as provided in this
section, the grantee shall also deliver all other monies and all
documents and instruments required by this chapter or by the franchise
agreement.
§ 222-8 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-11
222:249
agreement to the grantee. In the event of any such revocation, which shall
be accomplished in the same manner as that used in granting the award,
any funds and all documents and instruments delivered by the grantee to
the City in connection with the grantee's acceptance of the award shall be
returned forthwith to the grantee.
§ 222-12. Terms and other provisions of franchise agreement.
[Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7; 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 222-13. Negotiated provisions of franchise agreement. [Amended
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions
as may be negotiated between the City and the grantee except that no such
conditions or provisions shall conflict with any provision of the City Charter,
this chapter or other law in effect on the date of the franchise agreement.
In the case of such conflict, the provisions of the City Charter, this chapter
or other law shall prevail over the conflicting provision of the franchise
agreement.
§ 222-14. Rights reserved by City. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No.
82-7; 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement in question:
A. The franchise agreement shall provide for a nonexclusive franchise for
a term which shall commence as of the date set forth in the franchise
agreement.
B. The franchise agreement shall provide that, throughout the term of the
franchise, the grantee shall pay the City a franchise fee within 90 days
after the end of each fiscal year of the grantee. The fee shall not be less
than 5% of the grantee's gross revenues for each year. The grantee
shall take any action with respect to any federal or state agency which
may be necessary or appropriate to make the payment and receipt of
such fees lawful. Acceptance of any payment by the City shall not be
construed as a release of or as an accord and satisfaction regarding any
claim the City may have for further and additional sums payable as a
franchise fee or for the performance of any other obligation of the
grantee under this chapter or the franchise agreement.
C. Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, a grantee shall
agree:
(1) That the grantee agrees to and accepts all provisions of this
chapter and waives any claim that any provision hereof is
unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid, or void.
(2) That the grantee recognizes the right of the City to make
amendments to this chapter, during the term of the franchise
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement.
§ 222-11 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-14
222:250
A. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
right of the City, by resolution of the City Commission, to revoke the
franchise for just cause. Just cause shall include, without limitation:
(1) A material violation by the grantee of any provision of the franchise
agreement or this chapter, or any rule, order, or determination of
the City made pursuant thereto, where such violation shall remain
uncured pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement.
(2) Any attempt by grantee to dispose of any of the facilities or
property of the system in contravention of the franchise agreement.
(3) The commission of any fraud or deceit upon the City.
B. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of the City Code made pursuant to the police power of the
City, the City Charter, and any amendments thereto, whether made
prior to or after the inception of the franchise.
C. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the following
additional rights of the City:
(1) To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and
maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of
efficiency, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement.
(2) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products, and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.
(3) To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire
period thereof.
(4) To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the City
Commission to be conducive to the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(5) Through its appropriately designated representatives, to inspect all
construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of the franchise and this chapter and make such
inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with the
terms of the franchise, this chapter and other pertinent provisions
of law.
(6) At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted or
upon termination and cancellation as provided therein, to require
the grantee to remove at the grantee's sole expense any and all
portions of the system from the public ways within the City.
(7) To require the grantee to safeguard and keep private all individual
home subscriber information.
§ 222-14 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-15
222:251
§ 222-15. Procedure for termination. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-7]
Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement in question, any
termination or cancellation of a franchise prior to the expiration of the
term thereof shall be made by resolution of the City Commission only
after a public hearing thereon. The grantee shall be entitled to 30 days'
written notice of such hearing, and the notice shall specify with reasonable
particularity the grounds upon which the contemplated termination is
based. Any such termination shall be subject to any requirements of higher
law and any limitation contained in the franchise agreement between the
City and the grantee.
§ 222-16. Contravention of franchise. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-7]
Any breach by the grantee of the franchise agreement, in addition to
constituting a breach of contract, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
The reasonable costs of any litigation, including attorney fees, incurred by
the City to enforce this chapter or franchise granted pursuant hereto shall
be reimbursed to the City by the grantee, in respect of such litigation or
part thereof in which the City is the prevailing party.
§ 222-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-16
222:252
ARTICLE IV
Design of System
[Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7; 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 222-17. Channel capacity.
The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise the number
of channels specified to be initially activated in the franchise agreement.
The grantee shall also activate additional channel capacity as required by
public access or institutional users. The grantee shall continually upgrade
the system's facilities, equipment, and service pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the franchise agreement.
§ 222-18. Picture quality and technical requirements.
§ 222-19. Two-way capacity.
A. The system shall produce a picture upon each subscriber's television
screen in black and white or color, depending upon whether color is
being telecast and provided that the subscriber's television set is
capable of producing a color picture, which is undistorted and free from
ghost images, without material degradation of color fidelity. The system
shall produce a sound which is undistorted on a properly operating
standard receiver of a subscriber.
B. The system shall transmit or distribute signals to all television and radio
receivers of all subscribers without causing crossmodulation in the
cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems or the
reception of other television or radio receivers.
C. The system shall at all times meet not less than minimum FCC technical
standards.
D. The system shall be designed for and operated on a twenty-four-hour-aday
continuous operation basis.
E. A response by a grantee to an RFP shall specify the procedure for
initially and subsequently testing the technical capacity of the system.
Representatives of the City may be present during testing. The tests
may be done annually at such times as may be determined by the City,
with notice to the grantee. All expenses for all such tests shall be paid
by the grantee.
A. The grantee shall provide and maintain an operational two-way system
(audio, video and data impulse).
B. The grantee will not install or permit the installation of any subscriber
premises equipment that will permit transmission of two-way services
utilizing audio, video or digital signals without first obtaining written
permission of the subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit
§ 222-17 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-19
222:253
§ 222-20. Facilities.
The grantee's proposal may describe, in detail, the rotation of its head end,
hubs, distribution system, studios, equipment and other facilities and a plan
for implementing the construction, utilization and maintenance of those
facilities, including plans for accommodating future growth and changing
needs and desires of the community as determined by the City.
§ 222-21. Special channel and access requirements.
the transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement
of the system performance, or utility meter reading.
A. The grantee shall carry broadcast stations in accordance with FCC
rules as from time to time revised.
B. The grantee's proposal may describe, in detail, the utilization of
converters or other special equipment which subscribers are to receive
and any charges for them.
C. Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, the grantee shall
designate an emergency channel to be operated by the City.
D. The grantee shall provide adequate channels for public access as
provided in the franchise agreement. All residential subscribers who
receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall
also receive all public access channels at no additional charge. These
channels shall be activated upon system activation and thereafter
maintained as needed. If so provided in the franchise agreement, the
grantee shall establish rules and regulations for the use of community
access channels which shall be approved by the City before
implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without
approval of the City. In preparing such rules:
(1) The grantee shall provide an equal opportunity for use of access
services.
(2) The grantee shall present a needs assessment of the community to
be served and provide a plan to meet those needs.
(3) The grantee shall develop a plan to allocate to the City a reasonable
use and fair schedule of channel time and use of equipment and
facilities so that the City can send and receive programming fitted
to its needs. Such plan shall be approved by the City before
implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended
without approval of the City.
(4) The grantee shall describe all equipment and facilities and any
charges for their use.
§ 222-19 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-21
222:254
§ 222-22. Service to public buildings.
The grantee's proposal may designate all publicly owned buildings in the
City (City Hall, Police Department, Fire Department, schools, library, etc.)
and any buildings owned or leased for governmental use by any state,
federal or local government in the City, to which the grantee will provide
service. The provisions for such service shall be described in detail and shall
be provided without charge. The grantee's proposal may include in such
designation plans for existing as well as future publicly owned buildings.
§ 222-23. Interconnection.
§ 222-24. Community-specific cablecasting.
The grantee's proposal may describe the means and manner of providing
community-specific cablecasting over the system and the time of activation
and points of delivery.
(5) The grantee shall comply, at a minimum, with the requirements of
the City now or hereafter adopted or determined regarding access
channels.
E. The grantee's proposal may describe in detail all other channels
offered.
A. Required. The grantee shall interconnect origination and access
channels of the cable system with any or all other systems in adjacent
areas, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement.
Interconnection of systems may be done by direct cable connection,
microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method.
B. Procedure. Upon receiving the directive of the City to interconnect, the
grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected
system or systems in order that costs may be shared equitably for both
construction and operation of the interconnection link.
C. Relief. The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect or the City may rescind its order to interconnect upon
petition by the grantee to the City. The City shall grant said request if it
finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to
obtain an approval from the system or systems of the proposed
interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an
unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates.
D. Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or City,
county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter
established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise
providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the
boundaries of the City.
§ 222-21 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-25
222:255
§ 222-25. Computer services.
Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, the grantee shall
design and construct a system so that A and B cables (serving residential
and institutional users) accommodate interactive data communications and
so that the total network transmission time is less than one-tenth of a
second. Further, the system shall accommodate interactive communications
of point-to-point, point-to-multipoint, and multipoint-to-multipoint
communications between subscribers or potential subscribers.
§ 222-26. All channels emergency alert.
Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, in case of any
emergency or disaster, the grantee shall make its entire system available,
without charge, to the City or to any other governmental or civil defense
agency that the City may designate. The system shall be engineered to
provide an audio alert system to allow authorized officials to override
automatically the audio signals on all channels and to transmit and report
emergency information. The system shall also have the capability for visual
transmission of emergency messages.
§ 222-25 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-26
222:256
ARTICLE V
Services and Programming; Subscriber Contracts; Complaints
[Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7; 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 222-27. Services and programming.
The grantee's proposal may state the extent of its commitment to provide
for the following: A variety of origination programming; automated
channels carrying information from local sources; local access
programming; a home security package (with mechanisms to decrease
incidents of false alarms); access support including color broadcast studio
and location production equipment, post-production equipment, access
promotion plans, use of video facilities; plans accommodating growth of
access, production centers; a system to accommodate data, audio and video
transmissions between institutions; service to public buildings; expanding
distant signal offerings as FCC rules allow; broadcast station signals in
late night and early morning hours; an FM service with individual station
processing; a means for using the system during emergencies; needs of
schools and other learning institutions.
§ 222-28. Local origination and cablecasting.
The grantee's proposal may include detailed information on plans for local
origination, origination cablecasting, automated channels carrying
information from local sources, variety of origination programming, review
of and incorporation of the needs and reports of the City, channel
allocations, estimated programming hours, equipment, personnel and other
resources committed to local origination production.
§ 222-29. Use of channels.
§ 222-30. Marketing.
Grantee's proposal may describe a marketing plan, advertising policy and
means to promote the use of the access channels.
§ 222-31. Interruption of service.
Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service, the grantee shall
do so during periods of minimum use of the system. Unless such
interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, the grantee shall
give reasonable notice thereof to subscribers. All costs incurred in repairing
the system shall be paid by the grantee, and if service is interrupted or
A. Charges made by a grantee to a user, except for public access channels
operated by a grantee, which shall be free, shall be based upon the fair
value of the service to the user and no other criteria. The grantee shall
not discriminate on any other grounds among users or in favor itself.
B. Advertising for any candidate for political office, or for parties
sponsoring such candidates, shall be in accordance with federal law.
§ 222-27 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-31
222:257
disconnected, rebates and/or reductions in charges will be made pursuant
to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. The cause for any
such interruption shall be removed and service restored as promptly as
reasonably possible.
§ 222-32. Complaints.
Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, the grantee shall
maintain an office in or proximate to the City which shall be open during all
usual business hours, have a listed local telephone, and be so operated that
complaints and request for repairs or adjustments may be received at any
time, seven days per week.
A. Notice of this information shall be provided to all new subscribers at
time of subscription and to existing subscribers annually.
B. All complaints by the City, subscribers, or other interested persons
regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction, billing
disputes, and any other matters relative to the system shall be
investigated and responded to by a service representative of the
grantee within six hours or such greater time, if any, set forth in a
grantee's franchise agreement. If reasonably possible, the grantee shall
promptly rectify the cause of all valid complaints.
§ 222-31 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-32
222:258
ARTICLE VI
Construction; Initial Service Area; Line Extension; Construction
Standards
[Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7; 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 222-33. Initial service area.
§ 222-34. Construction timetable.
A. The grantee's proposal may clearly indicate the date by which system
engineering and design shall be completed and dates on which each
stage of system construction shall be completed.
B. The energized cable shall be extended throughout the City within 18
months after commencement of construction or such other time
specified in a grantee's franchise agreement. All persons along the
route of the energized cable who desire them may have individual drops
installed within the same period of time.
C. A map prepared by the grantee reflecting the areas within the City
initially served by the system along with the schedule for development
of the system may be included in the grantee's proposal.
D. The City shall cooperate with the grantee in the development of its
proposed service area by making available to the grantee, for copying,
all maps, data and other statistical information, then in possession of
the City, needed for the preparation of a map defining the initial service
area.
A. The grantee's construction timetable as set forth in the franchise
agreement shall reflect the specific method and schedule of
construction of the system. The plan of the grantee shall reflect the
following:
(1) Location of all facilities including studios, head ends, microwave
receivers and senders and all hubs and wiring.
(2) A timetable reflecting when each area within the initial service
area will be served.
B. Within 30 days after the commencement of the franchise term, the
grantee may apply for all necessary permits, licenses, certificates and
authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business,
including, but not limited to, any joint use attachment agreements,
microwave carrier licenses, or any other permits, licenses and
authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the operation of cable communications
systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. If after
six months from the commencement of franchise term the grantee has
not received the permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations
described in this section, the City may assess penalties pursuant to the
§ 222-33 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-34
222:259
§ 222-35. Construction standards.
Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement:
franchise agreement without regard to fault for delay in obtaining such
permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations.
C. The grantee shall promptly notify the City of all delays known or
anticipated in the construction of the system. The City may extend the
construction timetable in the event the grantee, acting in good faith,
experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control.
A. The grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any streets, or
public property, without first obtaining a permit from the City for which
permit the City may impose a reasonable fee to be paid by the grantee.
The lines, conduits, cables and other property placed in the streets and
public property pursuant to such permit shall be located in such part of
the street or public property as shall be determined by the City. The
grantee shall, upon completion of any work requiring the opening of
any streets or public property, restore the same, including the
pavement and its foundations to as good a condition as formerly and in
a manner and quality approved by the City, and shall exercise
reasonable care to maintain the same thereafter in good condition.
Such work shall be performed with diligence and due care, and if the
grantee shall fail to perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and
rubbish and to put the street or public property back into the condition
required hereby, the City shall have the right to put the streets or public
property back into such condition at the expense of the grantee. The
grantee shall, upon demand, pay to the City the cost of such work done.
B. All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of the
grantee shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained as
not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and
customary trade, traffic, and travel upon, or other use of, the streets
and public property of the City. The grantee shall keep and maintain all
of its property in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall
not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. The City
shall have the right to inspect and examine at all reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice the property owned or used, in part or in whole,
by the grantee. The grantee shall keep accurate maps and records of all
of its wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities located,
constructed and maintained in the City. Further, the grantee shall
furnish copies of such maps and records from time to time as requested
by the City without charge.
C. All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the
grantee shall be constructed and installed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner. All wires, conduits and cables shall be installed,
where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple
cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due
respect for engineering considerations.
§ 222-34 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-35
222:260
D. Regulations.
(1) The grantee shall at all times comply with the following codes,
rules, regulations, as amended, and any others supplemental to or
in substitution thereof:
(a) National Electric Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards).
(b) National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters).
(c) Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction.
(d) Applicable FCC and other applicable federal, state and local
regulations and ordinances.
(2) In any event, the installation, operation or maintenance of the
system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or
property in the City.
E. Whenever the City shall undertake any public improvement which
affects the grantee's equipment or facilities, the City may, with due
regard to reasonable working conditions and with reasonable notice,
direct the grantee to remove or relocate its wires, conduits, cables and
other property located in streets or public property. The grantee shall
relocate or protect its wires, conduits, cables and other property at its
own expense.
F. The grantee's plans for constructing its system, and the construction of
the system, shall be in accordance with its proposal as modified by the
franchise agreement. However, the grantee shall comply with the
following minimum requirements:
(1) The grantee shall construct underground in any area where both
the electrical and telephone lines have been installed underground.
(2) The grantee shall change from aerial to underground, at its own
expense, in any area where both the telephone and electric utilities
are hereafter changed from aerial to underground.
(3) To enable the grantee reasonable opportunity to change its wiring
from aerial to underground, and also to allow it to prewire all new
subdivisions or new development areas, the City shall provide the
grantee with written notice of the following but without liability for
failure to provide such notice:
(a) Any underground trenching that may be pending.
(b) All ordinance changes affecting the wiring of the system.
G. The grantee shall, upon completion of any work on private property (or
easements thereon), restore the same, including any and all landscape
features, plantings, turf, buildings, pipes, and wires (overhead and
§ 222-35 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-35
222:261
§ 222-36. Conditions on use.
Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement:
underground), pavements, sidewalks, foundations or other features
whatsoever, to as good a condition as existed before construction.
H. The grantee shall prior to construction make a clear video tape record
of all underground construction and other specially designated areas.
Such tapes are to be preserved for three years after completion of the
applicable construction.
A. The grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixture, water hydrant or
main.
B. The grantee, at the request of any person holding a building moving
permit and with not less than five days' advance notice, shall
temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires, conduits and cables. The
expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires,
conduits and cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in
advance.
C. The grantee shall have the authority, to the extent the City has authority
to grant the same, to trim trees upon or overhanging any street or
public property so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming
in contact with the wires, conduit and cables of the grantee. All
trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the City
and at the expense of the grantee.
§ 222-35 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-36
222:262
ARTICLE VII
System Operations
§ 222-37. Information availability. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No.
82-7; 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
A. Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, throughout the
term of this franchise, the grantee shall maintain books and records in
accordance with normal and accepted bookkeeping and accounting
practices for the cable communications industry, and allow for
inspection and copying of the same at reasonable times. The books and
records to be maintained by grantee shall include the following:
(1) A record of all requests for service.
(2) A record of all subscriber or other complaints, and the action taken.
(3) A file of all subscriber contracts; provided, however, that the
grantee will not have to disclose subscriber records which would
tend to invade subscriber privacy.
(4) The grantee policies, procedures and company rules.
(5) Financial records, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement.
B. The City shall give the grantee at least 24 hours' notice before making
inspections of any books or records of the grantee.
C. The grantee shall file with the City, at the time of its payment(s) of the
franchise fee, the following, unless otherwise provided in its franchise
agreement:
(1) A monthly financial statement, certified by the grantee as correct,
showing in such detail as may be required by the City the gross
operating revenues of grantee for the period to which the fee
relates, together with all other financial information customarily
contained in such statements and such other financial information
as may be required by the City.
(2) An annual certified financial statement prepared by an independent
certified public accountant showing, in such detail as may be
required by the City, the gross operating revenues of the grantee
for the period to which the annual fee relates, together with all
other financial information customarily contained in such
statements and such other financial information as may be required
by the City.
(3) Current list of names and addresses of each officer and director
and other managerial and supervisory personnel, as well as each
shareholder, having legal or beneficial ownership of 1% or more of
the grantee's stock if changed from a prior filing.
§ 222-37 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-37
222:263
§ 222-38. Service contract. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement:
§ 222-39. Subscriber practices.
(4) A copy of each document filed with all federal, state and local
agencies during the preceding fiscal year and not previously filed
with the City (each of which filings are to be provided at the time
the filing is made).
(5) A statement of its current billing practices if changed from a prior
filing.
(6) A copy of its current rules if changed from a prior filing.
(7) A copy of its current subscriber service contract if changed from a
prior filing.
D. Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, the City, its
agents and representatives, shall have authority to arrange for and
conduct an audit of and copy the books and records of the grantee;
provided, however, that all books and records so audited shall remain
the sole and exclusive property of the grantee. The grantee shall first be
given five days' notice of the audit request, the description of and
purpose for the audit, and the description, to the best of the City's
ability, of the books, records and documents it wishes to review.
A. The grantee shall receive approval from the City of the form and
content of the service contract to be used by the grantee prior to
entering into any such service contracts with subscribers, and the
grantee shall make no changes in the approved service contract without
prior approval of the City. The service contract shall include, at a
minimum, a schedule of all rates and charges, a description of services,
instructions on the use of the system, and billing and collection
practices.
B. The grantee shall have authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and
perform its obligations under this franchise and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of the franchise, ordinances of the City, and laws of the State
of Michigan or the United States.
C. Each subscriber shall be provided with instructions on filing complaints
or otherwise obtaining information or assistance from the grantee.
D. All items described in this section shall be provided to each new
subscriber at the time a contract is entered or service begun and to all
existing subscribers forthwith upon any changes therein.
§ 222-37 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-39
222:264
§ 222-40. Rates and charges; changes therein; procedures.
A. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or outlet.
If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee or
any other proper fee or charge when due, grantee may discontinue
service to such subscriber; provided, however, grantee may not remove
any of its equipment until after the later of: (i) 30 days after the due
date of said delinquent fee or charge; or (ii) 10 days after delivery to
subscriber of written notice of the intent to disconnect. If a subscriber
pays before expiration of the later of (i) or (ii), grantee shall not
disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent
fee or charge and the payment of a reconnection charge, grantee shall
promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable service.
B. Refunds to subscribers shall be made or determined in the following
manner:
(1) If grantee fails, upon request by a subscriber, to provide any
service then being offered, grantee shall promptly refund all
deposits or advance charges paid for the service in question by said
subscriber. This provision does not alter grantee's responsibility to
subscribers under any separate contractual agreement or relieve
grantee of any other liability.
(2) If any subscriber terminates any monthly service because of failure
of grantee to render the service in accordance with the franchise,
grantee shall refund to such subscriber the proportionate share of
the charges paid by the subscriber for the services not received.
This provision does not relieve grantee of liability established in
other provisions of the franchise.
C. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the end of a
prepaid period, a proportionate portion of any prepaid subscriber
service fee, using the number of days as a basis, shall be refunded to
the subscriber by grantee.
A. Rates and charges.
(1) Limitations on rates. The charges made for services of the grantee
shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to meet
all costs of the service (assuming efficient and economical
management), and to provide a fair return to the grantee. The
grantee shall receive no consideration whatsoever from its
subscribers for or in connection with its service to its subscribers
other than in accordance with this section, without approval of the
City Commission.
(2) Adjustments to rates. The City Commission shall have the power,
authority and right to cause the grantee's rates and charges to
conform to the provisions of Subsection A(1) hereof, and for this
purpose it may deny or institute changes in such rates and charges
§ 222-39 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-40
222:265
when it determines that, in the absence of such action on its part,
the grantee's rates and charges or proposed rates and charges will
not conform to such subsection.
B. Rate schedule. Grantee's proposal shall include a detailed schedule of
all rates and charges applicable to the system as required by the RFP.
There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or
connection and no charge for maintenance or repair service unless such
service is required as a result of damage caused by the subscriber. The
rates and charges set forth in grantee's proposal shall not be exceeded
during 3 1/2 years from the date of the franchise agreement or two
years after completion of construction of the system, whichever first
occurs.
C. Rate changes. The criteria and standards relating to the establishment
of rate changes, whether initiated by the City or by grantee, shall
include the following:
(1) The ability of grantee to render system services and to derive a
reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate schedule and
proposed rate schedule;
(2) The revenues and profits derived from system services;
(3) The efficiency of grantee;
(4) The quality of the service offered by grantee;
(5) The original cost of the system, less depreciation;
(6) A fair rate of return with respect to investments having similar
risks to that of providing cable communications services;
(7) The extent to which grantee has adhered to the terms of the
franchise;
(8) Fairness to residents and subscribers;
(9) Capital expenditures by grantee in providing updated technology
and service to subscriber;
(10) Such other factors as the City may deem relevant.
D. Procedure for rate changes. The procedure for reviewing and
establishing a proposed rate change, whether initiated by the City or by
grantee, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) No rate change shall be established except after a public hearing of
which the grantee and the grantee's subscribers in the City have
received notice as provided herein.
(2) If the proposed change is initiated by the grantee, it shall be
initiated by written application of grantee submitted to the City
which application shall describe the proposed change and the
§ 222-40 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-40
222:266
proposed effective date of such change. Within a reasonable time
after receipt of the application, the City Commission shall schedule
the public hearing thereon required by Subsection D(1) and cause
written notice thereof to be sent to grantee by registered or
certified mail. The City shall cause notice of the public hearing to
be furnished to grantee's subscribers by publishing notice thereof
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not more than 10
nor less than five days prior to the hearing. In addition, grantee
shall notify its subscribers in the City of the hearing by announcing
the time, date, and place thereof, one week immediately prior
to the hearing, each day between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
two channels. The public hearing shall be scheduled within a
reasonable time after receipt of grantee's application, but nothing
herein shall be deemed to prevent the City Commission from
referring such application to a committee or organization referred
to in Article VIII of this chapter prior to such public hearing.
(3) If the proposed change is initiated by the City, the City Commission
shall cause written notice thereof to be sent to grantee by
registered or certified mail. The notice shall describe the proposed
change, and the proposed effective date thereof, and shall further
set forth the time, date and place of the hearing. The City and the
grantee shall cause notice of the proposed change to be sent to
grantee's subscribers in the City as provided in Subsection D(2).
(4) The grantee's application shall be accompanied by the following
(and such supplemental information as the City may request):
grantee's most current year end and interim financial statements; a
list of current rates and charges of grantee in other areas
franchised to grantee; a list of current rates and charges applicable
to systems owned or operated by grantee's parent, or other
subsidiaries or affiliates of grantee's parent corporation or of
grantee; a list of current rates and charges for other systems in
Wayne, Oakland and Macomb Counties.
(5) In reviewing an application of grantee, the City may utilize a rate
consultant selected by it. All costs for review of the application,
including, without limitation, reasonable fees of the consultant,
reasonable attorney fees, and the reasonable value of the services
rendered by other agents, employees, and representatives of the
City, shall be paid by grantee.
(6) The City Commission shall make its determination regarding any
rate change, whether initiated by it or by grantee, within a
reasonable time after the closing of the public hearing thereon. Any
change shall become effective upon the date determined by the
City Commission.
E. No change required. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require any
proposed rate change initiated by grantee.
§ 222-40 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-41
222:267
§ 222-41. Subliminal advertising.
Grantee is expressly prohibited from transmitting any form of subliminal
advertising at any time.
§ 222-42. Tampering in fraudulent connections or sales. [Added
8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7; amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 222-43. Landlord and tenant relationship. [Added 8-16-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-7; amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
A. No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system, may
intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be damaged
any wire, cable, conduit, equipment, or apparatus of the grantee, or to
commit any act with an intent to cause such removal or damage, or tap,
tamper with, or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable,
conduit, equipment and apparatus, or appurtenances of the licensee
with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system
without authorization from or compensation to the grantee, or obtain
cable television or other communications, service or sell, rent, lend,
offer or advertise for sale, rental or use any instrument, apparatus,
device or plans, specifications, or instructions for making or assembling
the same to connect to the grantee's cable system with intent to cheat
or defraud the grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.
A. The City hereby declares that this chapter has, as one of its principal
objectives, the lawful public purpose of rapidly developing and
maximizing the educational, community service, cultural and public
safety potential of cable television in order to benefit all of the residents
of the City. The City further finds that the public interest and necessity
require that no owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling (nor his
agent or representative) be permitted to directly or indirectly prevent
any resident of such dwelling from receiving cable communications
service installation, maintenance, and services from a grantee
operating under a valid franchise issued by the City.
B. In order to provide the opportunity for the residents of any multiple-unit
residential dwelling to obtain service from a grantee, such grantee may
negotiate an agreement with the owner of that dwelling or, failing
agreement, may request that the City exercise its power of eminent
domain for the necessary public purpose of enabling the grantee to
serve residents of that multiple-unit residential dwelling. Upon request
of such grantee, the City may commence condemnation proceedings in
accordance with applicable law. In the event of such proceeding, in
preparing its good faith offer of just compensation, the City may
consider:
(1) The amount and fair market value of space occupied by the
grantee's cable and related facilities. The fair market value of the
space shall be assessed in light of the prior use, if any, of that
§ 222-41 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-43
222:268
space, together with any evidence of nonspeculative alternative
uses;
(2) The present value of any funds that the owner will reasonably
expend over time in ensuring that the grantee conforms to all laws,
regulations and the reasonable conditions necessary to assure the
safety, convenient functioning, and appearance of the multiple-unit
residential dwelling;
(3) The continued physical availability of other space on the premises
for the installation of alternative modes of television program
reception or delivery;
(4) As an offset to the amounts set forth in Subsections B(1) and (2)
hereof, any increase in the fair market value of the multiple-unit
residential dwelling attributable to the availability of the grantee's
service to the property's tenants; and
(5) Any other reasonable, nonspeculative factors which the City may
find relevant. The requesting grantee shall indemnify the City for
all expenses and costs incurred by the City in the condemnation
proceedings as well as for the full amount of the condemnation
award made to the owner if such condemnation proceedings are
completed.
C. Notwithstanding any other language in this section or elsewhere in this
chapter, the grantee shall not be obligated to provide service to any
multiple-unit residential dwelling so long as the owner of that dwelling
demands compensation from the grantee in an amount that is
unreasonable or imposes financial or other conditions that would, in the
grantee's reasonable business judgment, render provision of service to
that dwelling uneconomic. The grantee shall not be obligated, in such
circumstances, to request the City to institute condemnation
proceedings.
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter
or the franchise agreement, a grantee shall be permitted to charge
each resident of a multiple-unit residential dwelling an additional
charge, above and beyond the service rate for a single-family
dwelling as specified in the franchise agreement, solely to defray
the exact additional per-resident cost to the grantee of
compensating the owner for access to the multiple-unit residential
dwelling. Any such additional charge shall be subject to the
approval of City. Such additional charge shall not be included in the
computation of the franchise fees due to the City pursuant to this
chapter or the franchise agreement.
D. Neither the owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his
agent or representative shall penalize, charge, or surcharge a tenant or
resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or
resident or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who
requests or receives cable communications service from a company
§ 222-43 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-43
222:269
operating under a valid and existing cable communication franchise
issued by the City. Any person convicted of violating any provision of
this section is subject to a fine of not more than $300 for each offense.
E. No person shall resell, without the express written consent of both the
grantee and the City, any cable service, program, or signal transmitted
by a grantee operating under a franchise issued by the City.
F. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable
communications system facilities conform to laws and regulations and
reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning and
appearance.
G. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a person from requiring a grantee
from agreeing to indemnify the owner, or his agents or representatives,
for damages or for liability for physical damages caused by installation,
operation maintenance, or removal of cable television facilities.
§ 222-43 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-43
222:270
ARTICLE VIII
Administration; Advisory Body
§ 222-44. Administrator.
The City Commission may appoint an Administrator who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Commission and who shall be responsible for the continuing
administration of the franchise on the part of the City. The City shall provide
written notice to grantee of the initial appointment of the Administrator and
any subsequent appointments.
§ 222-45. Advisory body.49
The City Commission may appoint a Cable Communications Advisory
Committee to perform such duties and to have such powers as the City
Commission may determine. The composition and terms of office of the
members of the Committee, as well as the duties and powers of the
Committee, shall be determined and established by resolution of the City
Commission.
§ 222-46. Delegation of authority by City. [Amended 6-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-7]
Unless otherwise provided in its franchise agreement, the City reserves the
right to delegate from time to time any of its rights or obligations under that
franchise to any body or organization. Any such delegation shall be effective
upon written notice thereof to the grantee. Upon receipt of such notice, the
grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions of the delegation not in
conflict with the franchise. Any such delegation or revocation thereof, no
matter how often made, shall not be deemed to be an amendment to the
franchise or require the grantee's consent.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 39, Art. I, Municipal Cable Access Committee.
§ 222-44 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-46
222:271

ARTICLE IX
Consumer Protection
[Added 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-10]
§ 222-47. Customer service. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
A. The grantee shall maintain a local office or offices which provide the
necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply, under normal
operating conditions, with the customer service standards set forth in
Subsections A(1) through (5) of this section. For purposes of this
section, normal operating conditions embrace all conditions which are
within the control of the grantee, including special promotions, pay-perview
events, rate increases, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system, but excluding conditions outside the grantee's control, such as
natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network
outages, and extreme weather.
(1) On a monthly basis, provide sufficient customer service
representatives and toll-free telephone line capacity during normal
business hours to assure that a minimum of 90% of all calls will be
answered within 30 seconds and 90% of all calls for service will not
be required to wait more than 30 seconds after such call has been
answered before being connected to a service representative. All
incoming customer service lines shall not be simultaneously busy
more than 3% of the total time the cable office is open on any
business day.
(2) Staffed emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twentyfour-
hour basis, including weekends and holidays.
(3) Maintenance of an office in the franchise area of the authority with
adequate office hours to meet public demand. The authority may
require the grantee to alter or extend these hours if there is
significant evidence through subscriber complaints that the posted
hours are not adequate.
(4) An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of
responding to and repairing system malfunctions on a twenty-fourhour
basis.
(5) An installation staff capable of furnishing standard installation to
any subscriber within seven says after receipt of a request.
"Standard installation" shall mean those located up to 175 feet
from where trunk and feeder cable have been activated.
[Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3]
(a) The grantee shall, at its sole expense, cause all drops required
to be buried to be properly buried within 15 days of installation
of service unless conditions during such period make burial
impracticable, in which case the drop shall be buried within 15
days after physical conditions reasonably allow for such burial.
§ 222-47 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-47
222:273
In the event of any dispute between grantee and the subscriber
as to when conditions permit burial of the drop, such dispute
shall be resolved by the decision of the City's building official
or other official designated by the City to resolve such
disputes.
(6) The grantee shall provide written instructions and information at
the time of installation and reinstallation, and at least annually
thereafter, to all subscribers on products and services, prices and
options, installation and service maintenance policies, instructions
for using the system, and billing and complaint procedures. Such
instructions and information shall include the grantee's business
address, applicable phone number, and the name of the appropriate
official or department of the grantee to whose attention the
subscriber should direct a request for service, request for billing
adjustment or complaint. Such instructions and information shall
also include the name, business address and telephone number of
the authority's executive director and the title, business address
and telephone number of the designated City employee to whom
the subscriber can call or write for information regarding the
terms, conditions, and provisions governing the grantee's franchise
if the grantee fails to respond within a reasonable period of time to
the subscriber's complaint or request for installation, service or
billing adjustment.
(a) The grantee shall promptly furnish revised written instructions
and information to each subscriber whenever the instructions
and information previously provided have been materially
changed.
(b) The written instructions and information provided for herein
shall be subject to the review and approval of the authority
which shall not withhold its approval unreasonably.
B. Local office. For purposes of this section, the office(s) which grantee is
required to maintain may be a virtual office consisting of a toll-free
telephone number which all subscribers in the City may access from
their homes 24 hours a day, seven days a week to register complaints or
questions concerning the cable system, conveniently located bill
payment offices within the combined corporate limits of the Cities of
Royal Oak, Ferndale, Clawson, Pleasant Ridge, Berkley and Huntington
Woods where subscribers may pay their bills and no charge for delivery
and pickup of converter boxes, remotes and similar grantee-provided
customer premises equipment.
C. Authority. Unless otherwise specified by City, the term "authority" as
used herein shall mean:
(1) The Intergovernmental Cable Communications Authority (ICCA)
for a grantee where the City has transferred or delegated certain
§ 222-47 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-47
222:274
§ 222-48. Cable service. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
powers, functions, duties and responsibilities on cable television
matters for that grantee to the ICCA; and
(2) The Southeast Oakland County Cable Communications Cooperative
(SOCCC) for a grantee where the City has transferred or delegated
certain powers, functions, duties and responsibilities on cable
television matters for that grantee to the SOCCC.
A. The grantee shall interrupt system service only with good cause and for
the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only
after periodic cable casting notice of service interruption for two days
prior to the anticipated interruption. Services may be interrupted
between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and
repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday, Sunday,
holidays, or the night preceding a holiday.
B. The grantee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in
computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed
forms, of all subscriber service complaints. Such log shall list the date
and time of such complaints, identifying the subscribers and describing
the nature of the complaints and when and what actions were taken by
the grantee in response thereto. Such log shall be kept at the grantee's
local office or otherwise shall promptly be made available by grantee to
municipality, reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least
three years, and shall be available for public inspection during regular
business hours. The grantee shall submit a summary of such complaints
quarterly to the authority for its review or a copy thereof if the authority
so requests. For purposes of this subsection, the local office which
grantee is required to maintain may be the virtual office described in
§ 222-47, provided that, upon request, grantee shall make available for
public inspection at a location in or proximate to the City the log
required to be maintained by grantee pursuant to this subsection.
C. For purposes of this section, "service interruption" shall mean any loss
or material distortion of picture and/or sound on one or more channels;
"subscriber problem" shall mean a service interruption affecting a
single subscriber; "outage" shall mean a service interruption affecting
two or more subscribers. Under normal operating conditions as
specified in § 222-47 above, the grantee shall maintain a sufficient
repair force of competent technicians so as to respond effectively to any
subscriber problem or outage within the following time periods, unless
the applicable period is extended at the request of the subscriber or
extended pursuant to the requirements of any applicable law or
regulation:
(1) Subscriber problem: same-day service, seven days a week for all
requests for service received prior to 12:00 noon each day. In no
event shall the response time for notice received after 12:00 noon
§ 222-47 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-48
222:275
exceed 24 hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time
grantee receives notice of the problem.
(2) Outage: within two hours, including weekends and holidays, from
the time grantee discovers or receives notice of the outage.
D. Upon receipt of a request for service, the grantee shall establish a fourhour
appointment window with the subscriber (or adult representative
of the subscriber). The grantee shall respond to the request for service
within such established appointment window. In the event access to the
subscriber's home is not made available to the grantee's technician
when the technician arrives during the established appointment
window, the technician shall leave written notification stating the time
of arrival and requesting that the grantee be contacted again to
establish a new appointment window. In such case, grantee shall
respond in a timely manner after it is contacted to establish the new
appointment window.
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the grantee's technician
telephones the subscriber's home before or during the appointment
window and is advised that the technician will not be given access
to the subscriber's home during the appointment window, then the
technician shall not be obliged to travel to the subscriber's home or
to leave the written notification referred to above, and the burden
shall again be upon the subscriber (or adult representative of the
subscriber) to contact the grantee to arrange for a new
appointment window, in which case the grantee shall respond in a
timely manner after it is contacted to establish the new
appointment window.
E. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D above, the grantee,
under the provisions of this section and § 222-47, shall be deemed to
have responded to a request for service, a subscriber problem, or an
outage only when sufficient technicians arrive at the service location,
begin work on the request for service or remedial work, as the case may
be, and proceed diligently to complete such work.
F. As to company-owned and maintained equipment, no charge shall be
made to the subscriber for any service call unless the problem giving
rise to the service request can be demonstrated by the grantee to have
been:
(1) Caused by subscriber negligence; or
(2) Caused by malicious destruction of cable equipment; or
(3) A problem previously established as having been noncable in
origin.
G. All service personnel of the grantee or its contractors or subcontractors
who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public
shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing
§ 222-48 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-48
222:276
§ 222-49. Grantee's billings. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
§ 222-50. Disconnect and downgrade charges.
their name and photograph. The grantee shall account for all
identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of the grantee
shall be clearly identifiable by the public as such a vehicle.
A. The grantee's bills to its subscribers shall be clear, concise and
understandable and shall be itemized as to each charge reflected
thereon. The bill and any accompanying communication from the
grantee to its subscribers, and any other communication from the
grantee to its subscribers, shall not contain any material misstatement
or omit to state a material fact which omission would make the
information furnished misleading. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
99-3]
B. Grantee shall file with the City a copy of the billing form to be used by
grantee at least 32 days prior to sending any such billing form to
subscribers, and grantee shall make no changes in the latest billing
form on file without similarly first filing the revised billing form with the
City.
A. The grantee shall make no charge to any subscriber on account of
either complete discontinuance of service or net downgrade of service
whereby the subscriber requests a lower tier of basic service and/or a
net reduction in premium service.
B. The grantee may only disconnect a subscriber if at least 45 days have
elapsed after the due date for payment of the subscriber's bill and the
grantee has provided at least 10 days' written notice to the subscriber
prior to disconnection specifying the effective date after which cable
services are subject to disconnection; provided, however,
notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee may disconnect a
subscriber at any time if the grantee in good faith and on reasonable
grounds determines that the subscriber has tampered with or abused
the grantee's equipment, or is or may be engaged in the theft of cable
services.
C. The grantee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests
disconnection. No period of notice prior to requested termination of
service may be required of subscribers by the grantee. If the subscriber
fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the effective date
shall be deemed to be the day following the date the disconnect request
is received by the grantee. No charge may be imposed upon the
subscriber for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the
disconnect request.
§ 222-48 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-51
222:277
§ 222-51. Late payment charges. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
Late payment charges imposed by the grantee upon subscribers shall be
fair and shall be reasonably related to the grantee's cost of administering
delinquent accounts. No late payment charge shall be imposed upon a
subscriber, and a subscriber shall not be deemed to be in arrears on a bill,
unless at least 40 days have elapsed after the due date specified on the bill;
and, for purposes of this section and the prior section, the due date specified
on the bill shall not be earlier than the first day of the monthly period to
which the bill is attributable.
§ 222-52. Notice of programming or channel change. [Amended
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
Grantee shall provide at least 45 days' written notice to subscribers (30
days if there is more than one grantee operating in City) prior to
discontinuing any channel or programming service or to realigning any
channel and shall provide written notice of the same to the authority no
later than the grantee's notice to subscribers. This provision shall not
preclude the right of the City, or the authority on behalf of the City, to
contest or prohibit any such action by the grantee if, and to the extent,
such right exists. The foregoing notice requirement shall not apply in cases
in which a programming service is discontinued because a nonaffiliated
provider thereof discontinues furnishing the same to the grantee on less
than 45 days' notice (30 days if there is more than one grantee operating in
City) to the grantee. In any such case the grantee shall nevertheless furnish
notice to its subscribers and the authority promptly upon the grantee
receiving notice of the discontinuance of the programming service from
such unaffiliated provider.
§ 222-53. Notice of price increase or reduction of service.
[Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
The grantee shall provide at least 45 days' written notice to subscribers
(30 days if there is more than one grantee operating in City) prior to
implementing any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in subscriber
services and shall provide written notice of the same to the authority no
later than the grantee's notice to subscribers. The provisions of this section
shall not preclude the right of the City, or the authority on behalf of the City,
to contest or prohibit any such action by the grantee if, and to the extent,
permitted by law.
§ 222-54. Grantee's communications.
Prior to or simultaneously with any communication made by the grantee to
the general public or to the grantee's subscribers announcing or explaining
any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in programming services,
the grantee shall furnish a copy of such communication to the authority.
The copy of the communication required to be furnished to the authority
§ 222-51 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-54
222:278
hereunder shall be deemed to be a "report" under all applicable provisions
of the franchise agreement relating to "reports," including, without
limitation, the provisions of Subsections (J) and (K) of Section 19 of the
franchise agreement in effect as of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 222-55. Disclosure of information on grantee's costs. [Amended
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
If there is only one grantee franchised to provide cable communications
service in the City, then in the event the grantee, in any communication to
the general public, to the City, to subscribers, or to the authority, justifies
a price increase or reduction in service on the basis of increased costs
to which the grantee has been or will be subjected, then the grantee, on
written request of the authority, shall promptly furnish the authority the
underlying information on which such claim of increased costs is based
in such form as the authority may request. The information so furnished
by the grantee to the authority hereunder shall also be deemed to be a
report under all applicable provisions of the franchise agreement relating to
reports, including, without limitation, the provisions of Subsections (J) and
(K) of Section 19 of the franchise agreement in effect as of the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 222-56. Subscriber rebates. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
A. Grantee shall provide a customer with a full-day credit or a rebate for a
service outage exceeding four hours in duration beyond the time that
the customer notified grantee of such outage. No credit or rebate shall
be required where the outage was due to matters beyond the immediate
control of grantee, such as (by way of example and not limitation)
service outages caused by storms or other natural disasters. In no event
shall the customer incur a charge for any outage exceeding 48 hours.
The credit specified herein shall be equal to 1/30 of the subscriber's
total monthly bill for all services and equipment other than pay-perview;
provided, however, if such monthly bill includes a charge for a
pay-per-view program subject to such outage or significant impairment,
then the credit shall be increased by the amount of such charge.
B. In the event of a violation of the provisions of this article by the grantee
which results in a subscriber not receiving cable programming service
or receiving only significantly impaired service, the authority after
notice to such grantee and an opportunity to be heard may order and
direct the grantee to issue a rebate to such subscriber in a reasonable
amount determined by the authority to provide monetary relief to the
subscriber substantially equal to the subscriber's unliquidated,
detriment or loss resulting from such violation, not to exceed the
subscriber's monthly bill.
§ 222-54 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-56
222:279
§ 222-57. Security fund. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
C. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a subscriber from
requesting and receiving from the grantee a rebate greater than that
provided in Subsections A and B of this section.
A. Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, within 10 days after the
award of a new franchise or the transfer, extension or renewal of an
existing franchise, the grantee thereunder shall furnish the authority,
on behalf of all of the authority's member communities, and thereafter
maintain with the authority, throughout the term of the franchise, a
cash deposit of $25,000 as security for:
(1) The faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this chapter
and the franchise;
(2) Compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency,
commission, board or department of the City having jurisdiction
over its acts or defaults under the franchise; and
(3) The payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the
City which arise by reason of the construction, operation or
maintenance of the system.
B. Within 10 days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn
from the security fund, the grantee shall pay to or deposit with the
authority a sum of money in the full amount withdrawn.
C. If the grantee fails to pay to the City any fees within the time fixed
herein; or fails, after 10 days' written notice, to pay to the City any taxes
due and unpaid; or fails to repay the City, within such 10 days, any
damages, costs, or expenses which the City shall be compelled to pay by
reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with a
franchise; or fails, after three days' notice of such failure, to comply
with any provisions of the franchise which the City reasonably
determines can be remedied by a withdrawal from the security fund,
the authority, on request of the City, may immediately withdraw the
amount thereof, with interest and any additional charges, from the
security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the authority shall notify the
grantee of the amount and date thereof and shall remit to the City the
amount so withdrawn.
D. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section, including all
interest thereon, if any, shall be held by the authority, for the benefit of
its member communities, in the event that the franchise is rescinded or
revoked by reason of the default of the grantee. The grantee, however,
shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or such portion
thereof as remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the
franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part
of the grantee. Any interest earned by the investment of the security
fund shall become part of the security fund and unless consumed by the
§ 222-56 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-57
222:280
§ 222-58. Liquidated damages. [Amended 6-16-1977 by Ord. No.
97-7]
§ 222-59. Evaluation of violations.
payment of liquidated damages, fees or other charges under this
chapter, shall be returned to the grantee at the expiration of the
franchise term, provided that there is then no outstanding default on
the part of the grantee.
E. The authority shall maintain the security fund in a segregated account
and shall not commingle the same with any other monies of the
authority. The authority may, but shall not be required to, invest the
security fund so as to earn interest thereon and shall not be liable to the
grantee on any claim based upon the lack or insufficiency of interest
earned by such fund.
F. Payment from the security fund shall not constitute a cure of any
violation or any act of noncompliance by the grantee. The rights
reserved to the City with respect to the security fund are in addition to
all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this chapter or
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the City may
have.
G. The security fund provided for in this section shall not be required if the
franchise agreement expressly requires grantee to provide a cash
security fund, letter of credit or other form of security that is mutually
agreeable to the City and grantee.
A. The authority may assess liquidated damages of up to $100 per day
against the grantee for each day the grantee is in violation of this
article. Such assessment may be levied against the security fund
specified in § 222-57, or any letter of credit, performance bond, or other
security provided for in the franchise agreement.
B. Assessment of liquidated damages shall not constitute a waiver by the
City of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise
agreement or applicable law, including the right to recover from the
grantee any costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees,
which are incurred by the City on account of the grantee's violation of
this article.
A. The violation of this chapter by the grantee, the grantee's agents,
employees and/or independent contractors employed or retained by the
grantee shall be grounds for evaluating:
(1) The grantee's compliance with any existing agreement and with
applicable law; and
(2) The quality of the grantee's service and whether it has been
reasonable in light of community needs; and
§ 222-57 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS § 222-59
222:281
§ 222-60. Remedies available. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
If the Authority determines that the grantee has violated this article, the
authority may order appropriate rebates to subscribers as provided in
§ 222-56 and/or assess liquidated damages against the grantee as provided
in § 222-58. In addition, the City may pursue any additional or other legal
or equitable remedies available to it under the franchise agreement or any
applicable law.
§ 222-61. Appeal process. [Amended 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7]
With respect to matters affecting the City individually, and excluding
matters affecting all of the authority's member communities equally, the
grantee may appeal any action of the authority to the City by submitting
a written appeal within 21 days from the date of the authority's action to
which the grantee objects, including the proposed assessment of liquidated
damages. Upon such appeal, the City Commission shall conduct a de novo
review of the action of the authority being appealed and shall set a hearing
date within 60 days of the date of receipt of the appeal. The grantee may
present any information, data or other evidence to the City Commission
either prior to or at the time of the hearing. Hearings shall be open to the
public, and members of the public and representatives of the authority may
also present any evidence or information pertinent to the matter appealed.
The City Commission shall then determine whether to uphold, reverse, or
modify the action of the authority. The appeal shall stay any further action
on the matter appealed until the appeal has been decided by the City
Commission, including the assessment of liquidated damages.
§ 222-62. Effect on existing agreements.
This chapter is intended to supplement and strengthen the customer service
and related provisions set forth in the City's existing Cable Regulatory
Ordinance, its franchise agreement with the grantee and First Amendment
thereto, and other agreements between the City and/or the authority with
the grantee. Accordingly, only those portions, if any, of existing ordinances
which conflict and cannot be reconciled with the provisions of this chapter
are hereby repealed.
(3) The technical ability of the grantee to provide the services,
facilities, and equipment as set forth in an operator's proposal for
future or renewed cable services; and
(4) The reasonableness of the grantee's proposal to meet the future
cable-related community needs and interests of the residents and
cable television consumers of the City.
B. These evaluations shall be proper and germane for the City to consider
formally when reviewing a proposal for renewal of any agreement to
provide cable services within the City.
§ 222-59 ROYAL OAK CODE § 222-62
222:282
Chapter 229
CEMETERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Commission — See Ch. 82, Art. III.
§ 229-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Royal Oak Cemetery
Ordinance."
§ 229-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
CITY MANAGER — The Royal Oak City Manager or his or her designated
representative.
ROYAL OAK CEMETERY — The 7.8 acres of land in the City of Royal Oak
legally described as follows:
T1N, R11E, Sec 15 Part of NW 1/4 Beg at NW Sec Cor, Th N 89-55-30 E
492.73 Ft, Th S 12-13-30 W 699.45 Ft, Th S 12-36-30 W 501.66 Ft, Th N
88-38-30 W 235.18 Ft, Th N 1166.93 Ft. to Beg CI72A (Except for adjacent
road right-of-way)
§ 229-3. Ownership and operation.
The Royal Oak Cemetery shall be owned and operated by the City of Royal
Oak for the interment of persons who have an ownership right in a lot within
the cemetery.
§ 229-4. Administration by Royal Oak Historical Commission.
On the effective date of this chapter, the Royal Oak Cemetery shall be
administered by the Royal Oak Historical Commission as established by the
Royal Oak Historical Commission Ordinance, No. 95-14, as amended.50
§ 229-5. Rules and regulations.
A. The Royal Oak Historical Commission in conjunction with the City
Manager shall have the authority to make rules and regulations for the
operation of said cemetery; may prescribe conditions and qualifications
for interment; may make rules for the conduct of funerals while within
the cemetery grounds, and such other rules and regulations as may be
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Art. III, Historical Commission.
§ 222-62 CEMETERY § 229-5
229:283
§ 229-6. Superintendent.
The City Manager shall appoint a City employee to act as Superintendent
of the cemetery. The Superintendent shall oversee the maintenance of the
cemetery, supervise interments and the care of graves and monuments, and
attend to the sale of burial rights.
§ 229-7. Accounts and finances.
The Director of Finance shall set up a system of accounts for the Royal
Oak Cemetery, which system shall be adequate to keep the City Manager
and City Commission informed as to the general financial condition of the
cemetery operation.
§ 229-8. Gifts and donations.
The City may receive gifts and donations for said cemetery. Such gifts and
donations may be accepted for the general maintenance or ornamentation
of the cemetery, or may be accepted in trust for a particular purpose
in connection with the ownership, operation and maintenance of said
cemetery. Any funds so received in trust shall be used only for the purposes
received.
§ 229-9. Record of interments.
A suitable map or plat of the Royal Oak Cemetery, showing the location of
the various lots and burial spaces, shall be kept by the City, and shall be a
public record.
§ 229-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who willfully molests any grave or defaces or injures any
monument or marker of any kind in the Royal Oak Cemetery, or who
interferes with the conduct of any funeral therein, or who willfully violates
the rules and regulations of the Royal Oak Historical Commission, or who
necessary and proper for the public use and benefit of the cemetery and
the orderly conduct of persons therein, consistent with applicable state
laws and local ordinance.
B. The Royal Oak Historical Commission shall meet at least quarterly and
shall conform to all applicable rules and regulations governing the
conduct of meetings promulgated by the City Commission.
C. The business that the Royal Oak Historical Commission may perform
shall be conducted at a public meeting in compliance with the Open
Meetings Act.51 Public notice of the time, date and location of the
meeting shall be given, and a meeting agenda shall be part of the
notice.
51.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
§ 229-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 229-10
229:284
willfully obstructs or interferes with the work of the Superintendent or any
employee of the City, or who violates any ordinance of the City therein shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction and shall be punished
by imposition of a fine not to exceed $500 and/or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days within the discretion of the court.
Chapter 236
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 236, Chauffeurs and Taxicabs, adopted 10-14-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-4, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 244
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 244, Christmas Trees, adopted 12-3-1951 by Ord. No.
665, as amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 251
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 63.
§ 251-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Civil Emergency
Ordinance."
§ 251-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIVIL EMERGENCY — Either:
A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force
or violence, when criminal or lawless activity has suddenly and rapidly
increased to the extent that it appears a riot is imminent.
A.
A natural disaster or man-made calamity, including a flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the City
resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property
to such an extent that extraordinary measures have to be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B.
§ 229-10 CEMETERY § 251-2
229:285
CURFEW — A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon an alley, street, highway, public property or
vacant premises within the City excepting persons officially designated as
not subject to such curfew.
§ 251-3. Declaration of civil emergency.
§ 251-4. Curfew; failure to comply.
The Mayor or his lawful designee may then order a general curfew
applicable to such geographical areas of the City or to the City as a whole,
as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night
as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. No
person who is not a resident of the City, as evidenced by a current address
on his driver's license or other valid identification, shall be arrested or
prosecuted for violation of a curfew without first being given a reasonable
opportunity to continue through or otherwise leave the area which is under
a state of civil emergency. Any person who is given a reasonable opportunity
to leave such area and does not do so is subject to arrest and prosecution.
§ 251-5. Authority to issue orders. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02]
A. When in the judgment of the Mayor, or in his absence or disability the
Mayor Pro Tem or other designee who shall be an elected officer of the
City, hereinafter referred to as "lawful designee," a civil emergency is
deemed to exist, he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of
the civil emergency.
B. The existence of a civil emergency shall not be declared under this
chapter because individuals or groups of individuals are engaged in
concerted activities in a bona fide labor dispute and are using lawful
means in pursuit of a lawful labor objective.
C. When the existence of a civil emergency is declared under this chapter,
the Mayor or his lawful designee shall notify the Office of the Governor
forthwith.
A. The Mayor or his lawful designee, proclaiming a civil emergency in the
interest of public safety and welfare, may also make any of the following
orders:
(1) Order the closing of all retail liquor establishments.
(2) Order the closing of all beer taverns.
(3) Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein
the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer or both is permitted.
(4) Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer.
§ 251-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 251-5
229:286
§ 251-6. Notification of curfew or order; amendment or
cancellation.
A curfew or order authorized by this chapter shall become effective upon
being posted in three public places in the City or affected area thereof and
transmitted to newspapers of general circulation in the area. The curfew
and orders may be amended or rescinded in like manner by the Mayor or his
lawful designee during the pendency of the civil emergency, but shall cease
to be in effect upon the declaration by the Mayor or his lawful designee that
the civil emergency no longer exists, or when superseded by action of the
Governor of the State of Michigan.
§ 251-7. Notification to City Commission and Governor.
After proclamation of a civil emergency, or any order thereunder, the Mayor
or his lawful designee shall forthwith provide for notice thereof to be given
to members of the City Commission and to the Governor of the State of
Michigan.
§ 251-8. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter or any order issued thereunder is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of
the court.
(5) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or other combustible products in
any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor
vehicle.
(6) Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, or dispensing of
liquid flammable or combustible products.
(7) Order the discontinuance of the lawful sale or distribution of any
explosives or dangerous weapons.
(8) Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof,
the chief activity of which is the lawful sale or distribution of
explosives or dangerous weapons.
(9) Issue such other orders as are necessary for the protection of life
and property or to bring the civil emergency under control.
B. Subsection A does not authorize the seizure, taking or confiscation of
lawfully possessed firearms or ammunition, or a prohibition on the
lawful sale or distribution of any firearms or ammunition.
§ 251-5 CEMETERY § 251-8
229:287
Chapter 260
CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disturbances caused by construction
activity — See Ch. 278.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 340.
Signs — See Ch. 607.
§ 260-1. Agency designated; local administration and enforcement.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 9 of Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of
1972 (MCLA § 125.1509)52, the Building Official of the City of Royal Oak is
hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities
of the City under Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, State of Michigan.53
The City of Royal Oak hereby assumes responsibility for the administration
and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.
§ 260-2. Construction Code Board of Appeals. [Added 5-7-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-9; amended 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-04; 9-10-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-09]
A. The Construction Board of Appeals shall consist of three members
appointed by the City Commission for terms of two years. A member of
the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by experience or training to
perform the duties of members of the Board.
B. Two members of the Board of Appeals constitute a quorum. Action may
be taken by the Board by an affirmative vote of at least two members of
the Board. A meeting of the Board may be called by the Chairman or
two members of the Board on written notice not less than two business
days in advance of the meeting.
C. The business that the Board may perform shall be conducted at a public
meeting of the Board held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act,
MCLA § 15.261 et seq., as amended. Public notice of the time, date, and
place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by the Open
Meetings Act, MCLA § 15.261 et seq., as amended.
D. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by
the Board in the performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information
Act, MCLA 15.231 et seq., as amended.
52.Editor's Note: Section 9 of Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1509) was
repealed by PA 1999, No. 245.
53.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.
§ 251-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 260-2
229:288
E. If the Building Official or his designee refuses to grant an application
for a building permit, or makes any other decision pursuant to or
related to the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code
Act,54 as amended, or the State Construction Code, as amended, an
interested person or the person's authorized agent may appeal, in
writing, to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear the
appeal and render and file its decision with a statement of reasons for
the decision not more than 30 days after submission of the appeal.
Failure by the Board of Appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision
within the time limit is a denial of the appeal for purposes of authorizing
an appeal to the State Construction Code Commission. A copy of the
decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered
or mailed, before filing, to the party taking the appeal.
F. Grant of variance.
(1) After a public hearing, the Board of Appeals may grant a specific
variance to a substantive requirement of the Construction Code if
the literal application of the substantive requirement would result
in an exceptional, practical difficulty to the applicant, and if both of
the following requirements are satisfied:
(a) The performance of the particular item or part of the building
or structure with respect to which the variance is granted shall
be adequate for its intended use and shall not substantially
deviate from performance required by the Construction Code
of that particular item or part for the health, safety and welfare
of the people of this City.
(b) The specific condition justifying the variance shall be neither
so general nor recurrent in nature as to make an amendment of
the Construction Code with respect to the condition reasonably
practical or desirable.
(2) `The Board of Appeals may attach, in writing, any condition in
connection with the granting of a variance that in its judgment is
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of
this City. The breach of a condition shall automatically invalidate
the variance and any permit, license and certificate granted on the
basis of it. In no case shall more than minimum variance from the
Construction Code be granted than is necessary to alleviate the
exceptional, practical difficulty.
G. An appeal to the Board of Appeals does not stay a stop construction
order issued by the Building Official or his designee, or prevent the
Building Official or his designee from seeking an order in a court of
competent jurisdiction enjoining the violation of a stop construction
order. In other cases, an appeal to the Board of Appeals, or to the State
Construction Code Commission pursuant to the Construction Code, as
54.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.
§ 260-2 CEMETERY § 260-2
229:289
Chapter 264
CONSTRUCTION SITES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Code enforcement — See Ch.
260.
Fences — See Ch. 323.
amended, or to a court of competent jurisdiction, shall act as a stay
upon an order, determination, decision or action appealed from, unless
the Building Official or his designee establishes that immediate
enforcement of the order, determination, decision or action is necessary
to avoid substantial peril to life or property.
§ 260-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 260-2
229:290
ARTICLE I
Securing Construction and Demolition Sites
[Adopted 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12; amended in its entirety
7-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-1255]
§ 264-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “2017 Residential
Construction Site Ordinance Amendment.”
§ 264-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require single-family and two-family
residential construction sites and demolition sites that are adjacent to
existing residential dwellings to be secured.
§ 264-3. Standards for securing construction sites. [Amended
9-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
All single-family and two-family residential construction sites and
demolition sites that are adjacent to existing residential dwellings shall
comply with the following standards while a building or structure is being
erected, altered, repaired, removed or demolished under a valid permit for
construction or demolition. Failure to comply is grounds for the Building
Official to issue an order to stop work on the construction or demolition.
A. Fencing. Prior to the commencement of construction or demolition, the
construction site shall be enclosed with a stable chain-link fence not
less than four feet in height. Any gates shall open inward, so as not to
obstruct the public right-of-way. When there is not active construction
on the site, the gate shall be secured. Temporary fencing may be
removed after a complete insulation inspection has been approved. All
temporary fencing (including the foundation) shall be removed prior to
the issuance of a conditional certificate of occupancy.
B. Signage. Prior to the commencement of construction or demolition,
signage prepared by the City shall be attached to the required fencing
with the permit holder's name and telephone number, and contact
information for the City's Building Department. One sign shall be
provided per street frontage.
C. Right-of-way maintenance. Any activity expected to impact the public
right-of-way, including but not limited to a tree within the right-of-way
or an adjoining sidewalk, must first receive a right-of-way permit
pursuant to the City of Royal Oak Right-of-Way Management Ordinance,
as amended.56
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this article from "Securing
Residential Construction Sites" to "Securing Construction and Demolition Sites."
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. V, Right-of-Way Management.
§ 264-1 CEMETERY § 264-3
229:291
§ 264-4. Violations and penalties.
D. Portable toilets. Any portable toilets on site shall be located within the
construction site and no less than 15 feet from any existing structure on
adjacent property.
E. Excavation. Excavations on a site shall not be open for more than 60
days.
F. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
(1) New developments that have been through subdivision or site
condominium approvals.
(2) All renovations enclosed within the original building or structure.
(3) Additions of less than 50% of the square footage of the original
building or structure.
(4) Detached accessory structures.
A. A person violating this article for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $250, plus costs.
B. A person violating this article for the second time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $500, plus costs.
C. A person violating this article for the third or subsequent time is guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
D. In addition to any penalties provided for herein, the court shall be
authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or
enjoin further violation of this article.
§ 264-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 264-4
229:292
Chapter 273
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 273, Dirt, Hauling and Sale of, adopted 5-16-1955 by
Ord. No. 815, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 278
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 180.
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 251.
Special events — See Ch. 312.
Fireworks — See Ch. 345.
Hazardous materials and incendiary-type
fires — See Ch. 379.
Liquor — See Ch. 430.
Public nuisances — See Ch. 484.
Parks and public recreational facilities — See
Ch. 515.
Skateboards, roller skates and in-line
skates — See Ch. 612.
Tobacco products — See Ch. 684.
§ 264-4 CEMETERY § 264-4
229:293

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 278-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Criminal
Offenses Ordinance."
§ 278-1 CEMETERY § 278-1
229:295

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 278-2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Every place of business, including, but
not limited to, retail, wholesale, or storage.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance, or immediate precursor
included in Schedules 1 to 5 of Part 72 of the Michigan Public Health Code
(see MCLA §§ 333.7212, 333.7214, 333.7216, 333.7218 and 333.7220).
DATING RELATIONSHIP — Frequent, intimate associations primarily
characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does
not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two
individuals in a business or social context.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA —
All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of state law. It includes, but is not
limited to:
Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
(1)
Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances;
(2)
Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled
substance;
(3)
Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
(4)
Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
(5)
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;
(6)
A.
§ 278-2 CEMETERY § 278-2
229:297
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or
refining, marijuana;
(7)
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;
(8)
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
(9)
Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
(10)
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body;
(11)
Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls;
(a)
(b) Water pipes;
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks;
Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
(g) Chamber pipes;
(h) Carburetor pipes;
(i) Electric pipes;
(j) Air-driven pipes;
(k) Chillums;
(l) Bongs;
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
(12)
§ 278-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-2
229:298
FIREARM — An instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell, or bullets
by the action of gunpowder exploded within it.
GOVERNMENT — Includes any principal subdivision or agency of the
United States, State of Michigan, City of Royal Oak, or any agency of local
government operating within the City of Royal Oak.
GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION — Includes any activity which a public
agency or public servant is legally authorized to undertake.
In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," a court
or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the objects
concerning its use;
(1)
Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
(2)
The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of state law;
(3)
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
(5) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
state law; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, as to direct violation of state law shall not prevent a
finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia;
(6)
Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
(7)
Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
(8)
(9) National and local advertising concerning its use;
(10)The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
(11)
The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
(12)
(13)Expert testimony concerning its use.
B.
§ 278-2 CEMETERY § 278-2
229:299
LITTER — A paper, wrapping, cigarette, cardboard, bottle, tin can, glass,
and other refuse materials, and out-of-date posters, placards and
advertisements.
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant;
and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation
of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of
the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture
or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom,
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
MODEL GLUE — Any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the
building of model airplanes, boats, and automobiles, containing toluene,
acetone, or other solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic
vapors.
MOTOR VEHICLE — The meaning given such term in Section 33 of MCLA
§ 257.33.
PEACE OFFICER — Includes any public servant vested by law with a duty to
maintain public order to make arrests for crime, whether that duty extends
to all crimes or is limited to specific crimes.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, company, or
organization of any kind.
PREMISES — Includes any structure or motor vehicle and any real property.
PROPERTY — Any money, personal property, real property, thing in action,
evidence of debt or contract, or article of value of any kind.
PUBLIC NUDITY — Knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place,
or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not
limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any
individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering or a
female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the
nipple and areola. A woman's breastfeeding of a baby does not under any
circumstances constitute nudity irrespective of whether or not the nipple is
covered during or incidental to the feeding.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group
of persons has access, and includes but is not limited to highways,
transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds
and hallways, lobbies and other portions of apartment houses not
constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual residence.
SCHOOL — A school that provides elementary or secondary education as
determined under Michigan law.
SCHOOL ZONE — In or on the grounds of a public, parochial, or private
school, or within a distance of 1,000 feet from the grounds of a public,
parochial, or private school.
§ 278-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-2
229:300
SEXUAL CONDUCT — An act of sexual gratification between persons not
married, involving the sexual or intimate parts of the human anatomy.
TO OBSTRUCT — To render difficult of passage without unreasonable
inconvenience or hazard.
TRUCK — Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property, including, but not limited to, trailer-pulling
tractors, vehicles used for removing rubbish from bins, and vehicles used
for vacuuming parking lots.
§ 278-2 CEMETERY § 278-2
229:301

ARTICLE III
Offenses Directed Against the Person
§ 278-3. Assault and battery; violations and penalties. [Amended
1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
§ 278-4. Domestic assault; violations and penalties.
An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse or
former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating
relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common,
or a resident or former resident of his or her household is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than $500, or both.
§ 278-5. Harassing communications.
A person commits the offense of harassing communications if, with intent
to harass or alarm another person, he or she communicates with a person,
anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, or by telegraph, mail or any other
form of written or electronic communications, in a manner likely to harass
or cause alarm.
§ 278-6. Harassment.
A person commits the offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy
or alarm another person, he or she:
§ 278-7. Malicious annoyance by writing.
Any person who shall knowingly send or deliver or shall make, and for
the purpose of being delivered or sent, shall part with the possession of
any letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene language with or
without a name subscribed thereto, or signed with a fictitious name, or
with any letter, mark or other designation, with the intent thereby to cause
annoyance to any person, or with a view or intent to extort or gain any
A. No person shall commit an assault or an assault and battery upon the
person of another.
B. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not
more than $500, or both.
A. Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or
her to physical contact;
B. Follows a person in or about a public place or places; or
C. Engages in a course of conduct or repeatedly commits acts that alarm
or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose.
§ 278-3 CEMETERY § 278-7
229:303
money or property of any description belonging to another, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
§ 278-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-7
229:304
ARTICLE IV
Offenses Directed Against Property or Services
§ 278-8. Insufficient funds for check $50 or less.
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to defraud, to make, draw,
alter, or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply
on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at
the time of the making, drawing, uttering, or delivering, that the maker or
drawer does not have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other
depository, for the payment of the check, draft, or order, in full, upon its
presentation, or for any person, with the intent to defraud, make, draw,
utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money to
apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, unless
the person has sufficient funds for the payment of the check, draft, or order
when presentation for payment is made to the drawee, except if the lack of
funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause, and
the fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered, or delivered
the check, draft, or order at the time of the making, drawing, uttering, or
delivering if the amount payable in the check, draft, or order is $50 or less.
§ 278-9. Insufficient funds, evidence of intent to defraud.
As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering, or
delivering of a check, draft, or order, payment of which is refused by the
drawee, when presented in the usual course of business shall be prima facie
evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or
credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer
shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together
with all costs and protest fee, within five days after receiving notice that
such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee.
§ 278-10. Insufficient funds, notice of protest as evidence of intent
to defraud.
Where such check, draft or order is protested, on the ground of insufficiency
of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof
or presentation, nonpayment and protest and shall be prima facie evidence
of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with
such bank or other depository.
§ 278-11. Insufficient funds, credit construed.
The word "credit" as used herein shall be construed to mean an
arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository, for the payment
of such check, draft, or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for
payment.
§ 278-12. Larceny.
§ 278-8 CEMETERY § 278-12
229:305
§ 278-13. Larceny by conversion.
Any person to whom any money, goods or other property, which may be
the subject of larceny, shall have been delivered, who shall embezzle or
fraudulently convert to his or her own use, or shall secrete with the intent
to embezzle, or fraudulently use such goods, money or other property, or
any part thereof, shall be deemed by so doing to have committed the crime
of larceny and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 278-14. Larceny from libraries.
Any person who shall procure, or take in any way from any public library
or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or
association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book, pamphlet,
map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine,
manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the same
to his or her own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, or who
having procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting,
picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or
exhibit or any part thereof, shall thereafter convert the same to his or her
own use or fraudulently deprive the owner thereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 278-15. Malicious mischief; violations and penalties.
A. A person who commits larceny by stealing any of the following property
of another person is guilty of a crime as provided in this section:
(1) Money, goods, or chattels.
(2) A bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of
exchange or other bill draft order, or certificate.
(3) A book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due, to
become due, or to be delivered.
(4) A deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or other valuable
contract in force.
(5) A receipt, release or defeasance.
(6) A writ, process, or public record.
B. If the property stolen has a value of less than $200, the person is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93
days or a fine of not more than $500, or both imprisonment and a fine.
A. Willful and malicious destruction of property; personal. A person who
willfully and maliciously destroys or injures the personal property of
another, in the amount less than $200, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not
§ 278-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-15
229:306
more than $500 or three times the amount of the destruction or injury,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
B. Willful and malicious destruction of property; house, barn or building of
another. A person shall not willfully and maliciously destroy or injure
another person's house, barn, or other building or its appurtenances. If
the amount of the destruction or injury is less than $200, a person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500
or three times the amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is
greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
C. Maliciously destroying or injuring trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants,
crops, or soil. A person who willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and
without cause, cuts down, destroys, or injures any tree, shrub, grass,
turf, plants, crops, or soil of another that is standing, growing, or
located on the land of another is guilty of a crime as follows:
(1) If the value of the trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops, or soil cut
down, destroyed, or injured is less than $200, the person is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93
days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the
trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops, or soil, whichever is
greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
D. Malicious destruction of property; boundary markers; defacing
inscriptions, buildings and sign boards; light bulbs. Any person who
shall willfully or maliciously break down, injure, remove or destroy any
monument erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of this
state or any municipality thereof, or of any tract or lot of land, or any
tree marked for that purpose, or shall so break down, injure, remove or
destroy any milestone, mileboard, guidepost or guide board, lawfully
erected upon any highway, or other public way or railroad, or shall
willfully or maliciously deface or alter the inscription on any such stone,
post or board, or shall willfully or maliciously mar or deface any
building or sign board, or extinguish any lamp, or break, injure, destroy
or remove any gas lamp, oil lamp, electric light globe or bulb, or any
railing or lamp post, erected on any bridge, sidewalk, street, highway,
court or passage, or shall willfully or maliciously injure, remove, deface
or destroy any board or structure lawfully erected or used for the
posting of bills, posters, or other notices, or shall willfully or maliciously
mutilate, deface or destroy any bill, poster, or other printed or written
notice lawfully posted on any board or structure used for that purpose,
without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
E. Malicious destruction of property; signs, bills and notices placed on
private property. Any person who shall willfully tear down, destroy or in
any manner deface any signs, bill or notices on any private lands of this
State, or on any lots of premises in any township, city or village shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor; provided that such signs, bills or notices are
§ 278-15 CEMETERY § 278-15
229:307
§ 278-16. Receiving, concealing or possession of stolen property;
violations and penalties.
not in violation of any general law of the state or municipal ordinance,
and were placed by the owner or lessee or by their consent.
F. Willful destruction of property; memorials of dead; protective or
ornamental structures; trees, shrubs, or plants; violation as
misdemeanor or felony; penalties.
(1) A person other than the burial right owner or his or her
representative, heir at law, or a person having care, custody, or
control of a cemetery pursuant to law, a contract, or other legal
right, shall not willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or remove
a tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure or thing placed
or designed for a memorial of the dead, or a fence, railing, curb, or
other thing intended for the protection or for the ornament of any
tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure described in this
section or any other enclosure for the burial of the dead and shall
not willfully destroy, mutilate, remove, cut, break, or injure any
tree, shrub, or plant placed or being within such an enclosure.
(2) Prosecution under Subsection F(1) may commence upon complaint
by the burial right owner or his or her representative, heir at law,
or person having care, custody, or control of a cemetery, tomb,
monument, gravestone, or other structure or thing described in
Subsection F(1).
(3) If the total amount of damage is less than $200, a person who
violates Subsection F(1) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500 or three times the amount of damage, whichever is greater, or
both imprisonment and a fine.
G. Maliciously injuring or mutilating library books. Any person who shall
willfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface or mutilate or write upon,
or by other means injure or mar any book, pamphlet, map, chart,
painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine,
manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof belonging to or loaned to any
public library, or to the library of any literary, scientific, historical or
library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. A person shall not buy, receive, conceal or possess any stolen,
embezzled or converted money, goods or property knowing the same to
have been stolen, embezzled or converted.
B. If the property purchased, received, possessed or converted has a value
of less than $200, a person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of not more than $500, or both imprisonment and a fine.
§ 278-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-17
229:308
§ 278-17. Retail fraud; violations and penalties.
A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity
is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both imprisonment
and a fine:
§ 278-18. Tampering.
A person commits the offense of tampering if, having no right to do so and
no reasonable ground to believe that he or she has such right, he or she
tampers or meddles with public property or private property belonging to
another person even though no damage results.
§ 278-19. Theft of services.
A person commits the offense of theft of services if he or she intentionally
obtains services known by him or her to be available only for compensation
by deception, threat, false token or other means to avoid payment for the
services.
§ 278-20. Trespass; illegal entry. [Amended 6-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-08]
A. While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and
replaces, conceals or otherwise misrepresents the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or
to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale if the
resulting difference in price is less than $200.
B. While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is
offered for sale at a price of less than $200.
C. With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property
from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the
property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.
A. Trespass. A person commits the offense of trespass if he or she enters
or remains in or upon premises when he or she is not licensed, invited
or otherwise privileged to do so. A person who enters or remains in or
upon premises which are at the time open to the public does so with
license and privilege unless he or she defies a lawful order not to enter
or remain, personally communicated to him or her by the owner of the
premises or some other authorized person. A license or privilege to
enter or remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is
not a license or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the building
which is not open to the public. A person who enters or remains upon
unimproved and apparently unused land which is neither fenced nor
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders does so
with license and privilege unless notice against trespass is personally
§ 278-17 CEMETERY § 278-20
229:309
communicated to him or her by the owner of the land or some other
authorized person, or unless notice is given by posting in a conspicuous
manner.
B. Illegal entry.
(1) A person commits the offense of illegal entry if he or she breaks and
enters, or enters without breaking, any dwelling, house, hotel,
office, store, shop, warehouse, factory or other building or
structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private
apartment therein, or any garage or outbuildings belonging
thereto, or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied,
without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner,
occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof.
(2) Subsection B(1) does not apply to entering without breaking any
place which at the time of the entry was open to the public, unless
the entry was expressly denied. Subsection B(1) does not apply if
the breaking and entering or breaking without entering was
committed by a peace officer, or an individual under the peace
officer's direction, in the lawful performance of his or her duties as
a peace officer.
§ 278-20 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-20
229:310
ARTICLE V
Offenses Directed Against Government Functions
§ 278-21. Disrupting school classes.
A person commits the offense of disrupting school classes if, by his or her
acts, words, conduct or mere presence, he or she unlawfully diverts or
unlawfully tends to divert the attention of pupils, teachers or other persons
from the normal instructional program of a public or private school.
§ 278-22. Disturbance of lawful meetings.
Any person who shall make or excite any disturbance or contention in any
tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business
place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park,
or at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and
lawfully assembled, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 278-23. False alarm, rendering.57
A person commits the offense of rendering a false alarm if he or she
knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted
to or within a Fire Department or any other government agency that deals
with emergencies involving danger to life or property.
§ 278-24. False report of crime; violations and penalties; payment
of costs by juvenile.
A person who intentionally makes a false report of the commission of a
crime, or intentionally causes a false report of the commission of a crime
to be made, to a peace officer, police agency of this state or of a local
unit of government, 911 operator, or any other governmental employee or
contractor or employee of a contractor who is authorized to receive reports
of a crime, knowing the report is false, is guilty of a crime as follows:
§ 278-25. Obstructing government operations.
A person commits the offense of obstructing government operations if
he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders the performance of
a governmental function or the use of government property by using or
threatening to use violence, force, physical interference or obstacle.
A. If the report is a false report of a misdemeanor, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of not more than $500, or both.
57.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 180, Alarm Systems.
§ 278-21 CEMETERY § 278-26
229:311
§ 278-26. Peace officer, obstructing.
A person commits the offense of obstructing a peace officer if, by using
or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle,
he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs, or hinders the enforcement of
the criminal laws or City ordinances, or the preservation of the peace by a
peace officer acting under color of his or her official authority.
§ 278-27. Peace officer, interfering.
A person commits the offense of interfering with a police officer in the
lawful discharge of his or her duty if the person:
§ 278-28. Peace officer, impersonating.
A person commits the offense of impersonating a peace officer if he or she
falsely pretends to be a peace officer and does an act in that capacity.
§ 278-29. Peace officer, resisting arrest.
A person commits the offense of resisting arrest if he or she intentionally
prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or
her official authority, from affecting an arrest of the actor or another, by:
A. Fails to obey a lawful order of a police officer and thereby hinders the
officer in the discharge of his or her duty.
B. Provides false information concerning his or her identity to a police
officer which hinders the officer in the discharge of his or her duty.
A. Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace
officer or another; or
B. Using any other means creating a substantial risk of causing physical
injury to the peace officer or another.
§ 278-26 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-29
229:312
ARTICLE VI
Offenses Directed Against Public Order
§ 278-30. Alcoholic liquor, illegal possession of.
A. A person shall not possess alcoholic liquor on any premises or in any
building owned or under the control of the School District of the City of
Royal Oak.
B. Minor in possession. [Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
(1) A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or
attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol
content, except as provided in this section. A minor who violates
this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the
following fines and sanctions and is not subject to the penalties
prescribed in Section 90958:
(a) For the first violation by a fine of not more than $100. A court
may order a minor under this subsection to participate in
substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse
treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in Section
6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA
§ 333.6107, and designated by the administrator of the office of
substance abuse services, and may order that minor to perform
community service and to undergo substance abuse screening
and assessment at his or her own expense as described in
Subsection B(5).
(b) For a second violation of this subsection, Section 33b(1) of
former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to this subsection or Section 33b(1) of former
1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, by imprisonment for not more than 30
days but only if the court finds that the minor violated an order
of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment,
screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed
to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, by a
fine of not more than $200, or both. A court may order a minor
under this subsection to participate in substance abuse
prevention services or substance abuse treatment and
rehabilitation services as defined in Section 6107 of the Public
Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA § 333.6107, and designated
by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services,
to perform community service, and to undergo substance
abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as
described in Subsection B(5).
58.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 436.1909.
§ 278-30 CEMETERY § 278-30
229:313
(c) For a third or subsequent violation of this subsection, Section
33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, or a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to this subsection or Section
33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, by imprisonment for not
more than 60 days but only if the court finds that the minor
violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete
any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the
court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, by a fine of not more than $500, or both. A court
may order a minor under this subsection to participate in
substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse
treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in Section
6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA
§ 333.6107, and designated by the administrator of the office of
substance abuse services, to perform community service, and
to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his
or her own expense as described in Subsection B(5).
(2) An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or
notwithstanding Subsection B(1), a minor who uses fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93
days or a fine of not more than $100, or both.
(3) When an individual who has not previously been convicted of or
received a juvenile adjudication for a violation of Subsection B(1)
pleads guilty to a violation of Subsection B(1) or offers a plea of
admission in a juvenile delinquency proceeding for a violation of
Subsection B(1), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt in a
criminal proceeding or a determination in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding that the juvenile has committed the offense and with
the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and
place the individual on probation. The terms and conditions of that
probation include, but are not limited to, the sanctions set forth in
Subsection B(1)(a), payment of the costs, including minimum state
cost as provided for in Section 18m of Chapter XIIA of the Probate
Code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCLA § 712A.18m, and Section 1j of
Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCLA
§ 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in Section 3 of
Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCLA
§ 771.3. If a court finds that an individual violated a term or
condition of probation or that the individual is utilizing this
subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of
guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that
the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as otherwise
provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and conditions of
probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the
proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be
without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a
juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed
§ 278-30 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-30
229:314
the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for
purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon
conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only one discharge
and dismissal under this subsection. The court shall maintain a
nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred
and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and
dismissal under this subsection. The Secretary of State shall retain
a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal
under this subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of
the following:
(a) To a court, prosecutor, or police agency upon request for the
purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this
subsection.
(b) To the Department of Corrections, a prosecutor, or a law
enforcement agency, upon the department's, a prosecutor's, or
a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the
following conditions:
[1] At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of
the Department of Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with
the Department of Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency.
[2] The record is used by the Department of Corrections, the
prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to
determine whether an employee has violated his or her
conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets
criteria for employment.
(4) A violation of Subsection B(1) successfully deferred, discharged,
and dismissed under Subsection B(3) is considered a prior violation
for the purposes of Subsection B(1)(b) and (c).
(5) A court may order an individual convicted of violating Subsection
B(1) to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as
designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined
in Section 6103 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA
§ 333.6103, in order to determine whether the individual is likely to
benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug
education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may
order an individual subject to a conviction or juvenile adjudication
of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of Subsection B(1)
to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath
analysis. The parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor under 18
years of age not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCLA §§ 722.1 to
722.6, may request a random or regular preliminary chemical
breath analysis as part of the probation.
§ 278-30 CEMETERY § 278-30
229:315
(6) The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's
license of an individual convicted of violating Subsection B(1) or (2)
as provided in Section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA
300, MCLA § 257.319.
(7) A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may
require that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. A peace officer may arrest an individual based in whole or
in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.
The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other
acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal
prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or
possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. A
minor who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test
analysis as required in this subsection is responsible for a state civil
infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than
$100.
(8) A law enforcement agency, upon determining that an individual less
than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293,
MCLA §§ 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed,
purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or
purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in
violation of Subsection B(1) shall notify the parent or parents,
custodian, or guardian of the individual as to the nature of the
violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is
reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The law
enforcement agency shall notify the parent, guardian, or custodian
not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency
determines that the individual who allegedly violated Subsection
B(1) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968
PA 293, MCLA §§ 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement agency may
notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means reasonably
calculated to give prompt actual notice, including, but not limited
to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an
individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating
Subsection B(1), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be
notified immediately as provided in this subsection.
(9) This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic
liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed by this act, by the
Commission, or by an agent of the Commission, if the alcoholic
liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption.
(10) The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of
Subsection B(1):
(a) A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who
voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or
§ 278-30 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-30
229:316
agency for treatment or for observation, including, but not
limited to, medical examination and treatment for any
condition arising from a violation of Sections 520b to 520g of
the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCLA §§ 750.520b to
750.520g, committed against a minor.
(b) A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the
following criteria:
[1] Has consumed alcoholic liquor.
[2] Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility
or agency for treatment or for observation, including, but
not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any
condition arising from a violation of Sections 520b to 520g
of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCLA
§§ 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.
(c) A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or
emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of
obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care
concern.
(11) If a minor under the age of 18 who is not emancipated under 1968
PA 293, MCLA §§ 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents himself or
herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for
observation as provided under Subsection B(10), the health facility
or agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian
of the individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if
the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably
ascertainable by the health facility or agency.
(12) This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of a vendor
or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of
this act.
(13) The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational
institution in an academic building of the institution under the
supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the
purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a
requirement of the course.
(14) The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection
with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not
prohibited by this act.
(15) Subsection B(1) does not apply to a minor who participates in
either or both of the following:
(a) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's
§ 278-30 CEMETERY § 278-30
229:317
§ 278-31. Alcoholic liquor, furnishing to underage persons.
A person commits the offense of furnishing alcoholic liquor to an underage
person if he or she gives or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who
is less than 21 years of age, except upon authority of and pursuant to a
prescription of a duly licensed physician.
employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's
office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement
action.
(b) An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the State
Police, the Commission, or a local police agency as part of an
enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous
purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not
under the direction of the State Police, the Commission, or the
local police agency and was not part of the undercover
operation.
(16) The State Police, the Commission, or a local police agency shall not
recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an
undercover operation at the scene of a violation of Subsection B(1),
MCLA § 436.1701(1), or § 436.1801(2).
(17) In a criminal prosecution for the violation of Subsection B(1)
concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an
affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in
a venue or location where that consumption is legal.
(18) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ANY BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT — Either of the following:
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL — As defined in
Section 20904 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA
§ 333.20904.
HEALTH FACILITY OR AGENCY — As defined in Section 20106 of
the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCLA § 333.20106.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 21 years at the time of the
offense.
An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
(a)
Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from
the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of
alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious
service or ceremony.
(b)
§ 278-30 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-32
229:318
§ 278-32. Alcoholic liquor, open in vehicle.
A person commits the offense of open alcoholic liquor in a vehicle if he
or she transports or possesses any alcoholic liquor in a container which
is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken, within the passenger
compartment of a vehicle on the streets of this municipality or any other
place open to the general public, including any area designated for the
parking of motor vehicles. If the vehicle does not have a truck or
compartment separate from the passenger compartment, a container, which
open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken, shall be encased or
enclosed. This section shall not apply to any chartered passenger vehicle
licensed by the Michigan Public Service Commission.
§ 278-33. Alcoholic liquor in vehicle, transportation or possession
of.
A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport or possess
in a motor vehicle alcoholic liquor unless the person is employed by a
licensee licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCLA
§ 436.1101, the Liquor Control Commission, or an agent of the Liquor
Control Commission, and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a
motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours and
in the course of the person's employment.
§ 278-34. Curfew established for minors; loitering; violations and
penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter,
wander, stroll, play or idle in or upon the public streets, highways,
alleys, parks, playgrounds, public places, places of amusement, or
entertainment, vacant lots or public unsupervised places in the City of
Royal Oak between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day, unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent, a
brother or sister over the age of 18 years, or adult member of the family,
guardian or custodian; provided, however, it shall be lawful for minors
to be upon the public streets during the aforesaid while returning home
from:
(1) A party or dance held under the auspices of a public or parochial
school;
(2) An entertainment, festival or bazaar held under the auspices of any
duly and lawfully organized ecclesiastical corporation or the YMCA
or the YWCA;
(3) An entertainment held by any religious, educational or other
organization primarily organized for young people, held under a
special permit issued by the City Commission upon
recommendation by the Director of Public Safety.
§ 278-32 CEMETERY § 278-34
229:319
B. In all the foregoing cases, the minor attending such function must have
the permission of his or her parent, guardian, custodian or teacher to
attend the party, dance or entertainment and may be required by any
police officer to furnish satisfactory evidence thereof. Any minor shall
also have the right to be on the public streets or other public places of
the City during the hours aforesaid while engaged in the performance
of an errand or duty directed by his or her parent, guardian or
custodian, or in cases where the legal employment of such minor makes
it necessary for him or her to be upon the streets, alleys or other public
places during the hours hereinbefore specified, provided the minor is
able to furnish satisfactory proof of the errand, duty or legal
employment requiring such presence.
C. Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian
or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the
age of 17 years to permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play
in or be upon the public streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds or public places, places of amusement and
entertainment or vacant lots between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to the cases excepted in Subsection A of this
article.
D. Responsibility of operators of places of amusement and entertainment.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a
place or places of amusement and entertainment to permit any minor or
minors to enter or remain in such places of amusement and
entertainment during the hours prohibited in this chapter; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor
is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor.
E. Permit by Chief of Police. If lawful employment, business or other lawful
purposes require a minor under the age of 17 years to be or remain
upon the public streets or other public places between the hours of
10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., the Chief of Police, upon written application
by the parent or guardian of such minor, and for good cause shown, may
issue a written permit for such minor under the age of 17 years to be or
remain on the streets or other public places at the time specified in
such permit. No such permit shall be issued for a period longer than 30
days from the date of application.
F. Violations by minors. Any minor violating the provisions of this section
shall be deemed a delinquent or neglected child and may be complained
against in the Family Court of Oakland County, or any court of
competent jurisdiction, as such by any police officer or other person
having knowledge of such violation, and such minor shall be dealt with
by said Court as provided by law.
G. Violations and penalties.
§ 278-34 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-34
229:320
§ 278-34.1. Minor; contributing to neglect or delinquency. [Added
7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children. Any person who shall
by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend
to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected
or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the
Juvenile Division of the Probate Court, as defined in Section 2 of Chapter
12a of Act No. 288 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1939; as added by Act No.
54 of the Michigan Public Acts of the First Extra Session of 1944,59 and any
amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated
a ward of the Probate Court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 278-34.2. Parental responsibility. [Added 11-20-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-10]
(1) Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of a minor found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
(2) Each violation of the provisions of this chapter or any part thereof
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance, or immediate
precursor included in Schedules 1 to 5 of Part 72 of the Michigan Public
Health Code, as amended.
DELINQUENT ACT — An act which violates the laws of the United
States, the laws of the State of Michigan, or an ordinance of the
City of Royal Oak, or which would cause a minor to come under the
jurisdiction of the Family Division of the Circuit Court, as defined by
MCLA § 712A.2, as amended. "Delinquent act" does not include a traffic
violation which is designated as a civil infraction.
MINOR — Any unemancipated person under the age of 17.
PARENT — The mother, father, legal guardian and any other person
having the care of custody or a minor, or any person 17 years of age or
older with whom the minor resides, at the time that the delinquent act
is alleged to have been committed by the minor.
B. Parental duties.
59.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 712A.2.
§ 278-34 CEMETERY § 278-34.2
229:321
(1) It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise
reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any
delinquent act.
(2) No parent of any minor shall fail to exercise reasonable parental
control over the minor. The exercise of reasonable parental control
shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
(a) Keeping controlled substances out of the home and out of the
possession of the minor, except those drugs duly prescribed by
a licensed physician or other authorized medical professional.
(b) Keeping firearms out of the possession of the minor, except
those used for hunting in accordance with all applicable laws
and regulations and with the knowledge and supervision of a
parent.
(c) Requiring the minor to observe the curfew ordinance of the
City of Royal Oak.60
(d) Requiring the minor to attend regular school sessions and
forbidding the minor to be absent from class without parental
or school permission.
(e) Arranging proper supervision for the minor when the parent is
absent.
(f) Forbidding the minor from willfully or maliciously destroying
property belonging to another person.
(g) Forbidding the minor from knowingly possessing stolen
property.
(h) Forbidding the minor from possessing alcoholic beverages.
(i) Seeking help from the appropriate governmental authorities or
private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when
necessary.
(j) Assisting or cooperating with governmental authorities in their
efforts to handle or control the minor, including the production
of the minor for court appointments and hearings.
(3) Notification of parents; record of notification. Whenever a minor is
arrested or detained for the commission of any delinquent act
within the City of Royal Oak, the Royal Oak Police Department shall
immediately attempt to notify the parent of such arrest or
detention, the reason for the arrest or detention, and the parent's
responsibility under this section. A record of such notification
efforts shall be kept by the Royal Oak Police Department.
60.Editor's Note: See § 278-34 of this chapter.
§ 278-34.2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-34.2
229:322
§ 278-35. Disorderly conduct.
A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct if he or she:
C. Penalties.
(1) A violation of this section is a civil infraction.
(2) Upon the first conviction of a violation of this section, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100, plus the costs of
prosecution.
(3) Upon the second conviction of a violation of this section, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250, plus the costs of
prosecution.
(4) Upon the third or subsequent conviction of a violation of this
section, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500,
plus the costs of prosecution.
(5) Pursuant to the violation of this Code, the parent shall to the fullest
extent permitted by law be held civilly responsible for any damages
caused by the commission of any delinquent act within the City.
A. Engages in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior;
B. Makes unreasonable noise which tends to cause a public danger, alarm,
disorder or nuisance;
C. Uses threatening, abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene
gesture, which by their very use inflict injury or tend to incite a breach
of the peace;
D. Without lawful authority, disturbs any lawful assembly or meeting of
persons;
E. Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
F. Possesses or consumes alcoholic liquor in any public park, public place
of amusement, or area under the jurisdiction of the City of Royal Oak
that is owned and/or administered by the City of Royal Oak;
G. Urinates in a public place, except at public toilets.
H. Engages in an illegal occupation or business;
I. Loiters in a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution
or lewdness is practiced, encouraged, or allowed;
J. Knowingly loiters in or about a place where an illegal occupation or
business is being conducted;
K. Is found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public
place;
§ 278-34.2 CEMETERY § 278-35
229:323
§ 278-36. Disturbances of the peace by trucks.
L. Commits the offense of failure as a disorderly person to disperse if he or
she participates with two more other persons in a course of disorderly
conduct likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm, and intentionally refuses or fails to disperse when
ordered to do so by a peace officer or other public servant engaged in
executing or enforcing the law;
M. Permits or suffers any place occupied or controlled by him or her to be a
resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons.
N. A person commits the offense of public intoxication if he or she appears
in a public place under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance,
other drugs or combination thereof and he or she is either endangering
directly the safety of another person or of property, or is acting in a
manner that causes a public disturbance.
O. Commits the offense of window peeping. [Added 7-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
P. Vehicle sound equipment noise and vibration. It shall be unlawful for
any person to be in possession or control of a parked or moving vehicle
with a stereo, disc player, cassette player, speakers, or other similar
equipment that is producing sound on a street, driveway, publicly
patrolled parking lot or public place at or with a level, volume, intensity,
frequency, or other attribute that is perceptible at a distance of 50 feet
or more, either by hearing the sound by the human ear or by feeling the
sound in the form of vibrations associated therewith. This subsection
shall not be applicable to sound emanating from emergency vehicles,
vending vehicles, or publicly sponsored or permitted concerts, sporting
events, activities, or gatherings. A violation of this subsection is a civil
infraction punishable by a fine of $100. [Added 7-25-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-09]
Q. Loud vehicles. The operation of any automobile, truck, motorcycle or
other vehicle so out of repair or so loaded or constructed as to cause
loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other unreasonable
noise, including the noise resulting from exhaust, which is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle and unreasonably
disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. A violation
of this subsection is a civil infraction punishable by a fine of $100.
[Added 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause to be loaded or unloaded
any truck, trailer, or combination thereof between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. where such commercial establishment is located
within 500 feet of any dwelling.
B. It shall be unlawful for any truck to be stopped with its engine idling or
its refrigeration motor operating between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
§ 278-35 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-36
229:324
§ 278-37. Disturbances of the peace, construction activity.
7:00 a.m. on the premises of a commercial establishment located within
500 feet of any dwelling, or on a residential street adjacent to such
commercial establishment.
C. It shall be unlawful to make any deliveries of materials, supplies,
equipment and other related items to a construction site between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise louder than the noise
normally present at the location when no construction is in progress by
the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of
any building, street, highway, or parking area, except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. Sunday. The following exceptions shall apply to this
section:
(1) The prohibition contained herein shall not apply to necessary
excavations or repairs of streets, highways, or public utilities on
behalf of the City, county, state, or public utility during the night,
when it is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(2) Where the City Engineer has issued a special permit for street
work.
(3) Unless the Building Official authorizes a special permit based upon
one of the following conditions:
(a) It is in the interest of the general public health, safety, and
welfare where a situation constituting an emergency exists. If
said condition is determined to exist by the Chief Building
Official, he or she shall issue a permit to undertake the
necessary activity to alleviate the emergency or until the
circumstances causing the emergency no longer exist.
(b) Extenuating circumstance(s) exist which would constitute an
unnecessary hardship.
B. When it is necessary to store construction or construction-related
materials and equipment at the work site, said materials and/or
equipment will be stored in an orderly fashion and in such a way as to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Where necessary to
comply with the building code and other provisions of this chapter, said
materials, supplies, or equipment will be covered and/or screened.
C. Sufficient refuse storage containers shall be provided for on-site, to
handle and prevent debris and refuse from littering the site or
surrounding property. When full, the containers shall be removed and
replaced. Said containers shall be so designed as to prohibit rodents
and others from gaining access to the refuse. The location of said
§ 278-36 CEMETERY § 278-37
229:325
§ 278-38. Drug paraphernalia; violations and penalties.
containers shall be approved by the Building Official to minimize the
impact on residential property.
D. At all times the necessary steps shall be taken to ensure that dust, soil,
or other material shall not become airborne and travel beyond the
construction site property lines. Such steps could include water,
chemical treatment, or other ground cover treatment as approved by
the Building Official. In addition, fencing and/or screening pursuant to
the City's building code may be required by the Building Official. Such
activity will be maintained throughout the duration of the construction
activity or until a permanent covering is installed.
E. The Building Official, Director of Public Safety, and their authorized
representatives which shall specifically include, but not by way of
limitation, all police officers and building inspectors for the City of
Royal Oak, are hereby authorized to enforce this section.
A. Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use,
or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of state law.
B. Manufacture, delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for
any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or
manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it
will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
state law.
C. Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended
for use as drug paraphernalia.
D. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers,
jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals,
research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors,
osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians,
pharmacists, and embalmers in the normal legal course of their
respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from
diabetes, asthma, or any other medical condition requiring selfinjection.
§ 278-37 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-38
229:326
§ 278-39. Firearms and other weapons.
E. Seizure of drug paraphernalia. Any drug paraphernalia used in violation
of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the City of Royal Oak.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall be convicted of violating
any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
court. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense and may be punished accordingly.
A. Discharge of weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a
police officer or other peace officer in the discharge of his or her duty,
to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, shotgun, rifle, revolver or any other
firearm or airgun, slingshot or any other instrument calculated to
propel or throw any missile within the City of Royal Oak; provided,
however, nothing in the foregoing clause shall prohibit any person from
discharging such weapons in the necessary defense of his or her
person, family or property; further provided, nothing in this chapter
shall prevent the discharge of firearms in a regularly licensed shooting
gallery of the City or on target ranges under suitable regulations for the
protection and safety of its citizens and inhabitants.
B. Injury to or destruction of animals and property. It shall be unlawful for
any person with a revolver, pistol, gun or other firearm, or with a
slingshot, airgun, BB or pellet gun, paint ball gun, or other weapon, to
destroy, injure or damage any electric light or equipment, or any animal
or other real or personal property, public or private, within the City of
Royal Oak, provided this section shall not apply to any police officer
acting in the discharge of his or her duty.
C. Minors.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to use or
possess any gun designed and manufactured for propelling BB's or
pellets or designed and manufactured for propelling paint
cartridges outside the curtilage of their domicile unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian over 18 years of age.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, company or corporation to sell,
offer for sale, give away or distribute any firearm, slingshot, airgun,
BB or pellet gun, paint ball gun, other light weapon, or any BB's,
pellets or paint cartridges designed to be used by such guns, to any
minor under the age of 18 years.
D. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having
custody or charge of any minor under the age of 18 to knowingly permit
such minor to have in his or her possession or use of any firearm,
slingshot, airgun, BB or pellet gun, paint ball gun, or other similar
weapon, except in a duly licensed shooting gallery or target range.
§ 278-38 CEMETERY § 278-39
229:327
§ 278-40. Firearms; gun-free school zone; violations and penalties.
§ 278-41. Glue.
E. Seizure of guns and weapons. All guns, pistols, airguns, BB or pellet or
paint ball guns, slingshots, and other weapons of similar nature,
possessed or used contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall be
seized by the police officer and are hereby declared forfeited to the City
of Royal Oak.
A. Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Gun-
Free School Zone Ordinance."
B. Possession of firearms in school zones.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any individual knowingly to possess a
firearm at a place that the individual knows, or has reasonable
cause to believe, is a school zone.
(2) Subsection B(1) shall not apply to the possession of a firearm if any
of the following apply:
(a) The firearm is possessed on private property not part of school
grounds.
(b) The individual possessing the firearm is licensed to do so by
the State of Michigan.
(c) The firearm is not loaded and in a locked container, or in a
locked firearms rack which is on a motor vehicle.
(d) The firearm is in the possession of an individual in accordance
with a contract entered into between a school in the school
zone and the individual or an employer of the individual.
(e) The firearm is in the possession of a law enforcement officer.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500 or be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or be both so fined and
imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.
D. Signs to be posted. The City is authorized to post signs around school
zones giving warning of prohibition of the possession of firearms in a
school zone.
A. Inhalation of fumes. No person shall inhale, drink, eat, or otherwise
introduce into his or her respiratory or circulatory system any
compound, liquid, chemical or any substance known as model glue,
adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent, or other material or
substance or combination thereof having the property of releasing toxic
vapors with intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed,
§ 278-39 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-41
229:328
§ 278-42. Hurling projectiles from or at vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any snowball, missile
or object from or at any moving motor vehicle.
§ 278-43. Indecent exposure.
A person commits the offense of indecent exposure if he or she makes an
open and indecent exposure of his or her person under circumstances in
which he or she knows or should know that his or her conduct is likely to
cause affront or alarm.
§ 278-44. Littering; violations and penalties.
irrational or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the
eyesight, thinking process, judgment, balance or coordination of such
person; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the
inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purpose.
B. Possession or transfer for unlawful purpose prohibited. No person shall,
for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of
this chapter, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or
receive possession of any model glue.
C. Possession by or sale to juveniles.
(1) Except as provided in Subsections C(3) and D below, no person
under 17 years of age shall possess or buy any model glue.
(2) Except as provided in Subsections C(3) and D below, no person
shall sell or transfer possession of any model glue to another
person under 17 years of age.
(3) Provided, however, a person may sell or transfer possession of
model glue to a person under 17 years of age for model building or
other lawful use where said juvenile has in his or her possession
and exhibits the written consent of his or her parent or guardian.
D. Record of sales to minors required. A person making a sale or transfer
of possession of model glue to a person under 17 years of age who
exhibits the written consent of his or her parent or guardian shall
record the name, address, sex, and age of the juvenile and the name
and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by
this section shall be kept in a permanent-type register available for
inspection by the Police Department for a period of at least six months.
A. Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-
Litter Ordinance."
B. Depositing litter on public and private property. No person shall throw
or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
§ 278-41 CEMETERY § 278-44
229:329
within the City, except in public trash receptacles, and no person shall
throw or deposit either upon private property.
C. Depositing litter in streets; maintenance of adjacent sidewalks. Except
at the direction of the Director of the Department of Recreation and
Public Services, no person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter,
street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter
from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying business property shall keep
the public sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
D. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. No person, while a driver or a
passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or
other public place within the City, or upon private property.
(1) In a proceeding for violation of this act involving litter from a motor
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation,
complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof
that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was
the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the violation,
constitutes in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
(2) The driver of a vehicle is presumed to be responsible for litter
which is thrown, dropped, dumped, deposited, placed or left from
the vehicle on public or private property.
E. Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or person in
control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises
free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
F. Removal of out-of-date placards. The owner or person in control of
business property shall at all times keep all store windows and display
space free of advertisements, posters and placards advertising events
that have previously taken place.
G. Notice of violation. The Building Official or his or her authorized
delegate is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner or
person in control of property, or the agent of such owner or person in
control, of any violation of the premises of this chapter. Such notice
shall be mailed to such person's last known address; provided, however,
that failure to send any such notice shall not prevent the invoking of the
penalty provision of this chapter.
H. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500 or be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or to both such fine and
such imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 278-44 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-45
229:330
§ 278-45. Loitering. [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
A person commits the offense of loitering if he or she:
§ 278-46. Marijuana, unlawful possession or use of.
§ 278-47. Prostitution and related offenses.
A. Loiters, remains or wanders about in a public place for the purpose of
aggressive begging. For purposes of this section, "aggressive begging"
shall mean the following:
(1) Touching the solicited person without that person’s consent;
(2) Blocking the path of the person being solicited or the entrance to
any building or vehicle;
(3) Following behind, alongside or ahead of a person who walks away
from the solicitor after having been solicited;
(4) Using abusive language, either during the solicitation or following
a refusal to donate, or making any statement, gesture or other
communication which would cause a reasonable person to be
fearful or feel compelled to make a donation; or
(5) Soliciting a patron in a sidewalk cafe without first having obtained
the permission of the operator of the cafe.
B. Loiters or remains in a public place for the purpose of gambling with
cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia;
C. Loiters or remains in or about a school building or grounds, not having
any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a
pupil, or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and not
having written permission from a school administrator;
D. Loiters or remains in any place for the purpose of unlawfully using or
possessing a controlled substance; or
E. Knowingly loiters or remains in any place where the unlawful use of
controlled substances is practiced, encouraged or allowed.
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of marijuana if he
or she knowingly or intentionally possesses marijuana except as
authorized by state law.
B. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of marijuana if he or she
uses marijuana except as authorized by state law.
A. A person commits the offense of prostitution if he or she engages in, or
agrees or offers to engage in, sexual conduct with another person in
return for a fee.
B. A person commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute if:
§ 278-45 CEMETERY § 278-47
229:331
§ 278-48. Public nudity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in public nudity.
§ 278-49. Railway cars; violations and penalties.
(1) Pursuant to a prior understanding a fee is paid to another as
compensation for engaging in or having a third person engage in
sexual conduct.
(2) A fee is paid or agreed to be paid to another person in
understanding that in return that person or a third person will
engage in sexual conduct.
(3) There is a solicitation or request made to another person to engage
in sexual conduct in return for a fee.
C. A person commits the offense of permitting prostitution if, having
possession or control of premises that he or she knows is being used for
prostitution, he or she fails to make reasonable efforts to halt or abate
such use.
A. Unlawful activities. It shall be unlawful for any person to board, enter,
cling to or leave any railway car, locomotive or train while the same is in
motion in the City of Royal Oak, except authorized employees of the
railroad.
B. Sign to be posted. It shall be unlawful for any person riding in a railway
car to open any doorway leading from said car or to leave said car at
any doorway which has not been provided for exit purposes and which
is not attended by a trainman. Notices reading substantially as follows
may be posted on each door of every railway car carrying passengers in
the City of Royal Oak:
DANGER
WARNING TO PASSENGERS
C. Opening doorways is prohibited by law. Passengers must leave only at
exits provided for and attended by trainmen.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days,
or to both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 278-47 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-49
229:332
ARTICLE VII
Inchoate Crimes
§ 278-50. Attempts to commit offenses; violations and penalties.
Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by law, and
in such attempt shall do an act toward the commission of such offense,
but shall fail in the perpetration or shall be intercepted or prevented in
the execution of the same, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by
imprisonment for not more than 45 days or by a fine of not more than $250,
or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 278-51. Accessories, liability.
Every person concerned in the commission of an offense, whether he or she
directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids
or abets in its commission, may hereafter be prosecuted, indicted, tried and,
on conviction, shall be punished as if he or she had directly committed such
offense.
§ 278-50 CEMETERY § 278-51
229:333

ARTICLE VIII
Violations and Penalties
§ 278-52. General penalty.
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, a person who commits any of the
foregoing offenses shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or
to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 278-53. (Reserved)61
61.Editor’s Note: Former § 278-53, Specific penalties, was repealed 11-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-16.
§ 278-52 CEMETERY § 278-53
229:335
Chapter 288
DRUGS AND OTHER DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Liquor — See Ch. 430. Tobacco products — See Ch. 684.
§ 278-53 ROYAL OAK CODE § 278-53
229:336
ARTICLE I
Synthetic Marijuana
[Adopted 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
§ 288-1. Findings, intent and purpose.
§ 288-2. Definitions; adoption of state provisions by reference.
A. The City finds that synthetic marijuana, consisting of plant or other
material treated with chemicals or other substances that have not been
approved for human consumption, is being marketed and sold as herbal
incense and is being used in the same manner and for the same
purposes as marijuana, with that use having become increasingly
popular, particularly among teens and young adults.
B. The City further finds based on information and reports from poison
control centers, hospitals, emergency room doctors, and police
agencies, that individuals who use synthetic marijuana experience
dangerous side effects, including convulsions, tremors, seizures,
hallucinations, unconsciousness, anxiety attacks, dangerously elevated
heart rates, increased blood pressure, vomiting, and disorientation,
evidencing that these herbal incense products are harmful if consumed
and present an imminent and significant public health danger to
persons consuming such products and other persons coming in contact
with them.
C. The City further finds that, notwithstanding the high potential for
abuse, and lack of any accepted medical use, the ability of the state to
prohibit all forms of synthetic marijuana as a controlled substance has
been frustrated due to the changing nature of the chemicals used in the
manufacturing process.
D. The City further finds that in addition to synthetic marijuana, there may
be other products or materials containing chemicals or substances that,
while not approved for human consumption, are or may be marketed
and sold in a form that allows for such consumption and which, upon
consumption, may result in the same serious side effects and public
health dangers as synthetic marijuana.
E. Based on these findings, this article is adopted for the purpose and with
the intent to protect the public health and safety of the City and its
residents from the threat posed by the availability and use of synthetic
marijuana and other dangerous products by prohibiting persons from
trafficking in, possessing, and using them in the City.
A. As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the
meanings indicated.
ACT — The controlled substances provisions in Article 7 of the Public
Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978, MCLA §§ 333.7101 to
§ 288-1 CEMETERY § 288-2
229:337
333.7545, as amended, which is hereby adopted by reference as part of
this article.
CHEMICAL AGENT — A chemical or organic compound, substance,
or agent that is not made, intended and approved for consumption by
humans.
CONSUMABLE PRODUCT OR MATERIAL — A product or material that,
regardless of packaging disclaimers or disclosures that it is not for
human consumption or use, is in a form that readily allows for human
consumption by inhalation, ingestion, injection, or application, through
means including but not limited to smoking, or ingestion by mouth with
or without mixing with food or drink.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A substance included as a controlled
substance in Schedules 1 through 5 of the Act62 or a substance
temporarily scheduled or rescheduled as a controlled substance as
provided in the Act.63
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE — Has the same meaning
as defined in the Act,64 which is a substance, the chemical structure
of which is substantially similar to that of a controlled substance in
Schedules 1 and 2 of the Act.65
DANGEROUS PRODUCT — A consumable product or material
containing a dangerous substance.
DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE —
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID — A chemical compound, substance or
agent identified in the Synthetic Cannabinoid Appendix66 that is part
of this article, as amended from time to time by resolution of the City
Commission.
SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA — A consumable product or material that
contains a synthetic cannabinoid or other dangerous substance which,
A chemical agent that under Section 2451 of the Act, MCLA
§ 333.2451, has been determined by the local health officer to be or
present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans when
present in a consumable product or material; and
(1)
A chemical agent in a consumable product or material unless that
chemical agent is conspicuously identified and described in writing
on the packaging of the product, and has not been previously
determined by the City or other governmental authority to be or
present an imminent danger to the health or lives of humans when
present in that type of consumable product or material.
(2)
62.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.7211 et seq.
63.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.7101 et seq.
64.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.7101 et seq.
65.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.7211 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: See Subsection B.
§ 288-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 288-2
229:338
on the date this article was added to the Code, included herb and
herbal incense products marketed and most commonly known as K-2
and Spice.
TRAFFIC AND TRAFFICKING — To manufacture, distribute, dispense,
sell, transfer, or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute,
dispense, sell, or transfer.
B. Synthetic Cannabinoid Appendix. Synthetic cannabinoids include all
the following chemical compounds, substances and agents.
(1) "AM Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds,
substances or agents created by Alexandros Makriyannis or his
research group and identified as AM-087; AM-251; AM-281;
AM-356; AM-374; AM-381; AM-404; AM-411; AM-630; AM-661;
AM-678; AM-679; AM-694; AM-855; AM-881; AM-883; AM-905;
AM-906; AM-919; AM-926; AM-938; AM-1116; AM-1172; AM-1220;
AM-1221; AM-1235; AM-1241; AM-1248; AM-2201; AM-2212;
AM-2213; AM-2232; AM-2233; AM-2102; AM-4030; and other
substances with a structure and effect that is substantially similar
to those listed. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids
that require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration and are dispensed in accordance with
state and federal law.
(2) "CP Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds,
substances or agents identified as CP-47, 297: (C6)-CP-47, 497;
(C7)-CP-47, 497; (C8)-CP-47, 497; (C9)-CP-47, 297; CP-50, 556-1;
CP-55, 244; CP-55, 940; CP-945, 598; and other substances with a
structure and effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The
term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a
prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration and are dispensed in accordance with state and
federal law.
(3) "HU Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds,
substances or agents synthesized at the Hebrew University and
identified as HU-210; HU-211; HU-243; HU-308; HU-320; HU-331;
HU-336; HU-345; and other substances with a structure and effect
that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall not
include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and
are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
(4) "JWH Cannabinoids" being synthetic chemical compounds,
substances or agents created by John W. Huffman or his research
group and identified as JWH-007; JWH-015; JWH-018; JWH-019;
JWH-030; JWH-047; JWH-048; JWH-051; JWH-057; JWH-073;
JWH-081; JWH-098: JWH-116; JWH-120; JWH-122; JWH-133:
JWH-139; JWH-147; JWH-148; JWH-149; JWH-161; JWH-164;
JWH-166; JWH-167; JWH-171; JWH-175; JWH-176; JWH-181;
§ 288-2 CEMETERY § 288-2
229:339
§ 288-3. Trafficking prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to traffic, or knowingly allow trafficking
on property owned or controlled by that person, in any of the following:
§ 288-4. Possession and use prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or use, or knowingly allow the
possession and use on property owned or controlled by that person, of any
of the following:
§ 288-5. Probable cause evidentiary presumption.
In recognition that the presence of a controlled substance, controlled
substance analogue, synthetic cannabinoid, or dangerous substance in a
consumable product or material may require laboratory testing that cannot
be done at the time a violation of this article is believed to have occurred,
for purposes of determining the existence of probable cause, it shall be
presumed that a consumable product or material contains one or more of
those substances if it is being or has been marketed or sold for a price
that is substantially higher than the price at which the same quantity of a
similar and comparable product or material that is known to not contain
such substances can be purchased.
JWH-182; JWH-184; JWH-185; JWh-192; JWH-193; JWH-194;
JWH-195; JWH-196; JWH-197; JWH-198; JWH-199; JWH-200;
JWH-203; JWH-205; JWH-210; JWH-213; JWH-229; JWH-234;
JWH-249; JWH-250; JWH-251; JWH-253; JWH-258; JWH-300;
JWH-302; JWH-307; JWH-336: JWH-350: JWH-359: JWH-387:
JWH-398: JWH-424; and other substances with a structure and
effect that is substantially similar to those listed. The term shall
not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration and
are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
A. A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance or
controlled substance analogue.
B. A dangerous product.
C. Synthetic marijuana.
A. A consumable product or material containing a controlled substance or
controlled substance analogue.
B. A dangerous product.
C. Synthetic marijuana.
§ 288-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 288-6
229:340
§ 288-6. Violations and penalties.
The sanction for a violation of this article shall be as a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days.
§ 288-6 CEMETERY § 288-6
229:341

ARTICLE II
Transport of Medical Marijuana
[Adopted 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-19]
§ 288-7. Enclosed case required.
A person shall not transport or possess usable marijuana as defined in
Section 26423 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.26423,
in or upon a motor vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle designed for land
travel unless the usable marijuana is one or more of the following:
§ 288-8. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both
A. Enclosed in a case that is carried in the trunk of the vehicle.
B. Enclosed in a case that is not readily accessible from the interior of the
vehicle, if the vehicle in which the person is traveling does not have a
trunk.
§ 288-7 CEMETERY § 288-8
229:343

ARTICLE III
Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments
[Adopted 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
§ 288-9. Short title.
This article shall be known as and may be referred to as the "Prohibition of
Marihuana Establishments Ordinance."
§ 288-10. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit marihuana establishments in the
City of Royal Oak, pursuant to Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL § 333.27951 et
seq., as may be amended.
§ 288-11. Definitions.
Words used herein shall be defined as provided in Initiated Law 1 of 2018,
MCL § 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
§ 288-12. Marihuana establishments prohibited.
The City of Royal Oak hereby completely prohibits marihuana
establishments within the boundaries of the City, pursuant to Initiated Law
1 of 2018, MCL § 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
§ 288-13. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of not more than $500 and/or 90 days in jail.
§ 288-9 CEMETERY § 288-13
229:345
Chapter 306
EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reimbursement for hazardous materials and
incendiary-type fires — See Ch. 379.
§ 306-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "2006 Emergency
Service Cost Recovery Ordinance."
§ 306-2. Statement of purpose.
This is a chapter to provide for the collection of fees for emergency medical,
fire and police services pursuant to the Police and Fire Protection Act,
MCLA § 41.801 et seq.
§ 306-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the words and phrases listed below shall have the
following meanings:
ACTUAL COSTS — Labor, equipment usage, and materials associated with
investigation, removal, repair, abatement, mitigation, monitoring, cleanup
and analysis. For purposes of determining actual costs, a schedule of the
cost of labor, equipment usage and materials shall be adopted from time to
time by the City Commission.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — Any response by the Fire Department, Police
Department, Department of Public Services, other City department, or
other entity operating at the request of the Fire Department, Police
Department, Department of Public Services, or other City department to
any call for assistance from any person, property owner, governmental
agency, emergency service provider, or other entity. "Emergency response"
shall also include the arrest and conviction of an individual for operating
while intoxicated, operating while visibly impaired, or any other violation of
federal, state or local law, ordinance, or regulation involving the operation
of a motor vehicle and the consumption of intoxicating liquor or the use of
a controlled substance.
EXPENSE OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The actual costs incurred
by the Fire Department, Police Department, Department of Public Services,
other City department, or other entity operating at the request of the Fire
Department, Police Department, Department of Public Services, or other
City department in an emergency response.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any chemical, substance, compound, mixture,
or other material defined as, designated as, listed as, or having the same
§ 288-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 306-3
306:346
characteristics as any substance, compound, mixture, or material listed as
hazardous under federal or state law or regulation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or other entity.
§ 306-4. Liability for expense of emergency response.
§ 306-5. Hazardous materials; notification.
§ 306-6. Recovery of expenses for emergency response.
A. Any owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any property to which there is
an emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the emergency
response.
B. Any registered owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any motor vehicle,
the operation of which results in an emergency response, shall be liable
for the expense of the emergency response.
C. Any person who is the subject of an emergency response shall be liable
for the expense of the emergency response.
D. Regardless of any other provision of this section, any person causing a
fire, an accident, or the release of any hazardous material giving rise to
an emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the emergency
response.
E. Any public or private utility whose activities or facilities necessitated an
emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the emergency
response.
F. When an emergency response directly benefits more than one person or
property, each person and/or property benefited shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of the expense of the emergency
response. For purposes of an emergency response involving a motor
vehicle, occupants other than the operator and the registered owner
shall not be liable for the expense of the emergency response. For
purposes of any emergency response involving real property, occupants
other than the owner, lessor, lessee and operator shall not be liable for
the expense of the emergency response.
A. Any person who causes or controls leakage, spillage or any other
dissemination of a hazardous material shall immediately contact the
Fire Department to make certain that any cleanup is in compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local regulations and guidelines.
B. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine of up to $500, or both,
plus the costs of prosecution.
§ 306-3 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 306-6
306:347
§ 306-7. Effect on existing proceedings and rights.
All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired
or incurred at the time this chapter takes effect are saved and may be
consummated according to the law in force when they are commenced.
Chapter 312
EVENTS, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 188.
Public auctions — See Ch. 201.
Fireworks — See Ch. 345.
Liquor — See Ch. 430.
Parks and public recreational facilities — See
Ch. 515.
Special event signs — See Ch. 607, Art. II.
A. The City shall be entitled to recover any and all of the expense of an
emergency response.
B. The City's Finance Director, or his designee, may within 45 days of
receiving an itemized statement of the expenses of an emergency
response submit a statement of those charges to any person liable for
the expenses of the emergency response or, if known, the person's
insurance company. Said statement shall request payment within 45
days.
C. A person receiving a statement of expenses, or that person's insurance
company, may appeal any or all of the amount shown on the statement
by filing a written appeal with the City Manager within 30 days of the
date of the statement. The appeal must be accompanied by a written
explanation as to why the full amount on the statement should not be
charged to the person. If the City Manager or his designee determines
that the person is not liable for any or all of the expense of the
emergency or that payment of the expense of the emergency response
will impose an undue hardship, the City Manager or his designee may
waive any or all of the expense. The findings and decision of the City
Manager or his designee shall be in writing and filed with the Finance
Department, with a copy to the person appealing the charge.
D. If a statement of expenses is not paid in full or appealed within 30 days
of the date of the statement, or paid in full within 45 days of the denial
of an appeal, the City may exercise any remedy available by law,
including the filing of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction.
E. Any expenses collected pursuant to this Section shall be supplemental
to other methods of financing emergency response, including but not
limited to general fund appropriations, ad valorem taxation, grants, and
other sources permitted by law.
§ 306-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 306-7
306:348
§ 312-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Special Event
Ordinance."
§ 312-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02;
6-16-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
SPECIAL EVENT — Any event outside the normal course of business that
has not received the approval of the City independent of this chapter and
which can reasonably be expected to exceed the interior capacity of the
building as set by the State Fire Safety Board and/or to block, close, or
significantly hinder or impair the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
on any street, road, or other public right-of-way within the City of Royal
Oak.[Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
§ 312-3. Permit required; restrictions during Woodward Dream
Cruise and Arts, Beats and Eats Festival. [Amended 4-19-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-12; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-06]
§ 312-4. Application for permit; investigation. [Amended 5-5-1997
by Ord. No. 97-5]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, group or entity to
stage or hold a special event without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Clerk of the City of Royal Oak.
B. No special event permit shall be issued for any use of a rooftop for any
activity during, and for the two-week period immediately preceding, the
Woodward Dream Cruise.
C. No special event permit, special (one-day) liquor license, transient
merchant license or peddler’s license shall be issued for any activity
other than activities produced and operated by Arts, Beats and Eats,
Inc., during the Arts, Beats and Eats Festival in the following area: on
the north, Catalpa Drive/Gardenia Avenue from Woodward Avenue to
Alexander Avenue/Longfellow Avenue; on the east, Alexander Avenue/
Longfellow Avenue from Gardenia Avenue to I-696; on the south, I-696
from Longfellow Avenue to Woodward Avenue; and on the west,
Woodward Avenue from I-696 to Catalpa Drive. For purposes of this
chapter, this area shall be known as, and may be referred to as, the
"Festival Zone."
A. Except as provided in § 312-5 for special event permits associated with
the Woodward Dream Cruise, every applicant for a permit to stage or
§ 306-7 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 312-4
306:349
hold a special event shall file an application at least 30 days prior to the
event with the City Clerk's office upon a form provided by the City of
Royal Oak.
B. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee.
Such fee shall be set by a City Commission resolution and shall be
renewed annually.
C. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting
the permit.
(2) A complete description of the event, the number of participants,
and the estimated number of those expected to attend the event.
(3) The date the event is to be conducted and the hour or hours the
event will commence and terminate, including time for set-up and
clean-up.
(4) A proposed plan to provide necessary parking, security, crowd
control, traffic control, sanitation facilities, noise control, and
clean-up of the area of the event.
(5) Whether any music will be provided, either live or recorded, and
whether loudspeakers and/or amplifying devices will be used.
(6) Whether the use of alcoholic beverages will be permitted on the
premises upon which the event is to be conducted and, if so, what
measures or procedures will be taken to prohibit the sale of alcohol
to minors or to visibly intoxicated individuals.
(7) Evidence of insurance, including satisfactory proof that the
applicant's insurance carrier has been apprised of the applicant's
proposed use of alcoholic beverages (if any), naming the City as
additional insured in an amount sufficient to protect the City from
any and all claims for damages from personal injury, property
damage or any other injury arising from or as a result of the activity
or event. This provision may be waived at the discretion of the City
Commission. [Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02]
(8) The applicant may be required to indemnify the City for and hold it
harmless from and defend it against any and all claims, lawsuits or
other liability arising from or as a result of the activity or event.
(9) Any other information deemed pertinent by the City in evaluating
the effect such events may have on the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the City of Royal Oak.
D. Upon receipt of such application, the City Clerk will refer same to the
Chief of Police and any other City employees deemed necessary for
investigation and a recommendation concerning the application. The
findings resulting from such investigation shall be reported to the City
§ 312-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 312-4
306:350
§ 312-5. Woodward Dream Cruise. [Added 5-5-1997 by Ord. No.
97-5]
§ 312-6. Arts, Beats and Eats Festival. [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-06]
Manager and the City Clerk. [Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-06]
A. In addition to any other provisions of this chapter, the following classes
of permits are established for special event permits associated with the
Woodward Dream Cruise:
(1) New sales permit: for outdoor on-premises sales by an existing
licensed business of a type not normally carried on by that
business.
(2) Outdoor sales permit: for outdoor on-premises sales by an existing
licensed business of the type that is normally carried on inside of
the business, not including the sale of alcohol.
(3) Outdoor sales with alcohol: for outdoor on-premises sales by an
existing licensed business of the type that is normally carried on
inside the business, including the sale of alcohol.
(4) Third-party permit: for a special event, either indoor or outdoor,
conducted by any individual or entity on premises normally
occupied by an existing licensed business, pursuant to any form of
agreement with the existing licensed business.
B. Every applicant for a permit to stage or hold a special event associated
with the Woodward Dream Cruise shall file an application at least 60
days prior to the event with the City Clerk’s Office on a form provided
by the City. In addition to the nonrefundable application investigation
fee described in § 312-4, an applicant who files an application less than
60 days prior to the event shall pay an additional nonrefundable late fee
in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Commission. The
applicant shall otherwise comply with the provisions of § 312-4.
[Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-06]
A. Approved outdoor service areas within the Festival Zone shall be
allowed to continue to operate, but may not be increased or expanded
during the Arts, Beats and Eats Festival.
B. Arts, Beats and Eats, Inc., is hereby granted the exclusive right to hang
temporary banners recognizing Festival sponsors on any public
property (with the prior approval of the City) and any private property
(with the prior approval of the property owner) within the Festival
footprint during, and for the one day immediately preceding, the Arts,
Beats and Eats Festival. During those dates, an owner or lessee of
private property within the Festival footprint may not hang any
§ 312-4 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 312-6
306:351
§ 312-7. Criteria for issuing permit. [Amended 5-5-1997 by Ord. No.
97-5; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-06; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-06]
commercial signage related to any other entity other than its own
business on its building, or in or on its storefront.
C. Every applicant for a permit to stage or hold a special event associated
with the Arts, Beats and Eats Festival outside the Festival Zone shall file
an application at least 60 days prior to the event with the City Clerk’s
Office upon a form provided by the City of Royal Oak. The applicant will
otherwise comply with the provisions of § 312-4 of this chapter.
A. Special events where the uncompensated use of City services and/or
direct financial support from the City is requested.
(1) A permit shall be authorized by the City Commission if the
following criteria are met:
(a) The application was fully and accurately completed.
(b) Adequate provisions have been made for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the community.
(c) The special event will not unreasonably affect the use or
enjoyment of private or public property and will not cause
unreasonable traffic hazards or delays.
(d) The special event will not constitute a public nuisance.
(e) The applicant makes payment to the City prior to the event of
the costs anticipated to be incurred by the City in assigning
personnel to the special event to assure the health, safety and
welfare of the community, as determined by evaluating the
information submitted in the application. In addition, said
payment shall also include the cost incurred by the City in
notifying area property owners, if such notification is
determined necessary by the City Commission. The final billing
will be adjusted to reflect the actual utilization of City
personnel and equipment.
(f) The special event will not adversely impact or unreasonably
affect the use or enjoyment of the private property in the
vicinity of the event.
(2) In the case of an application for an event that is the same as or is
substantially similar to an event that has previously received City
Commission approval, a permit shall be authorized by the Chief of
Police if the above criteria are met. Any applicant aggrieved by a
decision of the Chief of Police not to authorize a permit shall have a
right to a hearing before the City Commission, provided a written
§ 312-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 312-7
306:352
§ 312-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1997 by Ord. No.
97-5; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor upon conviction and shall be punished by the imposition
of a fine not to exceed $500 and/or by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days within the discretion of the court.
request for a hearing is filed with the City Manager within 10 days
following receipt of the Chief's decision.
B. Special events where the uncompensated use of City services and/or
direct financial support from the City is not requested.
(1) A permit shall be authorized by the Chief of Police if the following
criteria are met:
(a) The application was fully and accurately completed.
(b) Adequate provisions have been made for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the community.
(c) The special event will not unreasonably affect the use or
enjoyment of private or public property and will not cause
unreasonable traffic hazards or delays.
(d) The special event will not constitute a public nuisance.
(e) The applicant makes payment to the City prior to the event of
the costs anticipated to be incurred by the City in assigning
personnel to the special event to assure the health, safety and
welfare of the community, as determined by evaluating the
information submitted in the application. In addition, said
payment shall also include the cost incurred by the City in
notifying area property owners, if such notification is
determined necessary by the Chief of Police. The final billing
will be adjusted to reflect the actual utilization of City
personnel and equipment.
(f) The special event will not adversely impact or unreasonably
affect the use or enjoyment of the private property in the
vicinity of the event.
(2) Appeal. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Chief of Police
not to authorize a permit shall have a right to a hearing before the
City Commission, provided a written request for a hearing is filed
with the City Manager within 10 days following receipt of the
Chief's decision.
§ 312-7 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 312-8
306:353
Chapter 323
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 323-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Royal Oak
Fence Ordinance."
§ 323-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
FENCE — A barrier erected upon, or immediately adjacent to, a property
line for the purpose of separating properties, or for screening, enclosing,
and/or protecting the property within its perimeter. A fence shall not include
construction site barriers, landscape treatments, or privacy screens as
defined herein.
PRIVACY SCREEN — A barrier erected within the interior of a parcel of
property and not upon, or immediately adjacent to, a property line for the
purpose of obscuring patios, decks, courtyards, swimming pools, and other
similar outdoor features, from observation by persons outside the perimeter
of the property. Privacy screens shall not include landscape treatments.
SIGHT-OBSCURING — Opaque or having such qualities as to constitute
an effective visual barrier in the determination of the City's Chief Building
Inspector. A chain-link fence, in the absence of slats, shall not be considered
sight-obscuring.
§ 323-3. Maximum height and permitted locations of fences and
privacy screens.
The respective owners or lessees of property in the City of Royal Oak
may construct fences and privacy screens in such a manner as hereinafter
stated:
A. No fence shall be erected, constructed, or reconstructed to a height of
more than six feet above the adjoining ground level of the owner's or
lessee's property unless otherwise provided by the State Building Code
or § 323-6 herein. On property zoned for residential use, no fence shall
be erected, constructed, or reconstructed to a height of more than four
feet above the adjoining ground level of the owner's or lessee's property
when placed in a front yard as defined by Chapter 770, Zoning. On any
corner lot, no sight-obscuring fence shall rise over three feet in height
§ 312-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 323-3
306:354
§ 323-4. Construction.
All fences and privacy screens shall be of an ornamental type, constructed
of either ornamental wire, wrought iron or wood. All supporting posts, sightobscuring
fences, and privacy screens shall be inside the property of the
person who erects, constructs, or causes to have constructed the sightobscuring
fence or privacy screen.
§ 323-5. Materials.
§ 323-6. Barbed wire and sharp material. [Amended 1-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-01]
It shall be unlawful to construct and maintain any barbed wire or other
sharp, pointed material in connection with the construction of any fence
above the established lowest level of the adjacent roadways, within
the triangle formed by the two property lines which meet at the street
intersection and a line drawn between points located on said property
lines and 20 feet away from the point of intersection. No sightobscuring
fence or privacy screen that is located within 10 feet of the
intersection of any driveway with a public sidewalk shall rise over three
feet in height above said sidewalk, in order that the visibility of a driver
of a vehicle using said driveway shall not be obstructed.
B. No privacy screen shall be erected, constructed, or reconstructed to a
height of more than six feet above the adjoining level of the owner's or
lessee's property, when located between a property line and the
required minimum side yard setback for the dwelling pursuant to
Chapter 770, Zoning. Privacy screens may be erected, constructed, or
reconstructed to a maximum height of eight feet when set back from a
side or rear property line a distance equal to the minimum side yard
setback required for the dwelling pursuant to Chapter 770, Zoning.
Privacy screens are permitted only within a rear yard as defined by
Chapter 770, Zoning. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-01;
2-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03]
C. No fence shall be constructed so as to encroach into the public right-ofway,
provided that such encroachment may be permitted by the Royal
Oak City Commission upon request and a showing that a necessity
exists for such encroachment. The decision of the City Commission shall
be final and binding.
A. Old or used materials shall not be permitted to constitute any portion of
a fence or privacy screen unless such materials shall be reasonably
sound in the judgment of the Chief Building Inspector.
B. All constituent materials of a fence or privacy screen, with the
exception of bolts, screws, nails, or other such hardware, shall be of
identical or similar type, or of such other materials as are, in the
judgment of the Chief Building Inspector, reasonably compatible.
§ 323-3 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 323-6
306:355
or privacy screen in any residentially zoned area. In nonresidential zones,
barbed wire or other pointed materials may be used, provided said material
is exclusively located at least seven feet above the ground and projects over
the fence owner's property and does not overhang abutting properties.
§ 323-7. Maintenance and repair.
Any person, firm, or corporation that owns or leases property upon which
a fence or privacy screen is located shall be responsible for the repair,
upkeep, maintenance, and reconstruction of any such fence or privacy
screen and any area adjacent thereto. If ownership of a fence located upon
a property line is joint or cannot be determined, then each party owning
or leasing property adjacent to the fence shall be responsible for its care,
upkeep, and maintenance.
§ 323-8. Inspections; appeals; waivers. [Amended 9-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-11; 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
§ 323-9. Permit. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
A. The Chief Building Inspector or his or her designee may inspect any
fence to determine whether it conforms with the provisions of this
chapter. Any person who erects, constructs, builds or causes to be
erected, built, or constructed a fence, or who owns or leases property
upon which a fence is located, shall permit the Chief Building Inspector
or his or her designate access to inspect said fence to determine
whether it complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Failure to comply with any written notice from the Chief Building
Inspector or his or her designate shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
C. Appeal from a decision of the Chief Building Inspector shall be
permitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals in a manner and in
conformance with the rules promulgated by that Board.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a waiver from requirements of
this chapter, only upon a showing of practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed, public health, safety, and welfare secure, and
substantial justice done.
E. Upon the receipt of any request for a waiver of any provision of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing and
give due notice of the time and place of such hearing to all property
owners abutting the property which is the subject of the waiver request.
F. All fences and privacy screens shall comply with Chapter 770, Zoning,
and all other ordinances of the City and applicable state law.
§ 323-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 323-9
306:356
§ 323-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-13; 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
A. Required. It shall be unlawful to construct or install, or cause to be
constructed or installed, any fence upon any property within the City of
Royal Oak without first obtaining a fence permit.
B. Application. Applications for fence permits shall be filed with the
Building Department prior to the construction or installation of the
proposed fence. Such applications shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The property address of the proposed fence location and the name
of the owner of the property.
(3) The proposed location of the fence in reference to all lot lines,
drives, walkways, other fences, streets and buildings located on the
subject property and properties adjacent thereto.
(4) The nature and type of fence to be constructed or installed,
including posts and supporting members.
(5) The proposed height of the fence.
(6) Such other and further information necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Standards for issuance. The Building Official or his agents shall grant
and issue such fence permit if:
(1) The proposed fence conforms to all applicable Code requirements.
(2) The applicant tenders a fee in the amount set by resolution of the
City Commission prior to the consideration of the application.
D. Deed restrictions or other covenants. The issuance of a fence permit
under this section is not intended nor should it be construed to
abrogate or modify the applicant's duties as contained in covenants and
restrictions arising from a deed or other document. The City will not
review covenants or building and use restrictions before the issuance of
a fence permit.
A. A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $50, plus costs.
B. A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $100, plus costs.
C. A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $200, plus costs.
§ 323-9 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 323-10
306:357
Chapter 340
FIRE PREVENTION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Authority to pass fire prevention
ordinances — See Ch. 14, Sec. 16.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 70.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 180.
Construction code enforcement — See Ch.
260.
Hazardous materials and incendiary-type
fires — See Ch. 379.
Housing — See Ch. 400.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
Smoke pollution — See Ch. 619.
Vehicles transporting flammable
liquids — See Ch. 733.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
D. A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 323-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 323-10
306:358
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-1767]
§ 340-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City
of Royal Oak, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code,
2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters E, F, I and G (see International
Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of
Royal Oak, Michigan, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life
and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of
the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 340-2 of this article. All references to the
"International Building Code" shall be to the "Michigan Building Code."
§ 340-2. Modifications and amendments to standards.
A. The following sections are hereby revised:
(1) In Section 101.1, insert: "City of Royal Oak, Michigan."
(2) Section 104.1.1 shall be added following Section 104.1 to read as
follows:
104.1.1 Duties and powers of the Code Official. All written
policy statements promulgated and/or issued by the Code Official
for clarification of a provision of this code, or as a rule or
regulation regarding an issue not specifically or thoroughly
addressed in the code shall have the same effect and enforceability
as any other provision of this code.
(3) Section 105.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
105.1 General. Permits shall be in accordance with Section
105.1.1 through 105.7.18. Where reference is made to this section
for permits elsewhere in this code and there are no provisions
for issuing said permits by the Department of Fire Prevention,
the Fire Official is authorized to waive the particular permit
requirement.
67.1Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Adoption of Standards, adopted
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10.
§ 340-1 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-2
306:359
(4) Section 105.6 shall be amended to read as follows:
105.6 Required operational permits. The Fire Official is
authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set
forth in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.48. Where there are no
provisions for issuing said permits, the Fire Official is authorized
to waive the particular permit requirement.
(5) Section 107.3.1 shall be added following Section 107.3 to read as
follows:
107.3.1 Inspections, testing and maintenance reports. All
inspections and maintenance reports required to be furnished to
the Fire Department by the code shall be electronically forwarded
to the Fire Department using the IROL system
(inspectionreportsonline.net), and any company doing inspections
and maintenance shall be required to register with IROL.
(6) Section 108.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
108.1 Board of Appeals established. In order to hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the
Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
code, the Royal Oak Construction Code Board of Appeals shall be
utilized.
(7) Section 108.1.1 shall be added following Section 108.1 to read as
follows:
108.1.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right
to appeal a decision of the Code Official. The appeal shall be made
first to the Chief of the Fire Department. This appeal shall be made
in writing within 10 days of the decision of the Code Official. The
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department may be appealed to
the Royal Oak Construction Code Board of Appeals. This appeal
shall be made by filing a petition within 20 days of the decision of
the Chief of the Fire Department.
(8) Section 108.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
108.3 Qualifications. The Construction Code Board of Appeals
shall consist of members as established by City of Royal Oak
Ordinance 2007-04, as amended.68
(9) In Section 109.4, insert: "Misdemeanor, $500 maximum and/or 90
days' imprisonment maximum."
(10) In Section 111.4, insert: "$100; $500."
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Construction Code Enforcement, § 260-2, Construction Code
Board of Appeals.
§ 340-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-2
306:360
(11) Section 111.4.1 shall be added following Section 111.4 to read as
follows:
111.4.1 Failure to correct violations. If notice to correct
violation is not complied with within the time specified by the
Fire Official, the Fire Official shall request the City Attorney of
the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to
restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to require removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation
of the provisions of this code, or of any order or direction made
pursuant to the code. The Police Department shall be requested by
the Fire Official to make arrests for any offense against this code
or orders of the Fire Official affecting the immediate safety of the
public. It shall be the discretion of the Fire Official to levy fines
for all fire code violations that have not been corrected upon the
time of the second reinspection by the Fire Official. Fines shall be
assessed in the amount of $100 minimum hourly charge, per each
reinspection after the first reinspection, until the code violation is
abated or removed. Fire or injury resulting from failure or delay
to comply with the violation will be attributed to negligence on the
part of the responsible party or parties.
(12) Section 308.1.1.1 shall be added following Section 308.1.1 to read
as follows:
308.1.1.1 Prohibited use. A person shall not utilize, or allow to
be utilized, an open flame in connection with a public meeting
or gathering for purposes of deliberation, worship, entertainment,
amusement, instruction, education, recreation, awaiting
transportation or similar purpose in assembly or educational
occupancies without first obtaining approval from the Fire Official.
(13) Section 308.5 shall be added following Section 308.4.1 to read as
follows:
308.5 Fire Department training. Open burning is allowed for
the purpose of training firefighters for firefighting practice, or
for the purpose of training the public, including workers or
employees, or for the purpose of demonstration by the Fire Official
or other trained fire personnel, when such burning is done in
accordance with accepted practice.
(14) Section 315.3.5 shall be added following Section 315.3.4 to read as
follows:
315.3.5 Inside Storage. The Fire Official may require additional
safeguards for operations involving the use of high-piled storage.
Such safeguards may include, but not be limited to:
1. In-rack fire suppression systems.
2. Early warning fire detection systems.
§ 340-2 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-2
306:361
3. Additional clearances.
4. Isolation of racks.
5. Separation of storage commodities.
6. High density sprinkler systems.
(15) Section 315.7 shall be added following Section 315.6 to read as
follows:
315.7 Separation. Outside storage shall not be located within 15
feet of a structure.
(16) Section 403.2.2.1 shall be added following Section 403.2.2 to read
as follows:
403.2.2.1 Announcements. In all A-2 Use Group occupancies, or
in any occupancy as deemed necessary by the Fire Official, at the
beginning of each performance, the house lights shall be turned
on and an audible announcement shall be made not more than
10 minutes prior to the start of each program notifying each and
every occupant of the location of all the exits to be used in the
event of a fire or other emergency.
(17) Section 503.1.4 shall be added following Section 503.1.3 to read as
follows:
503.1.4 Installation. All fire apparatus access roads shall be
installed before new construction of a building or structure is
started. Apparatus access roads must meet the requirements of
Section 503.
(18) Section 503.2.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
503.2.4 Turning radius. All turns in fire lanes shall be
constructed with a minimum radius of at least 50 feet at the
outside edge or back of curbline, and the radius for the inside edge
or back of curbline shall be at least 25 feet less than the outside
radius provided.
(19) Section 503.3.1 shall be added following Section 503.3 to read as
follows:
503.3.1 Posting. All fire apparatus access roads shall be
conspicuously posted on both sides of the fire apparatus access
roads with "No Parking Fire Lane" signs, which shall conform to
the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and as
prescribed by the Fire Official. Signs shall be erected no further
than 75 feet apart in all areas designated as fire lanes.
(20) Section 503.4.2 shall be added following Section 503.4.1 to read as
follows:
§ 340-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-2
306:362
503.4.2 Authority to remove obstructions. If any vehicle,
trailer, or other object is located within a fire apparatus access
road during a fire emergency or alarm or any other time when
use of the fire lane is necessary, any Royal Oak police officer or
member of the Royal Oak Fire Department may move or cause
the same to be moved, by any means reasonably available, without
liability for any damages sustained to said vehicle.
(21) Section 505.1.1 shall be added following Section 505.1 to read as
follows:
505.1.1 Street numbers. All commercial and multifamily
premises shall bear a distinctive number on the front and at the
rear of the entrance and exit of said premises in accordance with
and as designated upon the street map on file in the Planning
Department.
(22) Section 507.5.1.2 shall be added following Section 507.5.1 to read
as follows:
507.5.1.2 Fire hydrants required on private property. All such
fire hydrants must meet the standards of the National Board of
Fire Underwriters, and must be connected to a water main having
a diameter of six inches or greater. The four-hundred-foot distance
specified herein shall be measured along the route that a fire hose
would be stretched, vertically and/or horizontally to fight a fire in
such a building. No occupancy permit shall be issued permitting
occupancy of any such building until such fire hydrant or hydrants
have been installed. In the case of any building in existence on the
date this section becomes effective, such building shall be made
to comply with the provisions of this section within six months of
said effective date. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any
building to be occupied contrary to the provisions of this section
or to fail to install any fire hydrant or hydrants required by the
provision of this section. There are no exceptions to the fourhundred-
foot provision of Section 507.5.1.
(23) Section 507.5.1.3 shall be added following Section 507.5.1.2 to
read as follows:
507.5.1.3 Special locations. Additional fire hydrants may be
required and located closer than the spacing required for high
hazard classifications.
(24) Section 507.5.1.4 shall be added following Section 507.5.1.3 to
read as follows:
507.5.1.4 Access. Access to fire hydrants shall be by any
approved roadway as specified by this code.
§ 340-2 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-2
306:363
(25) Section 507.5.1.5 shall be added following Section 507.5.1.4 to
read as follows:
507.5.1.5 Pumper outlet direction. Each hydrant shall have
the pumper (steamer) connection facing the primary roadway and
shall be accessible so that a connection can be made between the
hydrant and the apparatus located in the street with 20 feet of
suction hose.
(26) Section 507.5.1.6 shall be added following Section 507.5.1.5 to
read as follows:
507.5.1.6 Hydrant outlet location. Fire hydrant outlets shall be
a minimum of 18 inches and no more than 36 inches above the
finished grade.
(27) Section 507.5.1.7 shall be added following Section 507.5.1.6 to
read as follows:
507.5.1.7 Unauthorized use of hydrants. A person shall not
use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the Fire
Department for fire suppression purposes, unless such person first
obtains permission and secures a permit for such use from the Fire
Official. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by
persons who are authorized to use City of Royal Oak fire hydrants,
as authorized and/or permitted by the Fire Official or authority
having jurisdiction.
(28) Section 507.5.4.1 shall be added following Section 507.5.4 to read
as follows:
507.5.4.1 Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department
connections. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage,
deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or Fire
Department connection used for the pressurization of fire
suppression systems, including fire hydrants and Fire Department
connections that are located on public or private streets and
access lanes, or on private property. No parking shall be permitted
and/or no obstruction shall be placed or constructed within 15
feet of any fire hydrant or Fire Department connection, public
or private. If, upon the expiration of time mentioned in a notice
of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the
Fire Official shall proceed to remove the same. The expense
incurred shall be a debt to the City from the responsible person,
and, if necessary, the legal authority of the municipality shall
institute appropriate action for recovering such costs.
(29) Section 603.8 shall be amended to read as follows:
603.8. Incinerators. The use of, or operations of any incinerator
within the City of Royal Oak shall be prohibited at any time.
§ 340-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-2
306:364
(30) Section 609.3.5 shall be added following Section 609.3.4 to read as
follows:
609.3.5 Makeup air shutdown. Upon activation (either
manually or automatically) of the kitchen fire suppression system,
the makeup air supplied internally to a hood shall be shut off and
the exhaust system shall remain on.
(31) Section 801.2 shall be added following Section 801.1 to read as
follows:
801.2 Explosive or highly flammable or combustible
materials. Furnishings or decorations of an explosive or highly
flammable or combustible character shall not be used.
(32) Section 806.1.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
806.1.1 Restricted occupancies. Natural cut trees shall be
prohibited in Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4, S, and U
occupancies.
Exception: Trees located in areas protected by an approved
automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 shall not be prohibited in Groups A,
B, E, F, M, R-1, R-2, S and U.
(33) Section 903.2.7.2 shall be added following Section 903.2.7.1 to
read as follows:
903.2.7.2. Basements. All basement storage areas in buildings
of Use Group M shall be sprinklered at the direction of the Fire
Official.
(34) Section 903.2.8.5 shall be added following Section 903.2.8.4 to
read as follows:
903.2.8.5. Basements. All basement storage areas in buildings
of Use Group R-2 shall be sprinklered at the direction of Fire
Official. In the event that individual storage areas are not afforded
or provided for, and storage occupies the open and common area
of the basement, the entire basement shall be sprinklered.
(35) Section 903.2.11.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
903.2.11.3 Buildings more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) in
height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout a building that has a floor level which has an occupant
load of 30 or more occupants and which is located 30 feet (9,144
mm) or more above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle
access.
Exceptions:
1. Open parking structures.
§ 340-2 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-2
306:365
2. Occupancies in Group F-2.
(36) Section 903.3.5 shall be amended to read as follows:
903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler
systems shall comply with this section and the standards
referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be
protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements
of this section and the current Michigan Plumbing Code. Double
detector check assemblies shall be permitted, provided that they
are capable of accommodating metered bypass requirements. No
RPZ (reduced pressure) assemblies are permitted within the City
of Royal Oak, except by permission of the Fire Official.
(37) Section 903.4.2.1 shall be added following Section 903.4.2 to read
as follows:
903.4.2.1 Fire Department connections - audible/visual
alarms. A low voltage weatherproof combination audible/visual
alarm with a minimum rating of 110 cd shall be connected to the
sprinkler flow switch and mounted on the exterior wall above the
Fire Department connection and shall be a component of the fire
alarm system.
(38) Section 904.12.6.4 shall be added following Section 904.12.6.3 to
read as follows:
904.12.6.4 Cleaning schedule. When a cleaning schedule is
not on file, the Fire Official may require a cleaning schedule
to be submitted indicating the method of cleaning and the time
intervals between cleaning. The frequency, type, and amount of
cleaning may be determined by the Fire Official depending upon
the accumulation of grease build-up.
(39) Section 906.3.1.1 shall be added following Section 906.3.1 to read
as follows:
906.3.1.1 Distribution. In use groups of R1 and R2 occupancies,
a minimum of one 2A 10BC extinguisher shall be provided for
every four dwelling units, and shall be accessible to residents of
each dwelling unit. Extinguishers shall be tested by an approved,
certified company on an annual basis.
(40) Section 907.2.11.2.1 shall be added following 907.2.11.2 to read as
follows:
907.2.11.2.1. Location. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms
shall be installed and maintained in corridors, hallways, and all
common areas of occupancies in Use Groups R-2 and R-3.
(41) Section 907.4.2.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 340-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-2
306:366
907.4.2.4 Signs. Where fire alarm systems are not monitored
by a supervising station, an approved permanent sign that reads:
"THIS ALARM DOES NOT NOTIFY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT - TO
REPORT A FIRE DIAL 911" shall be installed adjacent to each
manual fire alarm box.
(42) Section 908.8 shall be added following Section 908.7 to read as
follows:
908.8 Monitoring. Where a building fire alarm system is
installed, emergency alarm systems shall be monitored by the
building fire alarm system in accordance with NFPA 72.
(43) Section 912.1.1 shall be added following Section 912.1 to read as
follows:
912.1.1 Interconnection. Where buildings or structures are
equipped with two or more separate automatic fire sprinkler
systems and/or two or more separate Fire Department sprinkler
connections for such systems, the Fire Department connections
shall be used to supply either sprinkler system.
(44) Section 912.2.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
912.2.1. Visible location. In any building or structure required
to be equipped with a Fire Department connection, the connection
shall be located within 100 feet of a fire hydrant. The one-hundredfoot
distance shall be measured along the route that a fire hose
would be stretched, vertically and/or horizontally, to fight a fire
in such a building. Fire department connections shall be located
on the street side of buildings, fully visible and recognizable from
the street or nearest point of Fire Department vehicle access or as
otherwise approved by the Fire Official.
(45) Section 912.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
912.3 Fire hose threads. All required Fire Department
connections for new and modified systems shall be equipped with
a single four-inch NPT by five-inch Stortz quick connect fitting
with thirty-degree downturn.
(46) Section 1004.3.1 shall be added following Section 1004.3 to read as
follows:
§ 340-2 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-2
306:367
1004.3.1 Overcrowding. A person shall not permit overcrowding
or admittance of any person beyond the approved occupant load.
The Code Official, upon finding overcrowded conditions or
obstructions in aisles, passageways or other means of egress,
or upon finding any condition which constitutes a hazard to life
and safety, shall cause the occupancy, performance, presentation,
spectacle or entertainment to be stopped until such a condition or
obstruction is corrected and the addition of any further occupants
prohibited until the approved occupant load is reestablished. In
the interest of life safety to the occupants involved in
overcrowding, the Code Official may also order the immediate
evacuation of the building until safe conditions may be
reestablished.
(47) In Section 1103.5.2, insert "System installed by December 31,
2020."
(48) Section 2304.2.6 shall be added following Section 2304.2.5 to read
as follows:
2304.2.6 Fuel station public address systems. A listed and
approved public address system shall be installed at each selfservice
station, providing the capability of two-way
communication between the fuel-dispensing area and the station
attendant. The public address system shall be maintained in an
operational and functioning condition at all times.
(49) Section 2801.3 shall be added following Section 2801.2 to read as
follows:
2801.3 Approval. Approval shall be obtained from the Code
Official for any facility or operation in which the storage,
manufacturing and processing of timber, lumber, plywood, veneers
and wood by-products are to be processed or stored.
(50) Section 3303.5.1 shall be added following Section 3303.5 to read as
follows:
3303.5.1 Clearances from combustibles. Any and all storage of
combustible material or items shall be kept a minimum distance of
36 inches from heat producing appliances. Additional clearances
may be required if deemed necessary by the Code Official.
(51) Section 5601.1.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale,
handling and use of fireworks are prohibited unless in compliance
with the Michigan Fireworks Law, 2011 PA 256, as amended, or its
equivalent.
(52) Section 5601.1.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 340-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-2
306:368
5601.1.4 Rocketry. The storage, handling, and use of model
and high-powered rockets shall comply with the requirements of
NFPA 1122, NFPA 1125, and NFPA 1127, and the Michigan Model
Rocket Law, 1965 PA 333, as amended, or its equivalent.
(53) Section 5608.2.3 shall be added following Section 5608.2.2 to read
as follows:
5608.2.3 Indoor displays. The indoor display of fireworks,
including proximate audience displays and pyrotechnic special
effects in motion picture, television, theatrical, group
entertainment productions, or for any reason, in structures, shall
be prohibited in the City of Royal Oak.
(54) Section 5704.2.9.7.10 shall be added following Section
5704.2.9.7.9 to read as follows:
5704.2.9.7.10 New bulk plants. No new bulk plants for
flammable liquids shall be constructed within the City of Royal
Oak, except in districts where such use is specifically permitted
under the provisions of the City of Royal Oak Zoning Ordinance,
as amended.69
(55) Section 6104.5 shall be added following Section 6104.4 to read as
follows:
6104.5 Balconies. The use or storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gas
(LPG) cylinders on balconies in Use Group R-2 and Use Group R-3
is prohibited.
B. The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
(1) Section 5704.2.9.6.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground tanks
outside of buildings is allowed only in General Industrial Zones as
defined by the City of Royal Oak Zoning Ordinance, No. 2001-9,
§ 770-44.
(2) Section 5706.2.4.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
5706.2.4.4 Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground tanks
is allowed only in General Industrial Zones as defined by the City
of Royal Oak Zoning Ordinance, No. 2001-9, § 770-44.
(3) Section 5806.2 shall be amended to read as follows:
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 770, Zoning.
§ 340-2 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-2
306:369
§ 340-3. Fire control measures and regulations.
The following fire control measures and regulations are adopted for the
purpose of controlling conditions which could impede or interfere with the
fire suppression forces:
5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic liquids in
stationary containers outside of buildings is allowed only in
General Industrial Zones as defined by the City of Royal Oak
Zoning Ordinance, No. 2001-9, § 770-44.
(4) Section 6104.2 shall be amended to read as follows:
Maximum capacity within established limits. For the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas is allowed only in General Industrial Zones
as defined by the City of Royal Oak Zoning Ordinance, No. 2001-9,
§ 770-44 and the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall
not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7,570 liters).
A. Authority at fires and other emergencies.
(1) Fire Chief. The Fire Chief or his duly authorized representative, as
may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency
involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to
direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control
any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous
conditions or situations, or of taking any other action necessary in
the reasonable performance of his or her duty.
(2) Police or fire officials. A police or fire official, depending on who is
in charge of a particular emergency situation:
(a) May prohibit any person, vehicle, or object from approaching
the scene; and
(b) May remove or cause to be removed from the scene any
person, vehicle, or object approaching the scene; and
(c) May remove or cause to be removed from the scene any
person, vehicle, or object which may impede or interfere with
the operations of the Fire Department.
(3) Fire Officials. The Fire Official may remove or cause to be removed
any person, vehicle, or object from a hazardous area, and any such
person, vehicle, or object shall do so immediately and shall not reenter
the area until authorized to do so by the Fire Official.
B. Interference with Fire Department operations. It shall be unlawful to
interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with,
obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any
§ 340-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-3
306:370
Fire Department emergency vehicle or apparatus in any way, or to
interfere with, obstruct or hamper any Fire Department operations.
C. Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Official or interfere
with the compliance attempts of another individual.
D. Authorized emergency vehicles/equipment.
(1) Defined. Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those
which are defined and authorized under the laws of the State of
Michigan.
(2) Yielding right-of-way; due care and caution. Drivers and operators
shall comply with MCLA § 257.653 and MCLA § 257.653a. A person
who violates either of these sections shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCLA § 257.1 et
seq., as amended.
(3) Following prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than
500 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area
where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(4) Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire Department emergency
equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from
the Fire Official in charge of said Fire Department emergency
equipment, cling to, attach to, climb upon or into, board, or swing
upon any Fire Department emergency vehicle, whether the same is
in motion or at rest, operate any emergency warning equipment, or
manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper
with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps,
or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any Fire
Department emergency vehicle.
E. Vehicles crossing fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled
over any unprotected fire hose of the Fire Department when it is laid
down on any street, alleyway, private drive, or any other vehicular road
without the consent of the Fire Official in command of said operations.
F. Damage/injury to Fire Department equipment/personnel. It shall be
unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to
damage or deface, any Fire Department emergency vehicle or
equipment at any time; or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure Fire
Department personnel while performing department duties.
G. Open building due to fire. The Fire Chief or his duly authorized
representative may order the securing of any fire-damaged building. If
the owner, lessee or occupant of the building is present, this order shall
be given to that person. If no owner, lessee, or occupant of the building
is present, the Fire Chief or his duly authorized representative may take
§ 340-3 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-3
306:371
§ 340-4. Cost recovery.
reasonable measures to have the building secured. The expense of
securing the building by the City shall be charged to the owner, lessee
or occupant.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enable the City of Royal Oak
to require reimbursement from those individuals and/or entities who
receive direct benefits from emergency medical/Fire/Police Department
services provided by the City; from those persons responsible for the
release, threatened release, leaking, spilling, or escape of dangerous
materials, and/or damage to public property; and those requesting or
necessitating that an emergency response be provided.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases
listed below shall have the following meanings:
DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES OR MATERIALS — Any
and all substances, compounds, mixtures or materials that are defined
to be, designated as, listed as, or which have characteristics that are
hazardous or toxic under any federal, state or local statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or under the relevant environmental laws.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The provision/utilization of environmental
removal and/or cleanup, firefighting, emergency medical, crowd
control, investigatory, and rescue services by the Police and/or Fire
Department, or by a private corporation or governmental or
intergovernmental entity or agency operating at the request of or
direction of the Fire Department, as well as sign fabrication and repairs
to damaged public property undertaken by or at the direction or
request of the Department of Public Services. This definition shall
include, but not be limited to, the provision/utilization of the City's
firefighting/emergency medical/rescue services, including resuscitator
and emergency extrication service, to the scene of a fire, accident,
utility emergency, hazardous material incident, arson, technical rescue,
or other emergency situation.
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP — Removal, abatement, mitigation and
restoration activities necessitated by any release or threatened release
of a dangerous or hazardous substance or material of unknown
composition reasonably believed to be dangerous or hazardous.
EXPENSE OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The actual costs associated
with an emergency response. The expenses of making an emergency
response shall include the costs associated with investigation, removal,
repair, abatement, mitigation, environmental cleanup and analysis of
chemical test, if applicable.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals and/or corporate,
unincorporated or partnership entities, including governmental entities
and agencies.
§ 340-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-4
306:372
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Real and/or personal property of a governmental
entity.
RELEVANT ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS — As referred to herein, shall
mean all applicable federal, state and local statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules, regulation, orders, judicial determination, and decisions or
determinations by any judicial, legislative or executive body of any
governmental or quasi-governmental entity, whether in the past, the
present, or the future, that regulate, prohibit, or impose duties or
liabilities with respect to:
UTILITY EMERGENCY — Downed power lines, gas pipeline breaks,
or other mishaps occurring in connection with the activities of public
utilities or their suppliers which necessitate a response by the City's
police, firefighting and/or emergency medical/rescue services, or cause
damage to public property.
The installation, existence, or removal of, or exposure to asbestos
on the property;
(1)
Performing or paying for testing, investigation, remedial actions,
response activities, cleanup, fines or penalties relating to
hazardous materials that are or were present, released,
discharged, disposed, stored, manufactured, treated, or utilized at
or from the property;
(2)
The existence, manufacture, treatment, storage, use, release,
disposal, discharge, manufacture, remedy, or removal of hazardous
materials at, to or from the property; and
(3)
The effects on the environment of the property or of any activity
now, previously, or hereafter conducted on the property.
(4)
C. The relevant environmental laws shall include, but are not limited to the
following, as all may be amended from time to time, and including any
replacements thereof:
(1) The Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and
Liability Act, 43 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.; Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.; the Safe Drinking Water Act,
42 U.S.C. § 300F et seq.; the Toxic Substances Control Act 15 U.S.C.
§ 2601, et seq.; the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251, et seq.; the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401, et seq. and all
regulations and interpretations promulgated in connection with the
foregoing.
(2) Environmental Protection Agency Regulations pertaining to
asbestos (including 40 CFR Part 61, Subpart M); the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration Regulations pertaining to
Asbestos (including 29 CFR 1919.1011 and 1926.58) as each may
now or hereafter be amended; and
§ 340-4 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-4
306:373
(3) The Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act, MCLA § 323.101, et seq., and all regulations promulgated
thereunder, and any similar local laws, ordinances and regulations
pertaining to hazardous materials, asbestos and other
environmental matters.
D. Presumption of liability.
(1) The owner, lessor and operator of any property to which there is an
emergency response shall be presumed liable for the expense of
the emergency.
(2) Any person or vehicle owner/lessee who owns, leases and/or
operates a motor vehicle or other transporter or equipment, the
operation of which results in an emergency response, shall be
presumed liable for the expenses of said emergency response.
(3) Any individual who is the subject of an emergency response by the
City shall be presumed liable for the expenses of said emergency
response.
(4) Any person causing a fire, an accident, or any release giving rise to
a need for environmental cleanup or other emergency response
shall be presumed liable for the expenses of said emergency
response.
(5) In the event of a utility emergency, the public utility whose
activities or facilities necessitated the emergency response shall be
presumed liable for the expenses of said emergency response.
E. Recovery of expenses of emergency response.
(1) Recovery of expenses for utility emergency. Any and all persons
owning, maintaining or operating a public or private utility,
including but not limited to, electric lines, telephone lines, cable
lines and pipelines, within the City of Royal Oak, shall be
responsible for and pay the actual cost and expense incurred by the
City to respond to, assist, manage, monitor or remediate any
emergency concerning or involving the utility.
(2) Recovery of expenses for hazardous and toxic materials. Any owner
and/or operator of any property, equipment or container shall be
responsible for and pay the actual cost and expense incurred by the
City to respond to, assist, manage, monitor or remediate an
emergency incident involving hazardous or toxic materials.
(3) Recovery of expenses for high BAC/OWI/OWVI/minor with BAC
responses. Any owner/operator of any vehicle found to be guilty of
any violation of federal, state or local law, ordinance, or regulation
involving the operation of a motor vehicle and the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and/or the use of a controlled substance shall be
responsible for and pay all the actual costs and expenses incurred
§ 340-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-4
306:374
by the City to respond to, to assist with, to manage, and/or to
transport from the incident.
(4) Recovery of expenses for incendiary fires. Any person found
responsible for setting an incendiary type fire by a court shall be
responsible for and pay the actual cost and expense incurred by the
City to respond, assist, manage, monitor, investigate or remediate
the fire site. Incendiary fires shall include intentionally and legally
started fires.
(5) Actual costs. Actual costs and expenses shall include, but not be
limited to, the direct costs, wages, fringe benefits, equipment
operation and materials incurred by the Fire Department, Police
Department, Department of Public Services or any other City
Department or personnel or any labor services for which the City
had to contract, in making the response to the emergency.
F. Dangerous or hazardous substances/materials liability.
(1) It shall be the duty of any person who causes or controls leakage,
spillage, or any other dissemination of dangerous or hazardous
substances or materials to immediately remove such and clean-up
the area of the spillage in such a manner that the area involved is
fully restored to its condition as existed prior to such occurrence.
The Fire Department shall be contacted to inspect said site to make
certain that the cleaning is in compliance with local, state, and
federal guidelines, regulations, and laws.
(2) Any such person who violates this article by failing to clean,
without delay, a dangerous or hazardous substance release, shall
be liable to and pay the City for its costs incurred, or incurred by
any party which it may engage for the complete abatement,
mitigation, cleanup, restoration and inspection of the affected area,
and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days'
imprisonment or a fine of up to $500, or both.
(3) The City shall be entitled to recover any and all expenses of
emergency responses. Such expenses shall include, but are not
limited to, any related third-party costs, which are necessary to
ensure the safety of the City and its populace and buildings.
(4) The City's Finance Department or its designee shall, within 90 days
of receiving an itemized statement of expenses incurred for
emergency response, submit a statement of charges for same by
first class mail to any such person whose identity and address are
known to the Director of Finance. Such a statement may also be
transmitted via facsimile or other electronic means if such means
are reasonably determined to provide actual notice to the intended
recipient. Said statement shall require payment within 45 days.
(5) Any person receiving such a statement shall have the opportunity
to appeal all or any portion of the amount shown on such statement
§ 340-4 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-4
306:375
by filing a written request for same with the Fire Chief within
30 days of receipt of an invoice from the City. The request must
be accompanied by a written explanation as to why the amount
appealed should not be charged to the appellant. The Assistant
Chief of the Fire Department, as hearing officer, or, in his absence,
the Chief of the Fire Department or his designee shall hear such
appeals. If the hearing officer determines that the appellant is not
properly responsible for any or the entire amount charged, the
hearing officer may waive such charge against the appellant. The
findings and decisions of the hearing officer shall be in writing and
filed with the Office of the Fire Chief.
(6) If no written request for appeal is received within the specified
time, the City may proceed by suit in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction to collect any monies remaining unpaid at the
expiration of 45 days from billing, or, if no bill is submitted, at any
time subsequent to the emergency response in question.
(7) In addition, the City shall have any other remedy available to the
City by law.
G. Hazardous materials; arson fires.
(1) The Fire Department shall have the authority to recover all costs
related to the use of equipment, personnel, and supplies associated
with incidents related to:
(a) Hazardous materials.
(b) Fires that are a direct result of an incendiary act.
(c) Fires that are the result of, or can be attributed to, the failure
of a building owner, occupant, or other responsible
representative of the property to comply with a lawful order
from the Code Official to abate a fire hazard.
(2) Such costs shall include, but are not limited to those associated
with incident abatement, mitigation, cleanup, extinguishment,
standby, as well as any related third-party costs. Such costs shall be
the responsibility of the owner, operator or agent of the building,
property, equipment, vehicle, or container causing or contributing
to a hazardous condition, fire, or dangerous situation.
H. Cost recovery: fires. To protect the health, safety and welfare of its
residents and to serve as a deterrent against unsafe conditions, the City
of Royal Oak or its Fire Department may recover all costs for use of
equipment, personnel and supplies associated with fire extinguishment
when it is determined that such fire extinguishment was necessitated
by a person's intentional disregard for the safety of persons or property,
violation of law, recklessness or gross negligence. The Fire Department
may also request the City Attorney to file a civil action for the recovery
for costs.
§ 340-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 340-5
306:376
§ 340-5. Open burning and fuels.
§ 340-6. Violations and penalties.
Any individual, partnership, corporation or other group acting as a unit
violating any provision of this article or any order made thereunder shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 or be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or be both so fined and imprisoned, at the discretion of
the court.
§ 340-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this article is, for
any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent portion of this article, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this article.
A. Defined. "Open burning" means burning that is not contained in a
vessel designed to contain fire.
B. No person shall cause or permit any open burning of fuel, garbage, or
other combustible refuse or waste material, including by way of
description, but not by way of limitation, leaves, brush, tree trimmings,
and grass.
C. Fuel for a residential outdoor fire is limited to natural gas, propane
(LPG), commercially available charcoal or charcoal briquettes. The fire
shall not be utilized for waste disposal purposes.
D. Special occasional open fires may be allowed with permission of the
Fire Chief or his/her designee, upon a determination by the Fire Chief
or his/her designee that the maintenance of such fire is not likely to
create a hazard or nuisance condition to adjacent property or persons
in close proximity. The Fire Chief or his/her designee may attach
conditions to the permit. The City may charge a fee for the permit to
recover its incidental costs.
E. Section 307 of the International Fire Code of 2015 is repealed.
§ 340-5 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 340-7
306:377
Chapter 345
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special events — See Ch. 312.
Hazardous materials and incendiary-type
fires — See Ch. 379.
General licensing — See Ch. 425, Art. II.
Parks and public recreational facilities — See
Ch. 515.
§ 345-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "2012 Fireworks
Ordinance."
§ 345-2. Statement of purpose; repealer.
This is a chapter to repeal existing Chapter 345, Fireworks, of the City
Code, and to adopt a new chapter to provide for the regulation of the
ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks, as allowed under the
Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCLA § 28.451 et seq., as amended.
§ 345-3. Definitions. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
APA STANDARD 87-1 — 2001 APA Standard 87-1, Standard for Construction
and Approval for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties, and Theatrical
Pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of
Bethesda, Maryland.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Fireworks devices that are designed to
produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated
by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR
Parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3,
or 3.5. "Consumer fireworks" does not include low-impact fireworks.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a
flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.
LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS — Ground and handheld sparkling devices as
that phrase is defined under APA Standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and
3.5.
MINOR — An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
§ 345-4. Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks.
[Amended 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-12; 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
§ 340-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 345-4
306:378
§ 345-5. Possession of consumer fireworks by minor.
A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks.
§ 345-6. Ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks on public
property, school property, church property or the property of
another person. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
§ 345-7. Ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks while
under the influence. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
A. Except as provided in this section, a person shall not ignite, discharge,
or use consumer fireworks at any time.
B. A person may ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on the
following days during the following hours:
(1) Between 11:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on the
immediately following January 1.
(2) Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday immediately
preceding Memorial Day.
(3) Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Sunday immediately
preceding Memorial Day.
(4) Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on June 29, June 30, July 1, July
2, July 3 and July 4.
(5) Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on July 5, if that date is a Friday
or a Saturday.
(6) Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday immediately
preceding Labor Day.
(7) Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Sunday immediately
preceding Labor Day.
C. A violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of
$1,000. Of that fine, $500 must be remitted to the Royal Oak Police
Department.
A. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on
public property, school property, church property, or the property of
another person without that organization's or person's express
permission to use those fireworks on those premises.
B. A violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not
more than $500.
A. A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks or lowimpact
fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a
§ 345-4 EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY § 345-7
306:379
§ 345-8. Determination of violation; seizure; destruction; storage
costs. [Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
Chapter 351
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 600.
Stormwater detention — See Ch. 644.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 658.
Water — See Ch. 745.
Waterworks — See Ch. 752.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 351-1. Purpose and intent.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a
controlled substance.
B. As used in this section, "alcoholic liquor" means that term as defined in
Section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL § 257.1d, as may be
amended, and "controlled substance" means that term as defined in
Section 8b of the Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL § 257.8b, as may be
amended.
C. A violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000.
A. If the Royal Oak Police Department determines through its
investigation that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the
Department may seize the firework as evidence of the violation. The
Department shall store, or cause to be stored, the evidence seized
under this section pending disposition of any proceedings arising from
the violation.
B. Following a final disposition of an appeal of a finding of responsibility
under this chapter that affirms the finding, the Department may dispose
of or destroy any fireworks retained as evidence in that proceeding.
C. A person from whom fireworks are seized under this chapter shall pay
the actual costs of storage and disposal of the seized fireworks if found
responsible for a violation of this chapter.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
§ 345-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 351-1
351:380
§ 351-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application:
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located
within the area of special flood hazard.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — The official map issued
by the Federal Insurance Administration where the areas of special flood
hazard have been designated Zone A.
HABITABLE FLOOR — Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof.
A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor."
MOBILE HOME — A structure that is transportable in one or more sections,
built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not
include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 351-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 351-2
351:381
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building or mobile home that is
principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceed 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:
§ 351-3. Applicability; rules; interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter only, the following rules shall apply:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
B.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of Royal Oak.
B. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in its Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), #03, dated
June 4, 1976, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The FHBM is on file at 211 Williams Street, Royal Oak,
Michigan.
C. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
D. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction
shall prevail.
E. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 351-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 351-3
351:382
§ 351-4. Administration; development permit.
F. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the City of Royal Oak, any officer or employee thereof, or the
Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
A. Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be
obtained before construction or development begins within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 351-3B. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Director
of Community Development and may include, but not be limited to,
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 351-6B; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Designation of the Director of Community Development. The Director of
Community Development is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the Director of Community Development.
The duties of the Director of Community Development shall include, but
not be limited to:
(1) Permit review. The Director of Community Development shall:
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
§ 351-3 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 351-4
351:383
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of
the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this
chapter, "adversely affects" means damage to adjacent
properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to
physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank
areas.
[1] If it is determined that there is no adverse effect and the
development is not a building, then the permit shall be
granted without further consideration.
[2] If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then
technical justification (i.e., a registered professional
engineer) for the proposed development shall be required.
[3] If the proposed development is a building, then the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(2) Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with § 351-3B, the Director of
Community Development shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state
or other source, in order to administer § 351-6, Specific standards
for flood hazard reduction.
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained. The Director of
Community Development shall:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not
the structure contains a basement.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
[1] Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed.
[2] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 351-4A(3).
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) Alteration of watercourses. The Director of Community
Development shall:
§ 351-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 351-4
351:384
§ 351-5. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(5) Interpretation of FHBM boundaries. The Director of Community
Development shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to
ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that:
(a) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations, with mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring
one additional tie per side;
(b) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile
homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per
side;
(c) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying
a force of 4,800 pounds; and
(d) Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
§ 351-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 351-5
351:385
§ 351-6. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 351-4C(2), Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Encroachments. Any proposed development shall be analyzed to
determine effects on the flood-carrying capacity of the area of special
flood hazard as set forth in § 351-4C(1)(c), Permit review.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
§ 351-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 351-6
351:386
§ 351-7. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance."
Chapter 363
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 363, Gasoline Service Stations, comprised of Art. I,
Licensing and Regulation, adopted 1-15-1951 by Ord. No. 632, as
amended, and Art. II, Abandoned Gasoline Stations, adopted
4-19-1976 by Ord. No. 76-14, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10.]
Chapter 379
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND INCENDIARY-TYPE FIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency response costs — See Ch. 306.
§ 379-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Reimbursement for
Hazardous Materials and Incendiary-Type Fires."
§ 379-2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this chapter:
DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance which is
spilled, leaked or otherwise released from its container, which, in the
determination of the Fire Chief or his authorized representative, is
dangerous or harmful to the environment or human or animal life, health
or safety, or is obnoxious by reason of odor, or is determined by the City
to constitute a danger or threat to the public health, safety or welfare
and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as chemicals and
gases, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products
or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives.
INCENDIARY-TYPE FIRES — A fire that was maliciously and willfully set.
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications
shall be provided to the official as set forth in § 351-4C(3)(b).
§ 351-6 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND INCENDIARY- § 379-3
379:387
§ 379-3. Duty to remove and clean up dangerous or hazardous
material release.
It shall be the duty of any person or any other entity which causes or
controls leakage, spillage or any other dissemination of dangerous or
hazardous substances or materials to immediately stabilize the hazardous
material release and remove such and clean up the area in such manner
that the area is fully restored to its condition prior to the dissemination.
§ 379-4. Failure to remove and clean up; liability for costs.
Any such person or entity which fails to comply with § 379-3 of this chapter
or is unable to do so in a timely manner shall be liable to and shall pay the
City of Royal Oak for its costs and expenses, including the costs incurred by
the City to any party which it engages to stabilize the release and for the
complete abatement, clean up and restoration of the affected area. Costs
incurred by the City shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to,
actual labor costs, including fringe benefits, administrative overhead, cost
of equipment operation, and materials used in the clean up.
§ 379-5. Reimbursement for incendiary-type fires.
The City of Royal Oak shall be entitled to recover all costs and damages
incurred in conjunction with any incendiary-type fire. The costs shall
include, but are not limited to, those associated with the fire extinguishment
and investigation, including actual labor costs and fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, cost of equipment operation, supplies and
materials used in the operation, and any related third-party costs necessary
for the extinguishment and/or investigation of the incident.
§ 379-6. Enforcement.
If any person or entity fails to reimburse the City as provided within 30 days
of demand by the City, the City shall have a lien for all unpaid costs, and
may enforce such lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the
State of Michigan providing for the enforcement of tax liens. The City shall
also have the right to bring an action in the appropriate court to collect such
costs if it deems said action is necessary.
Chapter 388
HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 195.
Chauffeurs and taxicabs — See Ch. 236.
General licensing — See Ch. 425, Art. II.
Motor buses — See Ch. 463.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
§ 379-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 379-6
388:388
§ 388-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Horse-Drawn Carriage
Ordinance."
§ 388-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE — A vehicle which has passenger carrying
capacity and is drawn by a horse(s) controlled by an operator.
OPERATOR — The person who is in control of the horse(s).
OWNER — The person to whom a license is issued.
POLICE CHIEF — The Royal Oak Police Department Police Chief or his or
her designated representative.
TRANSPORT VEHICLE — A trailer towed by a vehicle or a vehicle designed
for the transport of a horse or horses and used to transport horses.
§ 388-3. License required.
No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage engaged in the business or
service of transporting passengers upon any street, road, highway or alley
within the City of Royal Oak without first obtaining a license from the Royal
Oak City Clerk's office.
§ 388-4. Application for license; investigation; recommendation;
expiration.
A. Application. Application for initial licenses as well as renewal shall be
made upon forms as provided by the City to the City Clerk's office with
the accompanying license fee as set by the City Commission.
B. Investigation. Upon receipt of such application, the City Clerk will refer
same to the Police Chief who shall cause a thorough investigation,
including a history of past business experience and state or local law
violations, if any, of the owner and operators of the service.
C. The Police Chief shall recommend denial or approval of an application
within 30 days. In making such determination the Police Chief shall
review the information provided pursuant to Subsection B and shall
also consider:
(1) Penal history. All applicant's convictions, the reason therefor, and
the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release.
§ 379-6 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 388-4
388:389
§ 388-5. Denial of license; appeal.
An applicant denied a license pursuant to § 388-4 may appeal to the City
Commission in writing, stating reasons why the license should be granted.
The City Commission may grant a license following review of the written
appeal.
§ 388-6. Licenses nontransferable.
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be assignable or
transferable, nor shall any person, excepting the person to whom the
license was issued, be permitted to operate said service directly or
indirectly.
§ 388-7. Carriage standards.
The horse-drawn carriage shall at all times when in use as such:
(2) License history. The license history of the applicant and his or her
employees; whether such person has been previously licensed as a
carriage service, has had such license revoked or suspended; the
reasons therefor; and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to
such action.
(3) The number of licenses currently issued by the City to determine if
an additional license(s) would or could cause a nuisance to the
residents and/or businesses in the area of the proposed service, or
could or would be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of
the citizens of the City.
D. All horse-drawn carriage licenses expire at 12:00 midnight on
December 31 of each year.
A. Display adequate headlights, taillights and turn signals as approved by
the Police Chief, and be equipped with any other such safety devices as
are required by the State of Michigan.
B. Display, visible to each side at night, a light as determined by the Police
Chief.
C. Display a reflectorized slow-moving vehicle emblem in conformance
with Section 5.77 of the Uniform Traffic Code.
D. Be equipped with seats for the operator and all passengers.
E. Seat not more than six adult occupants, or not more than six children
under the age of 12 and one adult occupant, in addition to the operator.
F. Not be wider than eight feet, which includes fenders, running boards,
and safety mirrors and devices.
G. Maintain a rubber surface on the wheel traction surface.
§ 388-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 388-8
388:390
§ 388-8. Horse care standards.
The operator shall be responsible for determining that the horse(s):
§ 388-9. Operator's standards.
The operator of the horse-drawn carriage shall:
A. Is fitted with a device to catch all manure or solid waste except when
inside the transport vehicle.
B. Is attended at all times, including when loading and discharging
passengers.
C. Has received a valid certificate of health or veterinarian certificate
which shall be filed with the City Clerk's office annually.
D. From April 1 to November 1 of each year, be shod with nonmetallic
shoes. Horses may be shod with metallic and borium during the period
of November 1 to April 1. The borium is to be not more than 1 1/2
inches wide and 3/8 inch thick at the toe and one inch wide and 3/8 inch
thick at the heel of the shoe.
E. Is not subject to any cruel or harassing treatment.
A. Be subject to all state and City traffic laws applicable to motor vehicles.
B. Possess a valid state operator's license.
C. Require all passengers to be seated except when loading or
discharging.
D. Not operate the carriage when a passenger is in possession of an
alcoholic beverage in a container which is open or uncapped or which
has a broken seal.
E. Flush all liquid waste from the horse immediately with water and spray
with the appropriate chemical as approved by the Police Chief to
eliminate all noxious odors and bacteria.
F. Not be required to give a person or persons a ride in the carriage on
demand of said person as long as such refusal is not based on religion,
race, color, national origin or sex.
G. Not operate during those days and times of day nor operate upon those
streets, public places and quasi-public places prohibited by regulations
or rules promulgated by the Royal Oak City Commission.
H. Be in control of the horse(s) at all times.
I. Comply with all state laws, local ordinances, City rules and regulations,
and agreements entered into in consideration for the issuance of the
license.
§ 388-8 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 388-10
388:391
§ 388-10. Insurance requirements.
§ 388-11. Stabling overnight.
No horse used in the business of horse-drawn carriages shall be stabled
overnight within the limits of the City.
§ 388-12. Loading and unloading horses from transport vehicles.
Horses shall not be loaded into or unloaded out of their transport vehicle on
a public right-of-way or in a residential zone district.
§ 388-13. Renewal of license.
Application to renew a license shall be filed at least 45 days prior to the date
of expiration and be accompanied by the annual fee as set by resolution of
the City Commission.
§ 388-14. Revocation or suspension with cause.
Each business which is licensed to operate a horse-drawn carriage service
within the City shall operate in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations of the City of Royal Oak and State of Michigan. Upon any
violation of this chapter, pursuant to § 388-15 the City Commission may,
after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend such license.
§ 388-15. Procedure for revocation or suspension with cause.
A. The owner of the service shall provide insurance in at least the
following minimum amounts, with the City named as an insured on all
policies other than workers' compensation insurance:
(1) Public liability: $500,000/occurrence, $500,000/aggregate;
(2) Property damage: $500,000/occurrence, $500,000/aggregate;
(3) Comprehensive general liability, including horse or horses
coverage: $500,000/incident.
B. The licensee shall provide general liability coverage on
"Comprehensive General Liability" forms and shall provide the
following coverage for premises: liability, personal injury liability,
products liability and horse or horses liability. Insurance certificates
evidencing all such insurances shall be deposited with the City and
shall indicate the City as an additional named insured. Certificates of
insurance shall also be provided for workers' compensation insurance.
All certificates of insurance shall contain a clause requiring ten-day
notice of cancellation to the City prior to the cancellation of any
insurance coverage.
A. No license may be revoked or suspended until after due notice and
hearing before the City Commission or a hearing officer appointed by
§ 388-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 388-15
388:392
§ 388-16. Criteria for revocation or suspension with cause.
The City Commission may revoke or suspend a license upon a determination
based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that
any of the following exists:
the Commission to determine if grounds for revocation or suspension
exist. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and served at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing by serving the owner by first class
mail at the address on the license application.
B. The notice shall contain the following:
(1) The date, time and place of hearing.
(2) Notice of the proposed action.
(3) Reasons for the proposed action.
(4) The names of witnesses known at the time who will testify.
(5) A statement that the licensee may present evidence on his or her
behalf and confront and cross-examine witnesses against him or
her.
(6) A statement requiring the licensee to notify the City Attorney's
office at least three days prior to the hearing date if they intend to
contest the proposed action and to provide the names of witnesses,
known at that time, who will testify on the licensee's behalf.
C. Written notice of revocation or suspension together with the reasons
therefor shall be given by the City Clerk to the licensee by first class
mail at the address on the application.
A. Failure to comply with rules and regulations and agreements entered
into in consideration for the issuance of the license.
B. Violations of state laws or local ordinances.
C. Maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the operation of this
service, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
(1) Failure to maintain the roadway in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) A pattern of patron conduct which is in violation of the law and/or
disturbs the peace, order and tranquility within the City.
(3) Any advertising, promotion or activity in connection with the
licensed service which causes, creates or contributes to the
disruption of normal activity for those in the neighborhood of the
licensed activity.
§ 388-15 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 388-17
388:393
§ 388-17. Revocation without cause.
The City Commission retains the right to terminate the use of City streets,
roads, highways, and alleys for such service and can revoke all licenses
issued under this chapter at any time without cause upon 30 days' written
notice to the owner.
§ 388-18. Hours of service.
No horse-drawn carriage service shall be allowed between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 388-19. Responsibility of Police Chief.
§ 388-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90
days, or be both so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.
A. The Police Chief shall make rules and regulations he also deems
necessary to maintain safe and efficient operations of horse-drawn
carriages within the City of Royal Oak.
B. The Police Chief shall set carriage routes and designate areas as
carriage stops. All licensees shall obey such routes and stop only at
such designated areas to load and unload passengers.
C. The Police Chief, upon completing his investigation, and being satisfied
that all provisions of this chapter and corresponding rules and
regulations have been met, shall direct the City Clerk's office to issue a
license.
D. Whenever the Police Chief finds on the basis of the weather or any other
extenuating circumstance which poses a threat to carriage occupants,
operators or horses, and/or requires motor vehicle traffic be expedited,
the Police Chief shall order the immediate cessation of carriage rides
until such time as the existing condition subsides and allows for the
normal resumption of the service.
§ 388-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 388-20
388:394
Chapter 394
HOTELS, BOARDINGHOUSES, BED-AND-BREAKFASTS AND
TOURIST HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hotel-Motel Committee — See Ch. 39, Art.
VIII.
Construction code enforcement — See Ch.
260.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 340.
Housing — See Ch. 400.
Licensing — See Ch. 425.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
§ 394-1. Short title. [Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hotel, Motel, Bed-and-
Breakfast, Rooming House, Boardinghouse and Tourist Home License and
Regulation Ordinance."
§ 394-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to
have the meanings hereafter set forth:
ACCOMMODATION(S) — The room or other space provided to transient
guests for lodging or sleeping, including furnishings and other accessories
therein. Accommodations do not include food or beverage.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST OPERATIONS — A use which is subordinate to the
principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in
which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for
payment.[Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
HOTEL AND/OR MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing
units (a bedroom, closet and a bathroom) or rooms, which provide for
accommodations for transient persons for compensation for periods of 30
consecutive days or less, except as provided in § 394-13.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises licensed pursuant to this
chapter.[Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
ROOMING AND/OR BOARDING HOUSE — Any building where, for
compensation, and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging or
lodging and meals are provided for more than three persons.[Added
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
TOURIST HOME — Any building in which there are less than 10 rooms
or rental units, other than rooms which are occupied by the family of the
owner or lessee, which provides accommodations for transient persons for
compensation for periods of 30 consecutive days or less, except as provided
in § 394-13.
§ 388-20 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 394-2
388:395
TRANSIENT — A person lodging for compensation in any hotel, motel or
tourist home for a period of 30 consecutive days or less.
§ 394-3. License required; expiration; authority to impose
conditions. [Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11; 2-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-2; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-03; 11-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-21]
No person or other business entity of any sort shall operate a hotel, motel,
bed-and-breakfast, rooming house, boardinghouse and/or tourist home
within the City of Royal Oak without first having obtained a license for
that purpose. A license shall expire on December 31 following the date
of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. The City may impose
reasonable conditions upon the issuance of any license, including but not
limited to those minimum conditions referenced within this chapter or any
other applicable ordinance of the City of Royal Oak.
§ 394-4. Business plan of operation compliance. [Added 10-16-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-24; amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-21]
Applicants for a license and all licensees shall comply with all applicable
state and City regulations and this general policy, and shall submit a
comprehensive, written plan of operation which must be approved. A
licensee shall operate the premises consistent with any representations
made to the City Commission in obtaining the license. Failure of such
compliance or variance from the plan presented may result in the refusal by
the City Commission to renew a license or in revocation of the license. All
plans of operation or changes thereto shall be subject to the approval of the
City Commission.
§ 394-5. License review. [Amended 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-03]
The City Commission may undertake a review of any license at any time to
determine whether the license should be renewed, suspended or revoked.
§ 394-6. Application for license. [Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-2]
Every applicant for a license to operate a licensed establishment shall file an
application with the City Clerk's office upon a form provided by the City of
Royal Oak and pay a nonrefundable application fee. Such fee shall be set by
resolution of the City Commission and may be amended from time to time.
The application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each applicant.
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the name, residence address and
telephone number of each of the officers and directors of said
corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation if that individual is or will be involved in
the management and/or operation of the licensed establishment,
§ 394-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 394-6
388:396
the address of the corporation itself, and the name and address
of a resident agent in Oakland County, Michigan. The applicant
shall also provide documentation that the corporation is in good
standing in the state of incorporation.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the partnership, and
the name, residence address and telephone number of each of the
partners having 10% of an ownership interest if that individual is or
will be involved in the management and/or operation of the
licensed establishment, and the name, address and telephone
number of a resident agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
(3) If the applicant owns stock or has a financial interest in any other
licensed establishment, the name, address and telephone number
of the corporation, and the name, address and telephone number of
each licensed establishment.
B. The history of an applicant in the operation of a licensed establishment,
or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether
or not such person has previously operated in the City or another
municipality or state under license, has had such license revoked or
suspended, and the reason therefor.
C. Applicant's social security number, driver's license number, if any, and
date of birth.
D. Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application, including the
name, address and telephone number of any and all employers.
E. All criminal convictions in the preceding 10 years, other than traffic
violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crime, and
place convicted.
F. Authorization for the City of Royal Oak, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application. The application shall give such
additional information and identification necessary to discover the truth
of the matters required to be set forth in the application or renewal,
including all tax records, business records, profit/loss statements and
any other financial information regarding the operation of the licensed
premises. [Amended 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-03]
G. A statement concerning the proposed rates to be charged by the
establishment.
H. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant.
I. The successful applicant shall coordinate and schedule, in conjunction
with the Fire Chief and the Chief Building Inspector, or their
designee(s), timely inspections of the licensed premises not less than
annually and shall acquiesce, in writing, to such other inspection(s) as
§ 394-6 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 394-6
388:397
§ 394-7. Investigation.
Upon receipt of such application, the City Clerk shall refer same as follows:
may be deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of the Fire Chief and
the Chief Building Inspector, or their designee(s). [Added 9-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-03]
A. To the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative, who shall
investigate and determine whether the person making application for
such license is of suitable character to conduct or maintain such a
business in the City of Royal Oak. The Chief of Police or his or her
designated representative shall forward to the City Clerk the results of
such investigation along with a recommendation concerning whether or
not the license should be granted.
(1) The phrase "of suitable character" as used in this chapter for the
purpose of licensing shall be construed to mean the propensity on
the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a
fair, lawful, honest and open manner.
(2) In making his or her determination, the Chief of Police shall
consider:
(a) Penal history. All of the applicant's convictions in the preceding
10 years, other than traffic violations, the reasons therefor and
the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release.
(b) License and permit history. The license and permit history of
the applicant; whether such applicant, in previously operating
in this City or state or in another municipality or state under a
license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or
suspended, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the
applicant subsequent to such action.
(c) Other information. The Chief of Police may consider any other
information and documentation, which the Chief considers
relevant to make a determination as to whether the applicant is
of suitable character, which information may include, upon
request, all tax records, business records, profit/loss
statements and any other financial information regarding the
operation of the licensed premises. [Amended 9-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-03]
(3) The Chief of Police or his or her designated representative shall
complete his or her investigation and determination within 30 days
of being provided with the application.
(4) If an applicant is found to be unqualified for a license because of
lack of suitable character, or similar criteria, the applicant shall be
furnished by the City Clerk with a statement containing
information as to the basis for this determination.
§ 394-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 394-7
388:398
§ 394-8. Refusal, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license.
A license requested under this chapter may be refused by the City Clerk
or his or her designated representative, and any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter may be suspended by the City Manager or his
or her designated representative, and revoked or not renewed by the City
Commission, for cause. The term "cause" as used in this chapter shall
include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to
exist for which a license is issued, or upon any premises used in connection
therewith, which act, omission or condition is contrary to the health, safety
and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature, is
unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license issued, or is forbidden by
this chapter or any applicable law. Cause shall include, but not be limited
to:
B. If the investigation by the Chief of Police or his or her designated
representative does not evidence a lack of suitable character, the City
Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief Building Inspector, Fire
Chief, or their designated representatives, who shall cause a thorough
inspection of the premises to be made to ensure that all pertinent
provisions of state law and local ordinances are being complied with.
The results of such inspections shall be returned to the City Clerk
within 30 days of the date the application was referred.
A. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application for license.
B. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the operation of the licensed
business.
C. Any material violation of this chapter or of the regulations authorized
herein.
D. Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance which creates a
risk to the health, safety or welfare of the transients or to the
community, or brings into question whether the licensee is of suitable
character to operate the business.
E. Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the
licensed premises. For purposes of this chapter, "nuisance" shall be
given the normal and customary meaning, and shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing,
zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes.
(2) A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is in violation of the
law and/or interferes with the health, safety and welfare of the
residential or commercial properties in the area.
§ 394-7 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 394-8
388:399
§ 394-9. Authority to revoke license.
Each establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the
City of Royal Oak and the State of Michigan. Upon any violation of this
chapter pursuant to § 394-8, after notice and hearing, the City Commission
may revoke such license.
§ 394-10. Procedure for recommendation on nonrenewal,
revocation or suspension.
(3) Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties.
F. Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises
by the City's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of
this chapter.
G. Failure of the licensee to pay personal property taxes, other City
obligations, and real property taxes by February 14 of each year arising
from their use and occupancy of the property. A licensee who does not
own the real property is not responsible for the payment of the real
property taxes unless the lease requires such payment.
A. Before taking any action concerning nonrenewal, revocation or
suspension of a license, the City Manager, or his or her designated
representative, shall serve the licensee by first class mail, mailed at
least 10 days prior to a hearing, with notice of hearing, which notice
shall contain the following:
(1) Date, time and place of hearing.
(2) Notice of the proposed action.
(3) Reasons for the proposed action.
(4) Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify.
(5) A statement that the licensee may be represented by legal counsel,
present evidence, testimony and confront and cross-examine
adverse witnesses.
(6) A statement requiring the licensee to notify the Royal Oak City
Attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if he,
she or it intends to contest the proposed action, and to provide the
names of witnesses known at that time who will testify on his, her
or its behalf.
B. Upon completion of the hearing, the City Commission shall submit to
the licensee a written statement of its findings and determination
within 60 days. [Amended 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-03]
§ 394-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 394-10
388:400
§ 394-11. License refusal; hearing.
Any person whose initial request for a license is refused shall have a right to
a hearing before the City Commission, provided a written request therefor
is filed with the City Manager within 10 days following such refusal. The
City Commission shall have the right to affirm and sustain any refusal to
issue a license, or the City Commission may grant any license.
§ 394-12. Rules and regulations.
The following rules, regulations and conditions shall be observed by each
licensee under this chapter:
C. During the procedure for nonrenewal, revocation or suspension, the
licensee will be permitted to continue to operate until such time as the
findings and determination is served upon the licensee by mail or
otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. [Amended
9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-03]
A. All accommodations must afford easy and unobstructed access to a hall
or passageway or to the outdoors.
B. In every hotel, motel or tourist home hereafter erected, all
accommodations shall be in compliance with the BOCA National
Building Code, the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code and/or
all applicable building codes in the City of Royal Oak.
C. In a tourist home, there must be provided at least one toilet, washing
facilities and shower or bathtub for each eight occupants or less. Hot
and cold running water must be provided.
D. The third or higher floor of any building shall not be used for lodging or
sleeping purposes unless equipped with fire escape facilities as
required by all applicable regulations and codes, and unless approved
by the proper authorities designated in those regulations and codes.
E. Rooms must be kept clean and free from dirt, vermin, garbage and
rubbish.
F. Clean sheets, pillow cases and towels must be provided before a
transient guest may occupy a bed previously occupied by another
person.
G. The cooking of food in or upon the premises is prohibited, other than in
a kitchenette facility in compliance with applicable codes and
regulations, and approved by the proper authorities designated in those
codes and regulations. The use of hotplates or similar equipment which
can be utilized to heat or cook food is specifically prohibited. A notice to
this effect shall be conspicuously posted in each accommodation.
H. A register shall be provided and maintained on the premises near the
main entrance and shall be submitted, upon demand, to any official or
§ 394-10 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 394-12
388:401
police officer of the City of Royal Oak. The register shall contain the
following information subscribed in ink:
(1) The correct name and address of every guest, renting or occupying
a room, including but not limited to nonpaying minors and/or
dependents. The guest shall furnish proof of identity by showing a
valid driver's license or voter registration card or similar
identification, and provide a date of birth.
(2) Each guest with a motor vehicle on the site shall provide the make,
year and model of the motor vehicle, as well as the license plate
number.
(3) The date and time of arrival and date of departure of every guest,
and the number of days each guest has been at the establishment
during the calendar year.
(4) Where two persons occupy the same room and at least one of the
persons is a minor, the relationship of said person shall be noted on
the register.
I. No licensee shall knowingly permit any accommodations and/or other
location on the premises to be used for an unlawful purpose.
J. All licensees shall permit free access by the Chief Building Inspector,
Fire Marshal, Chief of Police, or their representatives at all reasonable
times.
K. No licensee shall permit or allow his agent, servant or employee to
permit any minor under the age of 18 years of age to obtain
accommodations in any establishment licensed under this chapter,
unless the licensee, his agent, servant or employee forthwith notifies
the Royal Oak Police Department, orally and in writing, of the presence
of such minor.
L. Accommodations shall not be made available for a period in hourly
increments, nor shall any accommodation be made available more than
one time during the eighteen-hour period of 12:00 noon to the following
morning at 6:00 a.m. The right to occupy any accommodation shall not
be assigned or transferred. [Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-2270]
M. Occupancy of a room shall be limited to the number of beds in the room,
but in no event shall occupancy exceed more than two persons for every
one bed.
N. These rules and regulations (§§ 394-12, 394-14 and 394-17 of this
chapter) shall be conspicuously displayed with the license at each
registration area.
70.Editor's Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided that the ordinance shall take effect
1-1-2015, and on or before 7-1-2014 every licensee shall have a copy of the ordinance
posted in a conspicuous location on the licensed premises.
§ 394-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 394-12
388:402
§ 394-13. Limitations on continuous and cumulative occupancy.
[Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11; 11-18-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-2271]
Accommodations in any establishment shall not be made available for more
than 30 consecutive days, or for more than 60 days total in any consecutive
one-hundred-eighty-day period, unless the establishment meets or exceeds
all the requirements for Residential Group R-2 under the Michigan Building
Code, as amended. If an accommodation is rented to or otherwise occupied
by any person for either of the maximum time periods allowed by this
section, then such accommodation may not again be rented or occupied by
that same person or any person that was a member of that person’s party.
§ 394-14. Reporting false information.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to inscribe in any hotel,
motel or tourist home register or to give for the purpose of being inscribed
in such register any false information. Knowing or having reasonable cause
to be believe such information to be false, the licensee or his employee
shall notify the Police Department of such fact, and failure to do so shall be
grounds for revocation of the license.
§ 394-15. Smoking in bed prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any transient guest to smoke while in bed, or for any
licensee to permit smoking in bed. A notice to this effect shall be posted in
each sleeping room.
§ 394-16. Reporting of fires.
Each licensee under this chapter shall cause the Fire Department of the
City of Royal Oak to be immediately notified when a fire occurs within
his establishment. Any person therein who discovers such a fire shall
immediately notify the person in charge of the place of registration.
O. Each room of every establishment shall receive daily housekeeping/
cleaning and inspection. [Added 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-24]
P. Any accumulations of snow shall be removed from the licensed
establishment in a timely manner, and such snow removed from parking
lots and all other areas of the licensed establishment shall not be placed
on adjacent public easements, sidewalks, or on or near a fire hydrant.
[Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
Q. Each occupied lodging room of every licensed establishment shall have
a working telephone with direct access to 911 emergency services.
[Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2; amended 9-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-12]
71.Editor's Note: Section 8 of this ordinance provided that the ordinance shall take effect
1-1-2015, and on or before 7-1-2014 every licensee shall have a copy of the ordinance
posted in a conspicuous location on the licensed premises.
§ 394-12 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES § 394-17
388:403
§ 394-17. No assignment of license.
No license granted pursuant to this chapter may be assigned, transferred
or otherwise utilized by any other person or entity other than the licensee.
§ 394-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90
days, or be both so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 400
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Commission — See Ch. 87.
Construction code enforcement — See Ch.
260.
Hotels, boardinghouses, bed-and-breakfasts
and tourist homes — See Ch. 394.
§ 394-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 394-18
400:404
ARTICLE I
Housing Standards
[Adopted 3-4-1963 by Ord. No. 63-6]
§ 400-1. Adoption of standards.
Act No. 167, of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended (MCLA §§ 125.401
to 125.519, Compiled Laws of 1948), known as the "Housing Law of
Michigan," is hereby adopted by reference as an ordinance of the City of
Royal Oak.
§ 400-2. Violations and penalties.
Every person who shall violate or assist in the violation of any provision of
the said Housing Law of Michigan shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100 or
be imprisoned in the Royal Oak City Jail or the Oakland County Jail for a
period not exceeding 90 days, or be both so fined and imprisoned in the
discretion of the court.
§ 400-3. Effect on other ordinances.
Nothing herein contained shall repeal any ordinance or part of any
ordinance heretofore in effect, or hereinafter enacted by the City of Royal
Oak.
§ 400-4. Availability of copies.
Copies of said Act No. 167, of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended,72 shall
be kept in the office of the City Clerk, such copies to be available for public
inspection and use by the public.
72.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.401 et seq.
§ 400-1 HOUSING § 400-4
400:405

ARTICLE II
Fair Housing
[Adopted 2-7-1977 by Ord. No. 77-4]
§ 400-5. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fair Housing
Ordinance."
§ 400-6. Definitions.
For the purpose of the provisions of this article, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
AGE — Chronological age.
COMMISSION — The Human Relations Commission established by this
article.
COMMISSIONER — A member of the Commission.
COMPLAINT — A written statement, given under oath, alleging an unfair
housing practice.
FAMILY — Its customary definition as well as a single individual.
HANDICAP — A determinable physical or mental condition of an individual
or a history of such condition which may result from disease, accident,
condition of birth, or functional disorder which constitutes a physical or
mental limitation which is unrelated to an individual's ability to acquire,
rent, or maintain property.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Includes any improved or unimproved
real property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home of residence of
one or more individuals.
NATIONAL ORIGIN — Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
PERSON — Includes an individual, association, corporation, joint
apprenticeship committee, joint-stock company, labor union, legal
representative, mutual company, partnership, receiver, trust, trustee,
trustee in bankruptcy, unincorporated organization, any other legal or
commercial entity, the state or any governmental entity or agency.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESMAN — A person, whether licensed or
not; who for, or with, the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists,
sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, or who negotiates
or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself out
as engaged in these activities, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate
a loan secured or to be secured by mortgage or other encumbrance upon
real property, or who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a
publication, or a person employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
§ 400-5 HOUSING § 400-6
400:407
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — Includes the sale, exchange, rental or
lease of real property.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes buildings, structure, real estate, land,
tenements, lease-holds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums
and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
STATE COMMISSION — The Civil Rights Commission created by the
Constitution of 1963.
TO PUBLISH OR ADVERTISE — A communication by the owner or lessor
or a person at his request relative to an offer of sale, rental or lease of a
housing accommodation.
§ 400-7. Human Relations Commission.
§ 400-8. Unfair housing practices.
A. There is hereby created a Human Relations Commission which shall
consist of five members duly appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the City Commission to serve for terms of four years each; provided,
however, that three members of the first such Commission so appointed
shall serve for terms of two years each.
B. The Commission shall have the power to establish its own rules of
procedure which are not in conflict with the procedural requirements of
Act 112, Public Acts of 1968, State of Michigan, as amended,73 and all
complaints filed with the Commission shall be handled in the manner
required by the rules of the Commission.
C. The Commission shall conduct such research, informational, and
educational programs and provide such services as in its discretion it
believes will further the purpose of this article and the improvement of
human relations and equal opportunity in the City of Royal Oak.
D. The Human Relations Commission created by this article shall have all
the powers and duties within its geographical jurisdiction which the
State Commission has under the provisions of Chapter 4 of Act No. 112,
Public Acts of 1968, State of Michigan, as amended; provided, however,
that said Human Relations Commission shall not issue cease and desist
orders without first obtaining the written approval of the State
Commission as required by the provisions of Chapter 6 of Act No. 112,
as amended.
A. It is an unfair housing practice for an owner, a real estate broker or real
estate salesman, or any other person to commit any of the following
practices because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital
status, age or handicap:
(1) To refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction.
73.Editor's Note: See now MCLA § 37.2101 et seq.
§ 400-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 400-8
400:408
(2) To refuse to engage in a real estate transaction.
(3) To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of
facilities or services in connection therewith.
(4) To refuse to receive from, or to fail to transmit to, a person a bona
fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction.
(5) To represent to a person that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to
fail to bring a property listing to his attention, or to refuse to permit
him to inspect real property, under reasonable conditions.
(6) To publish or advertise, directly or indirectly, an intent to
discriminate or limit.
(7) To use a form of application for a real estate transaction for the
purpose of limiting or discriminating.
(8) To make a record or inquiry in connection with a prospective real
estate transaction which indicates the race, color, religion, or
national origin, sex, marital status, or handicap of a person.
(9) To offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property with
the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a
real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services
in connection therewith with respect to race, color, religion or
national origin, sex, marital status, age or handicap.
B. It is an unfair housing practice for a person, for the purpose of inducing
a real estate transaction from which he may benefit financially:
(1) To initiate, instigate or participate in a series of representations,
advertisements or contacts within a block, neighborhood or area
designed to promote real estate transactions in the block,
neighborhood or area based on the implications, directly or
indirectly, that changes have occurred or will or may occur in the
composition with respect to race, color, religion, national origin,
sex, marital status, age or handicap of the owners or occupants in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is
located, or that changes will or may result in the lowering of
property values, or an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior or
a decline in the quality of the schools in the block, neighborhood or
area in which the real property is located.
(2) To solicit the sale or listing for sale of real property, by telephone,
mail or personally, after the property owner has expressly
requested the solicitor or the company the solicitor represents to
cease such solicitation.
C. It is an unfair housing practice:
§ 400-8 HOUSING § 400-8
400:409
§ 400-9. Personal information.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit an owner, lender, or his
agent from requiring that an applicant who seeks to buy, rent, lease or
obtain financial assistance for housing accommodations supply information
concerning the person's financial, business or employment status, or other
information designed solely to determine the person's credit worthiness,
but not concerning race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status,
age or handicap. Nothing in this article shall require an owner, real estate
broker, or other person to enter into a real estate transaction with a person
who does not otherwise have the legal capacity to enter into a self-binding
contract.
§ 400-10. Exclusions.
Section 400-8 of this article does not apply:
(1) To retaliate or discriminate against a person because he has
opposed an unfair housing practice, or because he has made a
charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in an
investigation, proceeding or hearing under this article.
(2) To coerce a person to engage in an unfair housing practice.
(3) To interfere willfully with the performance of a duty or in the
exercise of a power by the Commission or one of its members or
representatives under this article.
(4) To obstruct or prevent willfully a person from complying with the
provisions of this article or an order issued thereunder.
A. To the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains
housing accommodations for not more than two families living
independently of each other, if the owner or lessor or a member of his
family resides in one of the housing accommodations.
B. To the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling by the
owner or lessor if he or a member of his family resides therein.
C. To the sale or rental by the owner or lessor of a housing accommodation
in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than
two families living independently of each other which was not in any
manner listed or publicly advertised for sale or rental.
D. To the rental of a housing accommodation for not more than 12 months
by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him and maintained as
his home for at least three months immediately preceding occupancy by
the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal
residence.
E. With respect to the age provision only, to the sale, rental or lease of
housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state, or
§ 400-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 400-10
400:410
§ 400-11. Criminal complaint; violations and penalties.
A violation of this article may be proceeded upon by means of a criminal
complaint only when preceded by a written authorization from the Human
Relations Commission. Thereafter, any violation of this article shall be
deemed a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or by
imprisonment of not more than 90 days, within the discretion of the court.
local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations
otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the
purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons 50 years of
age or older.
§ 400-10 HOUSING § 400-11
400:411
Chapter 402
HUMAN RIGHTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 66. Immunodeficiency virus testing — See Ch.
403.
§ 402-1. Intent.
It is the intent of the City that no person be denied equal protection of the
laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his or her civil or
political rights or be discriminated against because of actual or perceived
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, condition of
pregnancy, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income,
family responsibilities, sexual orientation, gender identity or HIV status.
§ 402-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meaning:
AGE — Chronological age.
DISCRIMINATE — To make a decision, offer to make a decision, or refrain
from making a decision, based in whole or in part on the actual or perceived
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, condition of
pregnancy, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income,
family responsibilities, sexual orientation, gender identity, or HIV status
of another person, that person's relatives, or that person's associates.
Discrimination based on sex includes sexual harassment, which means
unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or
physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature when: a) submission
to such conduct or communication is, either explicitly or implicitly, made
a term or condition of obtaining employment, public accommodations, or
housing; b) submission to or rejection of such conduct or communication
by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting such individual's
employment, public accommodations or housing; and/or c) such conduct or
communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with
an individual's employment, public accommodations or housing, or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations,
or housing environment. Discrimination based upon actual or perceived
physical or mental limitation includes discrimination because of the use of
adaptive devices or aids by an individual.
FAMILY RESPONSIBILITIES — The state of being or the potential to
become a contributor to the support of a person or persons in a family
relationship.
§ 400-11 ROYAL OAK CODE § 402-2
400:412
GENDER IDENTITY — A person's actual or perceived gender, including a
person's gender identity, self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior,
whether or not that gender identity, self-image, appearance, expression, or
behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person's sex
at birth as being either female or male.
HIV STATUS — The physical condition of a person who has, or has been
diagnosed as having been infected with, the human immunodeficiency virus,
whether or not that person has or has been diagnosed as having acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
related complex.
HOUSING FACILITY — Any dwelling unit or facility used for a person to
regularly sleep and keep personal belongings including, but not limited to, a
house, apartment, rooming house, housing cooperative, hotel, motel, tourist
home, retirement home or nursing home.
MARITAL STATUS — The state of being married, unmarried, divorced, or
widowed.
MENTAL LIMITATION — A limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to
one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions
available to such person for hire or promotion; a limitation of mental
capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain
property; or a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability
to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges and
accommodations of a place of public accommodation. "Mental limitation"
includes, but is not limited to, developmental and psychological disabilities.
"Mental limitation" does not include any condition caused by the current
use of alcohol or the current illegal use of a controlled substance.
PERCEIVED — The perception of the person who acts, and not the
perception of the person for or against whom the action is taken.
PHYSICAL LIMITATION — A limitation of physical capabilities unrelated
to one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions
available to such person for hire or promotion; a limitation of physical
capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain
property; or a limitation of physical capabilities unrelated to one's ability
to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges and
accommodations of a place of public accommodation. "Physical limitation"
includes, but is not limited to, blindness or partial sightedness, deafness or
hearing impairment, muteness, partial or total absence of physical member,
speech impairment and motor impairment. "Physical limitation" does not
include any condition caused by the current use of alcohol or the current
illegal use of a controlled substance.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — An educational, governmental,
health, day care, entertainment, cultural, recreational, refreshment,
transportation, financial institution, accommodation, business or other
facility of any kind, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages
or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise made available
§ 402-2 HOUSING § 402-2
400:413
to the public, or which receives financial support through the solicitation of
the general public or through governmental subsidy of any kind.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality,
or bisexuality, by orientation or practice.
SOURCE OF INCOME — Any legal source from which a person obtains
money.
§ 402-3. Discriminatory housing practices.
§ 402-4. Discriminatory public accommodation practices.
No person shall discriminate in making available full and equal access to
all goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of any place
of public accommodation. No person shall prohibit a breastfeeding mother
from or segregate a breastfeeding mother within any public accommodation
where she and the child would otherwise be authorized to be.
§ 402-5. Discriminatory employment practices.
§ 402-6. Other prohibited practices.
A. No person shall discriminate in leasing, selling or otherwise making
available any housing facilities.
B. No person shall discriminate in the terms, conditions, maintenance, or
repair in providing any housing facility.
C. No person shall refuse to lend money for the purchase or repair of any
real property or to insure any real property solely because of the
location in the City of such real property.
D. No person shall promote real estate transactions by representing that
changes are occurring or will occur in an area with respect to race,
religion or national origin.
E. No person shall place a sign or other display on any real property which
indicates that the property is for sale or has been sold when it is not for
sale or has not recently been sold.
A. No person shall discriminate in the employment, compensation, work
classifications, conditions or terms, promotion or demotion, or
termination of employment of any person.
B. No person shall discriminate in limiting membership, conditions of
membership or termination of membership in any labor union or
apprenticeship program.
A. No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement,
publish, post or broadcast any advertisement, sign or notice which
discriminates or indicates discrimination in providing housing,
employment or public accommodations.
§ 402-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 402-6
400:414
§ 402-7. Information and investigation.
No person shall provide false information to any police officer investigating
an alleged violation of this chapter.
§ 402-8. Conciliation agreements.
In cases involving alleged violations of this chapter, the City may enter
into agreements whereby persons agree to methods of terminating
discrimination or to reverse the effects of past discrimination. A violation
of such an agreement shall be a violation of this chapter. The City Attorney
may commence a civil action to enforce a conciliation agreement.
§ 402-9. Discriminatory effects.
No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement which
has the effect of creating unequal opportunities according to actual or
perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight,
condition of pregnancy, source of income, family responsibilities, sexual
orientation, marital status, physical or mental limitation, gender identity
or HIV status for a person to obtain housing, employment or public
accommodation, except for a bona fide business necessity. Such a necessity
does not arise due to a mere inconvenience or because of suspected or
actual objection to such a person by neighbors, customers, or other persons.
§ 402-10. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, the following practices
shall not be violations of this chapter:
B. No person shall discriminate in the publication or distribution of
advertising material, information or solicitation regarding housing,
employment or public accommodations.
C. No agent, broker, labor union, employment agency or any other
intermediary shall discriminate in making referrals, listings or
providing information with regard to housing, employment or public
accommodations.
D. No person shall coerce, threaten or retaliate against a person for
making a complaint or assisting in the investigation regarding a
violation or alleged violation of this chapter, nor require, request,
conspire with, assist or coerce another person to retaliate against a
person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation.
E. No person shall conspire with, assist, coerce or request another person
to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this chapter.
A. For a religious organization or institution to restrict any of its facilities
of housing or accommodations which are operated as a direct part of
religious activities to persons of the denomination involved or to
§ 402-6 HOUSING § 402-10
400:415
§ 402-11. Violations and penalties.
restrict employment opportunities for officers, religious instructors and
clergy to persons of that denomination.
B. For the owner of an owner-occupied one-family or two-family dwelling,
or a housing facility or public accommodation facility, respectively,
devoted entirely to the housing and accommodation of individuals of
one sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex.
C. To limit occupancy in a housing project or to provide public
accommodations or employment privileges or assistance to persons of
low income, over 55 years of age, or who are handicapped.
D. To engage in a bona fide effort to establish an affirmative action
program to improve opportunities in employment for minorities and
women.
E. To discriminate based on a person's age when such discrimination is
required by state, federal or local law.
F. To refuse to enter a contract with an unemancipated minor.
G. To refuse to admit to a place of public accommodation serving alcoholic
beverages a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages.
H. To refuse to admit persons under 18 years of age to a business
providing entertainment or selling literature which the operator of said
business deems unsuitable for minors.
I. For an educational institution to limit the use of its facilities to those
affiliated with such institution.
J. To provide discounts on products or service to students, minors and
senior citizens.
K. To discriminate in any arrangement for the sharing of a dwelling unit.
L. To restrict use of lavatories and locker room facilities on the basis of
sex.
M. For a governmental institution to restrict any of its facilities or to
restrict employment opportunities based on duly adopted institutional
policies that conform to federal and state laws and regulations.
N. To restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or
on an athletic team on the basis of age or sex.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil infraction,
punishable by a fine of not more than $500, plus the costs of
investigation and prosecution. Upon a finding or an admission of
responsibility, the court may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or
order necessary to enforce this chapter.
§ 402-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 402-11
400:416
Chapter 403
IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS TESTING
§ 403-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Immunodeficiency
Virus (HIV) Testing Ordinance."
§ 403-2. Purpose.
This is a chapter to require a defendant, upon the request of the victim
of a crime in which the defendant is alleged to have, by force or threat
of force, compelled the victim to engage in sexual activity to be tested for
the immunodeficiency virus (HIV) no later than 48 hours after the date on
which the information or indictment is presented; to require the victim, or
parent or guardian of the victim, and the defendant to be notified of the
results of the testing as soon as practicable; to require follow-up testing of
the defendant for HIV as may be medically appropriate; and to require the
victim, or parent or guardian of the victim, and the defendant to be notified
of the results of the follow-up testing as soon as practicable.
§ 403-3. Testing required.
At the request of a victim of a crime in which the defendant is alleged to
have, by force or threat of force, compelled the victim to engage in sexual
activity, a court shall require the following:
Chapter 412
B. Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way
the remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the City or any
other person for the prevention or correction of discrimination. Private
actions and remedies shall be in addition to any actions for a violation
which the City may take.
A. The defendant shall be tested for the immunodeficiency virus (HIV) no
later than 48 hours after the date on which the information or
indictment is presented;
B. The victim, or parent or guardian of the victim, and the defendant shall
be notified of the results of the testing as soon as practicable;
C. The defendant shall be required to undergo follow-up testing for HIV as
may be medically appropriate; and
D. The victim, or parent or guardian of the victim, and the defendant shall
be notified of the results of the follow-up testing as soon as practicable.
§ 402-11 IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS TESTING § 403-3
403:417
LANDS, ABANDONED
§ 412-1. Terminology. [Amended 3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379]
The term "abandoned tax lands" as used herein shall be deemed to include
all lands which have been conveyed to the City by the State of Michigan
in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 50 of the PA of 1931.74 The
word "City" herein shall mean the City of Royal Oak, Michigan. The "Clerk,"
"Commission," "Assessor," "City Treasurer" and "City Attorney" shall be
deemed to mean the respective officers of said City. The term "county" shall
be deemed to mean Oakland County, Michigan, and "County Treasurer" and
"Chairman of the Board of Supervisors" shall mean the respective officers
of said county.
§ 412-2. Abandoned tax lands to be held by City. [Amended
3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379]
All abandoned tax lands shall be held by the City until the same can be
advantageously sold or otherwise disposed of and shall be deemed held for
public purposes.
§ 412-3. Report of deeds to Commission; records.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk to report to the Commission the receipt of
all deeds for abandoned tax lands deeded to the City in accordance with the
provisions of Act No. 50, PA. 1931,75 and thereafter the Clerk shall record
all such deeds as soon as practicable in the office of the Register of Deeds
of Oakland County, Michigan.
§ 412-4. Clerk to report lands to Assessor.
The Clerk shall likewise report all said lands for which deeds have been
received to the Assessor, and such lands shall thereafter be exempt from
taxation so long as they remain unsold.
§ 412-5. Appraisal Board. [Amended 10-28-1935 by Ord. No. 295;
3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379]
All lands deeded to the City shall be appraised by an Appraisal Board to be
appointed by the Commission, consisting of three members to be appointed
at the first meeting in January of each year and who shall serve for a term of
one year or until their successors are appointed and qualified. The members
of the Appraisal Board shall be residents and citizens and may be officials
of the City and shall serve as such without compensation. It shall be the
duty of the Appraisal Board to carefully examine for appraisal all abandoned
tax land, fix a minimum price therefor and report such appraisals to the
74.Editor's Note: Act No. 50, PA of 1931 was repealed by Act No. 234, PA 1941.
75.Editor's Note: Act No. 50, PA of 1931 was repealed by Act No. 234, PA 1941.
§ 403-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 412-5
412:418
Commission as soon thereafter as practicable. Reappraisals of any or all of
said lands may be ordered by the Commission at any time.
§ 412-6. Report of outstanding taxes and special assessments;
report of erroneous parcel descriptions. [Amended 3-18-1940 by
Ord. No. 379]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance of the City to ascertain the
total amount of outstanding taxes and special assessments against each
parcel of tax abandoned lands as shown by the records of the various tax
collecting officials together with all accrued interest and penalties thereon
and report to the Commission the total amount due on each parcel. The
Manager shall cause the descriptions of said parcels to be checked by the
Engineering Department, and if any descriptions are found to be erroneous
or imperfect such fact shall be reported to the Commission.
§ 412-7. Establishing sale price for abandoned lots; schedule of
lands for sale; fee. [Amended 10-28-1935 by Ord. No. 295;
3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379]
As soon as practicable after receiving the foregoing information, the
Commission shall fix a minimum sale price on any or all parcels of tax
abandoned lot except such parcels as are set aside for parks, playgrounds,
streets or other public grounds, or otherwise withheld from sale. In any
case where such minimum price is less than the total amount of taxes and
assessments against the parcel, application shall be made to the Chairmen
of the Board of Supervisors for said officer's approval. A schedule of all
lands offered for sale with the description and location thereof shall be
made a matter of permanent record and a copy furnished the Director of
Finance, City Attorney and City Manager. Copies shall also be furnished
any person interested for the sum of $1 per copy. The Commission may by
resolution withhold any lot or parcel of abandoned tax lands from sale and
dedicate the same to a specific public or municipal purpose.76
§ 412-8. Public or private sales; notice. [Amended 10-28-1935 by
Ord. No. 295; 8-13-1951 by Ord. No. 651]
The Commission may sell any parcel of abandoned tax lands at any time
at not less than the minimum price as last determined. Such lands may be
sold at either public or private sale at not less than the minimum price. In
case of public sale, such sale may be made either at public auction or on
sealed bids. In case of sale on bids, the bids shall be opened at a public
meeting of the Commission, and the Commission shall reserve the right to
reject any and all bids. Each bid shall be accompanied by cash or certified
check to the amount of 5% of the bid. If sold at public auction, the highest
bidder must comply with the terms of the auction and must make a deposit
of at least 5% of the purchase price upon acceptance of his bid. In case any
76.Editor's Note: Original Section 8, regarding auctions, which previously followed this
section, was repealed 10-28-1935 by Ord. No. 295.
§ 412-5 LANDS, ABANDONED § 412-8
412:419
sale at auction or on bids is not completed, the purchaser shall forfeit the
amount of his deposit. If no bids are received, or in case the Commission
deems it of advantage to the City, it may sell any parcel or group of parcels
of abandoned tax lands at private sale, provided that public notice is given
as hereinafter provided, but such notice will not be required for the sale
of a single parcel which, by reason of size, shape or location, is unsuitable
for general purposes and is appraised at less than $500. Notice of any
sale of said lands at public sale by auction or otherwise shall be made
by publishing same in a newspaper of said City once each week for two
successive weeks within the 60 days prior to date of sale, which notice shall
contain a description of the premises to be sold and the minimum price for
each parcel.
§ 412-9. Terms and conditions for sale of land; failure of purchaser
to carry out terms of contract. [Amended 10-28-1935 by Ord. No.
295; 3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379; 8-13-1951 by Ord. No. 651]
The City Commission shall prescribe the terms and conditions upon which
any abandoned tax lands shall be sold. Any parcels sold on sealed bids or
public auction shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder unless
all bids are rejected. Such lands may be sold either for cash or upon
contract. In case of sale on land contract, the down payment shall be at
least 20% of the selling price and at least sufficient to pay the state's
share of delinquent taxes on the lands sold; the remainder of the purchase
price shall be payable upon such terms and at such rate of interest as
may be prescribed by the Commission, provided that no assignment of the
purchaser's right under said contract shall be valid unless a copy of said
assignment is filed with the City Clerk. Any failure of the purchaser on
contract to carry out the terms of the contract shall forfeit the purchaser's
right to receive a conveyance of the premises sold and any payments made
prior to said failure. Any lands sold on contract and forfeited by the failure
of the purchaser to carry out the terms of his contract may be resold upon
such terms and conditions and at such price as may be determined by the
Commission. All payments due on contracts for the sale of such lands shall
be made to the City Treasurer and reported to the Director of Finance, who
shall keep a record of such payments and the balance due thereon. The
Director of Finance shall give written notice of any delinquency in payments
to the City Attorney within 60 days after said delinquency occurs.
§ 412-10. Contracts and deeds; purchase price to be paid in full.
[Amended 3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379; 8-13-1951 by Ord. No. 651]
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prepare proper land contracts
and deeds of conveyance for abandoned tax lands sold as aforesaid, which
contracts and deeds shall be executed on behalf of the City by the Mayor
and Clerk. The City may furnish an abstract of title from the date the City
received title, or a policy of title insurance to the purchaser. No deed shall
be delivered to the purchaser until the purchase price is fully paid.
§ 412-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 412-11
412:420
§ 412-11. Report to Auditor General. [Amended 8-13-1951 by Ord.
No. 651]
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to make a report to the Auditor General
of each sale as required by Section 131 of the General Property Tax Law
(7.188 MSA) as now provided or as hereafter amended.
§ 412-12. Purchase by City; sale to Board of Education. [Amended
3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379]
The Commission shall have the preferred right to purchase at the minimum
price any of the abandoned tax lands for municipal purposes. In such case
the Commission shall appropriate and pay into the abandoned tax land fund
the amount of such minimum price, to be apportioned in the same manner
as other moneys in said fund; likewise the Commission may sell to the Board
of Education of the School District of the City of Royal Oak any of said
abandoned tax lands at the minimum price to be used by said Board for
school purposes.
§ 412-13. Changes to minimum price. [Amended 10-28-1935 by Ord.
No. 295; 3-18-1940 by Ord. No. 379; 8-13-1951 by Ord. No. 651]
The Commission may, by resolution, change the minimum price of any
parcel or parcels of abandoned tax lands if it deems such change advisable
and may authorize the publication of the changed price in a newspaper
having general circulation in the City of Royal Oak.
§ 412-14. Lands remaining unsold after public auction or sale.
If, at any public auction or public sale on bids of abandoned tax lands,
any such lands remain unsold either by reason of failure to receive bids or
because the bids received are unsatisfactory, the Commission may at any
time thereafter offer and sell all or any part of such lands at either public or
private sale at not less than the minimum price.
§ 412-15. Abandoned Tax Land Fund. [Amended 8-13-1951 by Ord.
No. 651]
All moneys received from the sale of abandoned tax lands shall be deposited
in the City Treasury of the City of Royal Oak in a separate fund, to be known
as "Abandoned Tax Land Fund," and until apportioned shall belong to the
City of Royal Oak, the School District of the City of Royal Oak, the County of
Oakland and the State of Michigan, according to their respective interests
as shown by the records of said offices. Such money shall be accounted
for in accordance with Section 131 of the General Property Tax Law of
Michigan as now enacted, or as it may hereafter be amended. If the amount
received for the sale of any one parcel shall exceed the amount of all taxes
against said parcel, such excess shall belong to the contingent fund of the
City.
§ 412-11 LANDS, ABANDONED § 412-16
412:421
§ 412-16. Report of sold parcels; assessment roll.
On or before the 15th day of April in each year, the Clerk shall report to
the Assessor all parcels sold as hereinbefore provided, giving the correct
description of each parcel sold and the name of the purchaser. The Assessor
shall thereupon place said parcels of land on the assessment roll for the
ensuing year and shall assess the property as other real estate in the City is
assessed.
Chapter 420
LIBRARY
CHARTER REFERENCES
Library Board — See Ch. 3, Sec. 48.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Theft and destruction of library
property — See Ch. 278.
§ 412-16 ROYAL OAK CODE § 412-16
412:422
ARTICLE I
Library Board; Funding
[Adopted 1-28-1929 by Ord. No. 215]
§ 420-1. Appropriations; funds. [Amended 5-14-1945 by Ord. No.
459]
The City of Royal Oak shall maintain the Public Library established in
said City as a free Public Library and for such purpose the Commission
shall include in the annual budget such sum as may be deemed necessary
for the purpose of maintaining said library. The amount so appropriated
shall be known as the "Library Fund." Whenever the City Commission
shall determine by resolution that it is expedient to purchase ground and
buildings, or construct buildings for library purposes, it may raise such
moneys as deemed necessary for said purpose, and the amount so raised
shall be known as the "Library Building Fund."
§ 420-2. Library Board of Directors established; appointments;
terms. [Amended 11-27-1939 by Ord. No. 371; 7-6-1943 by Ord. No.
432; 3-13-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9; 4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-9]
The Public Library shall be administered by a Library Board which shall
consist of nine Directors, who shall be residents of the City of Royal Oak and
shall serve without compensation. The Directors shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Commission; one of the Directors may
be a member of the City Commission. The term of appointment of a Director
shall be three years; present members of the Library Board may serve as
Directors until their existing respective terms expire.
§ 420-3. Organization of Board; officials; quorum. [Amended
11-27-1939 by Ord. No. 371; 3-13-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9; 4-22-1996
by Ord. No. 96-9; 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-01]
The Board of Directors shall organize by electing annually at its regular
meeting in January a President, Vice President, Secretary, and such other
officials as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the duties of the
Board. Officers or other officials previously elected in July 2001 will
continue to hold office until the next election. Five members of the Board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 420-4. Powers and duties of Board; building maintenance.
[Amended 11-27-1939 by Ord. No. 371; 5-14-1945 by Ord. No. 459]
A. It shall be the duty of the Library Board to control and govern the
library reading rooms, branches and stations established or to be
established, and for that purpose it may make or adopt such bylaws,
rules or regulations as may be expedient and not inconsistent with the
Charter of the City and the general laws of the State of Michigan. It
shall have the power to appoint a librarian, library assistants, and other
library employees as may be required, fix their compensation within the
§ 420-1 LANDS, ABANDONED § 420-4
412:423
§ 420-5. Construction of new buildings.
Whenever the construction of a library building or buildings is
contemplated, it shall be the duty of the Library Board to prepare detailed
plans and specifications for the same. Such plans and specifications may
be prepared by the Library Board on its own initiative whenever it believes
that the construction of such building or buildings is necessary or desirable,
or shall be prepared whenever requested by the Commission. Said plans
and specifications shall be submitted to the Commission for approval or
rejection, and if approved shall be filed with the City Clerk, and estimates
of the cost of said construction shall be prepared under direction of the City
Manager. If not approved, same shall be returned to the Library Board with
limits of the library budget and terminate their employment, subject to
civil service rules and regulations. It shall have the care and custody of
the books, magazines, furniture, fixtures and equipment in said library
and shall keep such property properly and adequately insured against
loss or damage by fire or other casualty in such amounts and with
such insurers as shall be approved by said Board. Such policies of
insurance shall be deposited with the City Clerk for safe keeping. Said
Library Board shall have the power to impose and collect reasonable
fines for the infringement of established rules and regulations. It may
enter into contract with other municipalities for furnishing the use of
its library facilities and services and make reasonable charges therefor;
it may establish and collect fees for use of such services and facilities
by nonresidents of the City; it may accept donations, contributions
and gifts, either general or for specific purposes, and may expend the
money so received in accordance with any lawful stipulation imposed
by the donor; it may receive any moneys appropriated to it by the
state and disburse same in accordance with the laws governing such
disbursement. All moneys received by the Library Board shall be
deposited with the City Treasurer and, except as otherwise provided by
law or ordinance, credited to the general fund.
B. The Library Board shall have power to purchase books, magazines,
periodicals, library equipment and supplies and incur such other
expenditures for library purposes as may be deemed necessary or
proper; provided, however, that no purchase or lease or single item of
expense in excess of the sum of $500 shall be made without the
approval of the City Commission. Vouchers for payment of library
purchases, salaries and other expenses shall be approved by the
Library Board. Expenditures by the Library Board, except from state
aid funds and funds given in trust for special purposes, shall be limited
to the amount appropriated by the City Commission for library
purposes.
C. The City Commission shall provide suitable quarters for housing the
library and shall provide janitor service, maintenance and heating
therefor. Such janitor service and maintenance shall be under the
supervision of the City Manager.
§ 420-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 420-5
412:424
reasons for their rejection. In case the Library Board fails to prepare such
plans when so requested, same shall be prepared under direction of the
City Manager. The contract or contracts for such construction shall be let
by the Commission as provided by Sections 2 to 10, inclusive, Chapter 15
of the City Charter. Such contract shall provide that a representative of the
Library Board shall have the right to inspect the work and make objections
to any improper or defective or unauthorized work or materials used in
such construction. The Library Board shall designate one of their number to
cooperate with the City Manager in the superintendence of the construction
of any such building or buildings.
§ 420-6. Records and reports.
The said Board shall keep a complete record of its proceedings, and the
same shall be public records. It shall make at the end of the fiscal year and
at any other times when requested by the Commission, a report to the City
Commission, stating the condition of their trust; an account of all moneys
received; how much money has been expended from the Library Fund and
other sources and for what purposes; the number of books and periodicals
on hand; the number added by purchase or gift during the year; the number
lost, missing or worn out; the number of books loaned out, and such other
statistics, information and suggestions as it may deem of general interest.
§ 420-7. Budget.
Not later than 40 days before the end of each fiscal year, the Library
Board shall furnish the City Manager with an estimate of the annual budget
required for the ensuing fiscal year, which budget shall be submitted to
the Commission for approval or rejection at the time the general budget
of the City is so submitted. If rejected the Commission may either amend
the budget and approve same as amended, or may return said budget to
the Library Board with reasons for its rejection, and request an amended
budget from said Board. When the library budget has been approved by
the Commission, the Commission shall levy such tax as may be necessary
to meet the budget appropriation for library purposes. The Library Board
shall not expend in any one year a greater amount than the amount so
approved by the Commission when fixing the budget appropriation for
library purposes; provided, however, the Commission may by resolution
authorize additional expenditures by the Library Board and appropriate
money therefor from the contingent fund.
§ 420-8. Custody of funds; petty cash fund; money received in trust.
[Amended 5-14-1945 by Ord. No. 459]
The City Treasurer shall have custody of all money belonging to the Library
Fund, including cash receipts, and shall pay out such money only upon
proper vouchers as authorized by the City Charter; provided, however, the
Library Board may keep a petty cash fund of not exceeding $100 for the
handling of petty cash disbursements. The custodian of said petty cash fund
shall be designated by the Library Board and shall be required to furnish a
§ 420-5 LANDS, ABANDONED § 420-8
412:425
bond of not less than $1,000. Any money received by the Library in trust for
specific purposes shall be paid out only in accordance with the terms of said
trust. A report of all such gifts and disbursements made therefrom shall be
included in the annual report to the City Commission.
§ 420-9. Use by inhabitants and nonresidents; exclusion of
violators. [Amended 11-27-1939 by Ord. No. 371; 5-14-1945 by Ord.
No. 459]
A. The Library Board shall maintain the said Public Library for the use and
benefit of the inhabitants and freeholders of the City of Royal Oak.
B. All inhabitants and freeholders of the City shall have free use of said
library, subject only to such reasonable rules and regulations as may be
adopted by said Board, and subject further to the right of said Board to
exclude from the use of the Library any and all persons who shall
willfully violate said rules. Nonresidents may be granted permission to
use the library under such conditions and upon payment of such fees as
may be prescribed by the Library Board.
§ 420-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 420-9
412:426
ARTICLE II
Use of Facilities and Materials
[Adopted 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-06]
§ 420-10. Internet or computer access.
A. If the library offers use of the internet or a computer, computer
program, computer network, or computer system to the public, the
library shall restrict access to minors by providing the use of the
internet or a computer, computer program, computer network, or
computer system in the following way:
(1) By making available, to individuals of any age, one or more
terminals that are restricted from receiving obscene matter or
sexually explicit matter that is harmful to minors; and
(2) By reserving to individuals 18 years of age or older, or minors who
are accompanied by their parent or guardian, no more than one
terminal that is not restricted from receiving any material.
B. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
COMPUTER — Any connected, directly interoperable or interactive
device, equipment, or facility that uses a computer program or other
instructions to perform specific operations, including logical,
arithmetic, or memory functions, with or on computer data or a
computer program, and that can store, retrieve, alter, or communicate
the results of the operations to a person, computer program, computer,
computer system, or computer network.
COMPUTER NETWORK — The interconnection of hardwire or wireless
communication lines with a computer through remote terminals, or a
complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers.
COMPUTER PROGRAM — A series of internal or external instructions
communicated in a form acceptable to a computer that directs the
functioning of a computer, computer system, or computer network in
a manner designed to provide or produce products or results from the
computer, computer system, or computer network.
COMPUTER SYSTEM — A set of related, connected or unconnected
computer equipment, devices, software, or hardware.
DEVICE — Includes, but is not limited to, an electronic, magnetic,
electrochemical, biochemical, hydraulic, optical, or organic object that
performs input, output, or storage functions by the manipulation of
electronic, magnetic, or other impulses.
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That term as it is defined in MCLA
§ 722.674, as amended.
§ 420-10 LANDS, ABANDONED § 420-10
412:427
INTERNET — That term as it is defined in section 230 of title II of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 110 Stat. 137, 47 U.S.C.
§ 230, as amended.
MINOR — An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
OBSCENE — That term as it is defined in MCLA § 752.362, as amended.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATTER — That term as it is defined in MCLA
§ 722.673, as amended.
TERMINAL — A device used to access the internet or a computer,
computer program, computer network, or computer system.
§ 420-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 420-10
412:428
Chapter 425
LICENSING, GENERAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 188.
Animals — See Ch. 195.
Public auctions — See Ch. 201.
Sale of books, magazines and videos — See
Ch. 213.
Chauffeurs and taxicabs — See Ch. 236.
Christmas trees — See Ch. 244.
Hauling and sale of dirt — See Ch. 273.
Special events — See Ch. 312.
Gasoline service stations — See Ch. 363.
Horse-drawn carriages — See Ch. 388.
Hotels, boardinghouses, bed-and-breakfasts
and tourist homes — See Ch. 394.
Liquor — See Ch. 430.
City Market — See Ch. 441.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 447.
Merchants and mercantile
establishments — See Ch. 458.
Motor buses — See Ch. 463.
Moving contractors; moving of
buildings — See Ch. 475.
Parking stations — See Ch. 503.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 521.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 526.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 547.
Drive-in restaurants — See Ch. 580.
Secondhand goods; junk — See Ch. 593.
Motion-picture theaters — See Ch. 679.
Trampoline facilities — See Ch. 698.
Vehicle dealers — See Ch. 727, Art. I.
§ 420-10 LICENSING, GENERAL § 420-10
425:429

ARTICLE I
Penalties for Late Application
[Adopted 11-20-1950 by Ord. No. 624]
§ 425-1. Penalty for failure to obtain license.
In the case of all renewal licenses issued by the City of Royal Oak where the
application for such renewal is not filed prior to the date of the expiration
of the former license, or in the case of the issuance of a new license where
the application for such new license was not filed prior to the date the
applicant started to engage in the business for which the application was
filed, a penalty of 25% shall be charged in addition to the regular license
fee; provided, however, this article shall not apply to the issuance of dog
licenses, for which a penalty is provided in the Dog Ordinance.77
§ 425-2. Exception for seasonal businesses; expiration dates set
forth in other ordinances. [Added 12-26-1950 by Ord. No. 629]
In the case of seasonal businesses requiring licenses where the licensed
business is in operation only during a certain part of the year, the foregoing
penalty shall not be charged in case the application for renewal license
is made prior to the time of reopening the business for the year in which
the renewal license is applied for. In such cases the applicant shall be
entitled to a renewal license upon payment of the regular fee at any time
before reopening his business for the year. In cases where a date for the
renewal of license is specified in the ordinance relating to such business
as, for instance, electricians and drainlayers, mentioned herein by way
of illustration and not by way of limitation, no penalty shall be charged,
provided the renewal license is applied for prior to the date specified in the
ordinance relating to the licensing of such business.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Art. III, Dogs.
§ 425-1 LICENSING, GENERAL § 425-2
425:431

ARTICLE II
General Licensing
[Adopted 6-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-16]
§ 425-3. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "General Licensing
Ordinance."
§ 425-4. Scope.
This article shall apply to all activities, businesses or operations which
require a license in the City of Royal Oak.
§ 425-5. License required; term; authority to impose conditions;
renewal date.
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall engage or be engaged
in the establishment, operation, conduct or carrying on of any activity,
business or operation which requires a license under any ordinance in the
City of Royal Oak, without first obtaining a license for that purpose. Every
license issued by the City shall be effective for a period of one year from the
date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked, or limited in duration
by initial issuance. The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of any license. The City Commission shall by resolution establish a
schedule of renewal date for all licenses issued by the City.
§ 425-6. License review.
The City Commission may undertake a review of any license to determine
whether or not the license should be renewed.
§ 425-7. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license to operate, establish, conduct or carry on any
activity, business or operation which requires a license under any ordinance
in the City of Royal Oak shall file an application with the City Clerk's office
upon a form provided by the City of Royal Oak and a pay a nonrefundable
application fee. Such fee shall be set by resolution of the City Commission
and may be amended from time to time. The application shall contain at
least the following information:
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each applicant.
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the name, residence address and
telephone number of each of the officers and directors of said
corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation if that individual is or will be involved in
the management and/or operation of the particular establishment
or activity proposed to be licensed, the address of the corporation
itself, and the name and address of a resident agent in Oakland
§ 425-3 LICENSING, GENERAL § 425-7
425:433
§ 425-8. Investigation.
Upon receipt of such application, the City Clerk shall refer same as follows:
County, Michigan. The applicant shall also provide documentation
that the corporation is in good standing in the state of
incorporation.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the partnership, and
the name, residence address and telephone number of each of the
partners having 10% of an ownership interest if that individual is or
will be involved in the management and/or operation of the
particular establishment or activity proposed to be licensed, and
the name, address and telephone number of a resident agent in
Oakland County, Michigan.
(3) If the applicant owns stock or has a financial interest in any other
particular establishment or activity similar to that for which the
license is sought, the name, address and telephone number of the
corporation, and the name, address and telephone number of each
other establishment.
B. The history of an applicant in the operation of the proposed licensed
establishment or activity or similar business or occupation, including,
but not limited to, whether or not such person has previously operated
in the City or another municipality or state under license, has had such
license revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.
C. Applicant's social security number, driver's license number, if any, and
date of birth.
D. Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application, including the
name, address and telephone number of any and all employers.
E. All criminal convictions in the preceding 10 years, other than traffic
violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crime, and
place convicted.
F. Authorization for the City of Royal Oak, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application. The applicant shall give such
additional information and identification necessary to discover the truth
of the matters required to be set forth in application.
G. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant.
A. To the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative, who shall
investigate and determine whether the person making application for
such license is of suitable character to conduct or maintain such a
business in the City of Royal Oak. The Chief of Police or his or her
designated representative shall forward to the City Clerk the results of
§ 425-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 425-8
425:434
such investigation along with a recommendation concerning whether or
not the license should be granted.
(1) The phrase "of suitable character" as used in this article for the
purpose of licensing shall be construed to mean the propensity on
the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a
fair, lawful, honest and open manner.
(2) In making his or her determination, the Chief of Police shall
consider:
(a) Penal history. All of the applicant's convictions in the preceding
10 years, other than traffic violations, the reasons therefor and
the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release.
(b) License and permit history. The license and permit history of
the applicant; whether such applicant, in previously operating
in this City or state or in another municipality or state under a
license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or
suspended, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the
applicant subsequent to such action.
(c) Other information. The Chief of Police may consider any other
information and documentation which he or she considers
relevant to make a determination as to whether the applicant is
of suitable character.
(3) The Chief of Police or his or her designated representative shall
complete his or her investigation and determination with 30 days of
being provided with the application.
(4) If an applicant is found to be unqualified for a license because of
lack of suitable character, or similar criteria, the applicant shall be
furnished by the City Clerk with a statement containing
information as to the basis for this determination.
B. If the investigation by the Chief of Police or his or her designated
representative does not evidence a lack of suitable character, the City
Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief Building Inspector, Fire
Chief, or their designated representatives, who shall cause a thorough
inspection of the premises to be made, if applicable, to ensure that all
pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinances, including the
applicable plumbing, heating, electrical and zoning codes, are being
complied with. The results of such inspections shall be returned to the
City Clerk within 30 days of the date the application was referred. In
the event the applicant refuses entry to the premises for the required
inspections, said refusal shall be noted on the application, and the
application shall be returned to the City Clerk for denial.
§ 425-8 LICENSING, GENERAL § 425-9
425:435
§ 425-9. Refusal, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license.
A license requested may be refused by the City Clerk or his or her
designated representative, and any license issued may be suspended by the
City Manager or his or her designated representative, and revoked or not
renewed by the City Commission, for cause. The term "cause" as used in
this article shall include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any
condition to exist for which a license is issued, or upon any premises used
in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is contrary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular or fraudulent
in nature, is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license issued, or is
forbidden by this article or any applicable law. "Cause" shall include, but not
be limited to:
A. A determination of lack of suitable character, a failure of the proposed
licensed premises to meet applicable codes and ordinances, in the
investigation conducted pursuant to a request for a license, or a refusal
of the applicant to permit inspection of the premises prior to issuance of
the license or during the period any license is in effect.
B. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application for license.
C. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application for license.
D. Any material violation of this article or of the regulations authorized
herein.
E. Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance which creates a
risk to the health, safety or welfare of the community, or brings into
question whether the licensee is of suitable character to operate the
business.
F. Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the
licensed premises. For purposes of this article, "nuisance" shall be
given the normal and customary meaning, and shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing,
zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes.
(2) A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is in violation of the
law and/or interferes with the health, safety and welfare of the
residential or commercial properties in the area.
(3) Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties.
G. Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises
by the City's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of
this article.
§ 425-9 ROYAL OAK CODE § 425-9
425:436
§ 425-10. Authority to revoke license.
Each establishment licensed pursuant to this article shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the
City of Royal Oak and the State of Michigan. Upon any violation of this
article, or the violation of any other applicable ordinance, after notice and
hearing, the City Commission may revoke such license.
§ 425-11. Procedure for recommendation on nonrenewal,
revocation or suspension.
H. Failure of the licensee to pay personal property taxes, other City
obligations, and real property taxes by February 14 of each year arising
from their use and occupancy of the property. A licensee who does not
own the real property is not responsible for the payment of the real
property taxes unless the lease requires such payment.
A. Before taking any action concerning nonrenewal, revocation or
suspension of a license, the City Manager, or his or her designated
representative, shall serve the licensee by first class mail, mailed at
least 10 days prior to a hearing with notice of hearing, which notice
shall contain the following:
(1) Date, time and place of hearing.
(2) Notice of the proposed action.
(3) Reasons for the proposed action.
(4) Names of witnesses known at time who will testify.
(5) A statement requiring the licensee to notify the Royal Oak City
Attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if he,
she or it intends to contest the proposed action, and to provide the
names of witnesses known at that time who will testify on his, her
or its behalf.
B. All hearings shall be open to the public. Any person whose interests are
affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
C. The City Commission may adopt procedures under which the hearing
will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with
strict rules of evidence.
D. Upon completion of the hearing, the City Commission shall submit to
the licensee a written statement of its findings and determination with
30 days.
E. During the procedure for nonrenewal, revocation or suspension, the
licensee will be permitted to continue to operate until such time as the
findings and determination is served upon the licensee by mail or
otherwise.
§ 425-9 LICENSING, GENERAL § 425-12
425:437
§ 425-12. License refusal; hearing.
Any person whose initial request for a license is refused shall have a right to
a hearing before the City Commission, provided a written request therefor
is filed with the City Manager within 10 days following such refusal. The
City Commission shall have the right to affirm and sustain any refusal to
issue a license, or the City Commission may grant any license.
§ 425-13. Referral to hearing officer; appeals.
§ 425-14. Court review.
Any applicant for a license which has been refused, and any licensee who
has had a license suspended, revoked or not renewed, shall have the right
to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law.
Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by
law.
§ 425-15. No assignment of license.
No license granted pursuant to this article or any other ordinance may be
assigned, transferred or otherwise utilized by any other person or entity
other than the licensee.
§ 425-16. Violations and penalties.
Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90
days, or be both so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.
A. In lieu of conducting the hearings set forth in §§ 425-11 and 425-12
above, the City Commission may alternatively appoint a hearing officer
to conduct such hearing. The hearing officer will follow the applicable
procedures for the hearing. Upon completion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall submit to the City and to the licensee a written
statement of his or her findings and determination within 30 days.
B. The licensee shall have the right to appeal an adverse decision by the
hearing officer to the City Commission, provided that a written request
for appeal is filed within 21 days after the day the findings and
determination were served by the hearing officer. The appeal to the City
Commission shall be upon the record made before the hearing officer.
§ 425-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 425-16
425:438
Chapter 430
LIQUOR
CHARTER REFERENCES
Intoxicating liquors — See Ch. 15, Sec. 22.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278.
§ 425-16 LICENSING, GENERAL § 425-16
425:439

ARTICLE I
Licenses and Permits
[Adopted 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3; amended in its entirety
6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-06]
§ 430-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Liquor Control
Ordinance."
§ 430-2. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to allow the City to establish and administer
a policy for the issuance and transfer of liquor licenses and permits, to
provide for the enforcement of liquor laws, regulations and ordinances, and
to limit the number of liquor licenses in the City of Royal Oak.
§ 430-3. Licensing policy.
New licenses or permits, transfer of ownership of existing licenses,
transfers into the City of new licenses, and relocation or expansion of an
existing licensed establishment will be approved at the sole discretion of the
City Commission.
§ 430-4. Plan of operation required. [Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-15; 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-19]
A. Business operation. All on-premises licensees shall operate in
accordance with a plan of operation approved by the City Commission.
B. Plan of operation. A plan of operation shall contain an operational
statement outlining the proposed manner in which the establishment
will be operated, including, but not limited to, the format, schedule of
the hours of operation, crowd control, security, alcohol management,
use of the facilities, parking provisions, plan for interior use and layout
(including the location of any bar and the number of bar seats), and any
other pertinent information as requested by the City. [Amended
10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-19]
C. General compliance. Licensees shall comply with all applicable state
and City regulations, this general policy, and a plan of operation as
approved by the City Commission. Any change to a plan of operation
shall be approved by the City Commission prior to implementation of
the change by the licensee. Failure of such compliance or variance from
an approved plan is a violation of this article and may result in the City
Commission recommending to the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission that the license be revoked or not renewed.
D. Initial compliance with plan of operation. Within six months of having
obtained approval of an application for the transfer of an on-premises
license from the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, a licensee shall
§ 430-1 LICENSING, GENERAL § 430-4
425:441
§ 430-5. Review procedures. [Amended 7-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-07]
Each applicant for a new license, the transfer into the City of a new license,
or an applicant seeking to relocate or alter the size of the physical structure
of existing licensed premises shall make a request to the City in accordance
with the following procedures:
obtain a certificate of occupancy and open for business in compliance
with the plan of operation approved by the City at the time the
application for the transfer was being reviewed. If the licensee fails
to do so, the City Commission may undertake a review of the plan
to determine if operation of the establishment pursuant to that plan
will still provide a benefit to the City and constitute an asset to the
community, or if the facts and circumstances surrounding the earlier
approval have changed such that amendments need to be made to the
plan before the licensee is permitted to open for business.
A. Application. Each applicant must submit to the City Clerk an
application (on a form provided by the City), a plan of operation, plot
plan of the site, a plan for interior use and exterior design, and the
layout of any ancillary facilities. As part of the application, each
applicant shall submit a written statement explaining in detail how his/
her proposal meets the factors as listed in Subsection D of this section.
B. City departmental review. Upon receipt of an application and plans, the
City Manager will refer same to the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Planning
Department, Building Department and other City officers or employees,
who shall cause a thorough review and investigation, including but not
limited to a complete history of past business experience and liquor law
violations, if any, to be made of the persons and/or premises which must
meet or exceed codes. The applicant shall provide all requested
information to, and fully cooperate with, all City departments
requesting any and all additional information. The findings resulting
from such review and investigation shall be reported to the City
Manager, who then will report same to the City Commission.
[Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-19]
C. Public hearing/review. [Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-19]
(1) Hearing. The City Commission shall hold a public hearing upon a
request for a new license, to transfer a new license into the City, or
to relocate or alter the physical size of an existing establishment.
(a) In lieu of conducting the hearing, the City Commission may
alternatively appoint a hearing officer or a subcommittee to
conduct such a hearing. Upon the completion of the hearing,
the hearing officer or the subcommittee shall submit a written
finding to the City Commission within 30 days following
completion of the hearing.
§ 430-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 430-5
425:442
(b) The applicant shall have the right to appeal an adverse
decision by the hearing officer or the subcommittee to the City
Commission, provided that a written request for appeal is filed
with the City Manager within 21 days after receipt of the
findings. The appeal to the City Commission shall be upon the
record made before the hearing officer or the subcommittee.
(2) Notice. Notice of all hearings shall be provided to all property
owners, residents and voters within 300 feet of the proposed
establishment, all LCC Class C license holders, the Chamber of
Commerce, all neighborhood associations, the PTA Council, the
School Board, the Royal Oak Restaurant Association and the
Prevention Coalition. The applicant shall pay the cost of such
notice.
(3) Appearance. The applicant will be required to appear at the
hearing before the City Commission, the hearing officer, or the
subcommittee and make a written and/or oral presentation
concerning the request.
D. Review factors. In reviewing a request, the City Commission, the
hearing officer, or the subcommittee may consider and/or weigh the
following factors: [Amended 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-19;
10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-19]
(1) Conserve the expenditure of funds for public improvements and
services to conform to the most advantageous uses of land,
resources and property.
(2) Appropriate relationship between buildings and land uses.
(3) The general and appropriate trend and character of land, building,
and population development.
(4) Total number of similar licenses in the City.
(5) Input from residents and surrounding business owners.
(6) Impact of the establishment on surrounding businesses and
neighborhoods.
(7) Whether a proposed licensed premises is part of a multi-use project
with substantial new retail, office, or residential components; the
size of the licensed premises relative to the overall project or
development.
(8) Crowd control.
(9) Pedestrian movement.
(10) Vehicular movement.
(11) Parking availability.
§ 430-5 LICENSING, GENERAL § 430-5
425:443
(12) Total square footage of LCC establishments within the area.
(13) Number of on-premises establishments within the area.
(14) Concentration and capacity of similar establishments.
(15) Number of seats/occupancy per given area (block, intersection,
etc.).
(16) Association/integration with multi-use development.
(17) Amount invested in the facility/establishment.
(18) Substantial renovation of existing buildings.
(19) Preservation or restoration of historic buildings.
(20) Locating in an underdeveloped area.
(21) Concentration of drinking establishments and impact on policing
requirements.
(22) Policing requirements.
(23) Business history.
(24) Business experience.
(25) Liquor Control Commission violation history.
(26)Ratio of food to alcohol sales.
(27) Percent of floor area devoted to dining versus bar area.
(28) Size of kitchen (square footage) in relation to total square footage
of the establishment.
(29) Size of bar area.
(30) Size of dance floor, if any.
(31) Size of outdoor service area, if any.
(32) Type or character of the establishment, e.g., dining, nightclub,
hotel, dance club.
(33) Diversification of the type of entertainment in the CBD or
throughout the City.
(34) Diversification of the type of commercial activity in a given area,
block, CBD, etc.
(35) Overall benefit of the plan to the City of Royal Oak.
(36) Nonpayment of taxes.
§ 430-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 430-5
425:444
(37) Any other factor(s) that may affect the health, safety and welfare or
the best interests of the community.
E. Bistro concept. [Amended 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
(1) An applicant for a liquor license may propose to utilize the license
for purposes of the operation of a bistro. Food service shall be the
primary purpose of a bistro. Unique and diverse venues with
specialized menus that attract new patronage are encouraged.
(2) For purposes of this chapter, a "bistro" is defined as a restaurant
with a full-service kitchen with interior seating that meets all of the
following criteria:
(a) The liquor license must be a redevelopment district license, as
defined in the Michigan Liquor Control Code, MCLA
§ 436.1101 et seq., as amended.
(b) Interior seating (including bar seating) can be no greater than
75 people.
(c) Seasonal sidewalk cafe seating of up to 24 people may be
allowed, provided that the City determines that there is
sufficient space on an adjacent public sidewalk. Rooftop
seating shall not be allowed.
(d) Bar seating shall be limited to eight seats.
(e) The license shall not include a dance permit.
(f) The establishment shall close no later than 12:00 midnight any
day of the week. With the prior approval of the City
Commission, an establishment may remain open to offer food
service. If an establishment is allowed to remain open to offer
food service, the sale of alcohol shall stop at 12:00 midnight.
(g) No gaming devices or amusements (including, but not limited
to, pool tables, dartboards, video games and pinball) shall be
permitted.
(h) Alcohol shall only be served to seated patrons.
(i) The interior seating area shall be no greater than 2,250 square
feet.
(j) No direct connection additional bar permit shall be allowed.
(k) The licensee must otherwise comply with all requirements of
the City Code.
(3) Prior to operating a bistro, a licensee shall enter into a written
agreement with the City setting forth all of the operating
requirements for a bistro. Failure to comply with the terms and
conditions of the agreement shall be grounds for the City to
§ 430-5 LICENSING, GENERAL § 430-5
425:445
§ 430-6. Permits; transfer of ownership. [Amended 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-19]
§ 430-7. Annual license and permit review.
recommend revocation of the license by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission.
F. Approval. If the City Commission is satisfied that the establishment or
operation will provide a benefit to the City of Royal Oak and constitute
an asset to the community, it will adopt a resolution granting approval,
subject to the satisfaction of any conditions stated in the resolution.
[Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-19]
(1) Building; remodeling. If the request involves a change to the
physical size or layout of the establishment, when the applicant's
building or remodeling is completed, it must meet all state and
local regulations, and must comply with the representations made
to the City by the applicant. If such physical alteration is approved
by the City Commission and it is subsequently determined that the
project was not completed as required by the plans and
specifications presented to the City, or in compliance with
representations made to the City, the City may recommend that the
license be revoked or not be renewed for the following year.
A. Permits. Requests for permits for dance, entertainment, or dance and
entertainment shall be approved or disapproved in the sole discretion of
the City Commission after an evaluation of the factors listed in §
430-5D. Permits shall not be issued without the execution of the City’s
entertainment agreement.
B. Transfer of ownership. Requests for transfer of ownership of existing
licensed establishments shall be approved or disapproved by the City
Commission. The City Commission may hold a public hearing. If the
continuation of an existing operation is contemplated, the applicant
must present a plan relating to how it will deal with any existing
problems created by the business.
A. The City Commission may undertake a review of any license or permit
for the purpose of making a recommendation to the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission regarding renewal of said license or permit. The
Commission shall consider whether a licensed establishment has been
operated in a manner consistent with the provisions of this article and
all other applicable laws and regulations of the City of Royal Oak and
the State of Michigan.
B. Each year, the City Manager shall cause an investigation to be made
relative to each existing on-premises licensed establishment. The
investigation shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
§ 430-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 430-7
425:446
§ 430-8. Revocation and nonrenewal.
(1) An inspection of the premises to determine whether the licensee is
in compliance with all applicable City and state codes. All
inspection reports for the prior twelve-month period from the
County Health Department shall be obtained for review by the City
Commission.
(2) An inspection of the premises to determine whether the licensee is
in compliance with the license itself, its approved site plan and plan
of operation, as well as any conditions imposed by the City or the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission or representations made by
the licensee at the time of issuance or transfer of the license.
(3) An inspection to determine the general condition of the premises,
both interior and exterior.
(4) An inspection of City records to determine whether all taxes and
other monies due the City are timely paid.
(5) An inspection of police files or other sources of information to
determine total calls for service and whether any activity in
connection with the licensed premise is in violation of the law,
disturbs the public peace and tranquility, constitutes a nuisance, or
contributes to the disruption of the normal activities of those in the
neighborhood of the licensed premises.
(6) A review to determine the existence of any of the criteria as
described in § 430-10 of this article.
(7) A review of the operation of the licensed establishment to
determine whether the business is being operated in compliance
with any and all representations made by the licensee to the City or
the City Commission.
C. Recommendations from City departments. Following receipt of a fully
completed application, fees, and such other information as may be
requested by the City, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the
Police Department, Fire Department, Building Department, Treasurer's
office, and such other departments as required by the City Manager,
which departments shall make their inspections and recommendations
prior to consideration by the City Commission. In conducting its review,
the City may request other pertinent information from the licensee.
A. Each establishment within the City for which a liquor license or permit
is granted shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all
applicable laws and regulations of the City of Royal Oak and the State of
Michigan. Upon any violation of this article, the Commission may, after
notice and hearing, request the Liquor Control Commission to revoke
such license and/or permit.
§ 430-7 LICENSING, GENERAL § 430-8
425:447
§ 430-9. Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation.
The City Commission may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license
or permit to the Liquor Control Commission upon a determination based
upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that any of
the following exists:
B. Before filing any objection to renewal or request for revocation of a
license or permit with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the
City shall serve the licensee with notice and proceed in accordance with
Chapter 425, Article II, General Licensing, as amended.
C. Upon completion of the hearing, the City Commission shall submit to
the licensee and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission a written
statement of its findings and determination.
A. Failure to comply with all standards, plans or agreements entered into
in consideration for the issuance, transfer or continuance of the license
or permit, or failure to comply with all agreements or consent
judgments entered into subsequent to the issuance of the license or
permit.
B. Failure to comply with an approved plan of operation and other plans,
specifications, or representations made or submitted to the City by the
licensee.
C. Violations of the state liquor laws or regulations of the Liquor Control
Commission.
D. Violations of state laws or local ordinances concerning health, safety,
moral conduct or public welfare.
E. Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed
premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
(1) Violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning,
health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes, to include the
history thereof;
(2) A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed
premises which is a violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace,
order and tranquility of the neighborhood;
(3) Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties;
(4) Entertainment on the premises or activity in connection with the
licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or
contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinance or laws, or
contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the
neighborhood of the licensed premises.
§ 430-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 430-9
425:448
§ 430-10. Capacity limits.
The total capacity of each room of a licensed establishment shall be
determined as follows:
§ 430-11. Termination of escrowed licenses.
The City Commission may, through resolution, request that the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission terminate an on-premises license that has been
placed in escrow for more than one year after its expiration.
§ 430-12. Fees.
Each applicant for a new license or permit, for transfer of an existing license
or permit, for expansion of an existing establishment, and for renewal
of an existing license or permit shall pay a nonrefundable application
investigation fee. Such fee will be in addition to any fee required by the
Liquor Control Commission and shall be set by a City Commission resolution
that shall be renewed annually.
F. Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises
by the City's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of
this article.
A. If tables or booths are provided, then there shall be not more than one
customer for each 15 square feet of total area.
B. If tables or booths are not used, then there shall be not more than one
customer for each six square feet of total area.
C. If there is a combination of tables or booths and an open area, then the
provisions of both Subsections A and B above shall be used.
D. If seating is provided at a bar, then there shall be not more than one
seat for each 20 inches of bar length.
§ 430-9 LICENSING, GENERAL § 430-12
425:449

ARTICLE II
Open Parties
[Adopted 3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 86-4]
§ 430-13. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Open Party Ordinance."
§ 430-14. Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this article:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any beverage containing more than 1/2 of 1% of
alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined
in accordance with the provisions of MCLA § 436.2, as the same may be
amended from time to time.78
CONTROL — Any form of regulation or dominion, including possessory
right.
DRUG — A controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public
Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are
defined by Act No. 196 of the Public Acts of 1971, as amended, being MCLA
§ 335.301 to 335.367, as the same may be amended from time to time.79
MINOR — A person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess
alcoholic beverages pursuant to MCLA § 436.33b, as the same may be
amended from time to time.80
OPEN PARTY — A social gathering of persons at a rental facility or
residence other than the owner and immediate family members.
RENTAL FACILITY — A hall, auditorium, social, fraternal or service club,
and includes other similar type private clubs or organizations.
RESIDENCE — A home, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit
and includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit. It also includes a hotel/
motel room.
§ 430-15. Allowing possession or use of drugs and alcohol by
minors at open parties.
It shall be unlawful for any person having control of any residence or rental
facility to allow an open party to take place at said location if such person
knows any alcoholic beverage or drug is illegally possessed or consumed at
said location by any minor.
78.Editor's Note: MCLA § 436.2 was repealed by PA 1998, No. 58. See now MCLA § 436.1103
et seq.
79.Editor's Note: MCLA § 335.301 to 335.367 was repealed by PA 1978, No. 368. See now
MCLA § 333.7101 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: MCLA § 436.33b was repealed by PA 1998, No. 58. See now MCLA
§ 436.1703.
§ 430-13 LICENSING, GENERAL § 430-16
425:451
§ 430-16. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to legally protected religious
observances or legally protected educational activities.
§ 430-17. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 430-16 ROYAL OAK CODE § 430-17
425:452
Chapter 441
MARKET, CITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Farmers Market Committee — See Ch. 39, Art.
III.
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 244.
General licensing — See Ch. 425.
Merchants and mercantile
establishments — See Ch. 458.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 521.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 526.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 547.
Secondhand goods; junk — See Ch. 593.
§ 441-1. Public Market; Joint Market Committee.
§ 441-2. Producers; restrictions on items that may be sold.
[Amended 3-4-1940 by Ord. No. 377; 5-4-1942 by Ord. No. 409]
The word "producer" is herein defined to be any person or persons who
are actually engaged in the business of producing farm products. Producers
shall be allowed to sell on the Public Market wholesome, fresh, sound,
canned, dried, preserved or prepared food products either raised by the
producer or processed, manufactured or otherwise prepared by him in
whole or chiefly from products raised by him, but shall not be permitted to
sell processed or manufactured food or other articles, the major ingredients
of which have been purchased or otherwise acquired for such processing or
manufacture. Producers shall also be allowed to sell certain other products
of their farm, greenhouse, apiary, rabbit hutch, such as live or dressed
poultry and rabbits, and flowers, plants, nuts, herbs, shrubbery, Christmas
trees and other trees; provided that in so doing they comply with all the
rules and regulations in force in said City; and provided further that all
A. The "Royal Oak City Market" is herein defined to be the County- and
City-owned and regulated marketplace, together with buildings
thereon, designed for the sale of farm products and the accommodation
of producers, and hereinafter designated as the "Public Market."
B. The general administration of said market shall be under a joint market
committee of the County and City. The City members shall consist of the
City Manager and two City Commissioners, designated by the City
Commission. Said Committee is charged with the enforcement of this
chapter and is hereby empowered to make or amend from time to time
such additional market rules and regulations as may be deemed
necessary for the proper management and control of said market,
subject to the provisions of this chapter, and subject to the provisions of
any rules and regulations made by the Board of Supervisors of Oakland
County governing the conduct of said market. [Added 5-4-1942 by
Ord. No. 409]
§ 430-17 MARKET, CITY § 441-2
441:453
live poultry and rabbits brought to the market shall be confined in suitable
crates, and that dressed poultry and rabbits shall be kept in iced containers
covered with glass. The sale of all meat or meat products except those
herein mentioned is hereby prohibited, and the sale of all baked goods shall
be limited to those under conditions prescribed by the Market Master.
§ 441-3. Display of prices. [Added 3-4-1940 by Ord. No. 377]
Producers must keep a price list of all items offered for sale, evidenced
by legible price tags conspicuously placed either on the articles offered for
sale, or otherwise posted, to inform prospective customers of such prices.
The indicated price must be maintained until prices are changed and tagged
or posted accordingly.
§ 441-4. Market Masters.
Market Masters and their duly authorized assistants, acting themselves,
shall have the authority to direct the arrangement of all vehicles on the
market grounds, and persons in charge of such vehicles shall conform to the
directions so given. No person on the Public Market shall refuse to comply
with the direction of or interfere with the Market Masters or their assistants
in carrying out the provisions of these rules and regulations, nor shall any
such person seek to evade or refuse payment of the proper market fees
when called upon to do so.
§ 441-5. Schedule of fees. [Amended 3-14-1940 by Ord. No. 377;
5-4-1942 by Ord. No. 409]
Stalls at the Royal Oak City Market may be rented by the year, the season,
the month or the day, in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by the
Market Committee and approved by the City Commission. Such schedule of
fees shall be kept posted in the Market Building. In case of any change in
the schedule of prices, notice of such change shall be posted in the Market
Building at least 15 days before said change takes effect.
§ 441-6. Hours of operation. [Amended 3-14-1940 by Ord. No. 377]
The Market will open at 7:30 a.m. and close at 1:00 p.m. except that on
Saturdays it will open at 10:30 a.m. and close at 5:00 p.m. The times for
opening and closing may be changed by the Market Master as conditions
may arise to make a better market for producers and buyers. The Market
Master may set the time that rented stalls must be occupied by the renter,
and if said stall is not occupied at the time so set the Market Master may
rent it for the day.
§ 441-7. Subletting stalls; exchanges. [Amended 3-14-1940 by Ord.
No. 377]
No persons renting a stall on the Public Market shall sell, sublet or assign
such space or any privileges pertaining thereto. Exchanges of rented stalls
may be made with the price approval of the Market Master.
§ 441-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 441-8
441:454
§ 441-8. License required; application; fee; display of license plate.
[Amended 3-14-1940 by Ord. No. 377]
Any producer selling products or renting a stall space on either a daily,
annual or six-month basis on the said Public Market shall be required to
have a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made to the
Market Master and shall contain under oath a statement by the producer
of his name, address, the character, nature and extent of his business, the
kind and amount of the products produced by him which he proposes to
sell on the public market, and such other data as may be deemed necessary
for the protection of the public health and for the proper administration
of the Public Market. The fee for said license shall be $1 which shall be
paid to the City Treasurer. Upon payment of the fee and the filing of the
application approved by the Market Master, the City Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a license, together with a metal license plate. Either this plate
or an acceptable sign shall be conspicuously displayed at all times by the
producers.
§ 441-9. Litter.
No person shall deposit vegetable refuse or other garbage, broken crates,
boxes, barrels or pieces thereof, paper, or other rubbish on the Public
Market.
§ 441-10. Compliance required.
No person shall distribute, scatter about or post on the Public Market any
advertising pamphlet, car, handbill or other printed matter, nor shall any
person beg, loiter, solicit patronage for any business, or sell or attempt to
sell, display or demonstrate any goods, merchandise, real estate, animals,
vehicles or other materials or things whatsoever on the Public Market,
except as herein provided.
§ 441-11. Resale of farm produce. [Amended 3-14-1940 by Ord. No.
377]
Any producer buying and selling farm produce will not be permitted to sell
any of such products on the Market.
§ 441-12. Violations; authority of Market Master to bar violators;
appeal. [Amended 5-4-1942 by Ord. No. 409]
Attempts to establish or the establishment of abnormal or artificial prices
for products sold on the Public Market, by agreement between sellers or
between buyers, or by other unfair and irregular means; repeated verified
complaints against any producer who sells on the Public Market giving
reasonably conclusive evidence that such person has practiced deception in
his or her dealings on the Market by displaying or selling his or her produce
so packed and faced as to misrepresent the average quality or condition
of the produce of the package, or by knowingly giving false information
regarding the origin, variety, quality, condition or value of the products
§ 441-8 MARKET, CITY § 441-12
441:455
which he or she sells, or by similar sharp practices shall, in addition to any
other penalties which may be inflicted, be cause for the Market Master to
bar such guilty person from the privileges and grounds of the Public Market
for such period of time as may be deemed advisable by him. Any such action
shall be preceded by a hearing at which the person involved shall have a
chance to fully present his defense in any charges made against him. Any
person who is barred from the Public Market by order of the Market Master
for violation of these rules shall have the right to appeal for reinstatement to
the joint Market Committee. Such appeal shall be in writing and addressed
to the Chairman of the Board of County Auditors, who shall designate a day
for the hearing of said appeal within 10 days from the receipt of said request
and shall notify the appellant of the time and place of said hearing.
§ 441-13. Restrictions on persons barred from Market.
Any person barred from the Public Market privileges and grounds for a
specified period of time, not exceeding one year, under the provisions of
these rules he or she shall not, during such time, sell or buy through himself
or any other person, on the Public Market, nor shall he or she, his or her
vehicle enter upon the Public Market property during the market hours.
No other person shall sell on the Public Market products belonging to any
person barred from the Market.
§ 441-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-1940 by Ord. No.
377]
Anyone found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not to exceed $100 and costs, or imprisoned in the Oakland County
Jail or Royal Oak City Prison not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 447
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of obscene material — See Ch. 213.
General licensing — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 447-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Massage
Establishment License and Regulation Ordinance."
§ 441-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 447-2
441:456
§ 447-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
APPLICANT — All officers, owners, directors, shareholders, partners,
managers and members of a business.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who renders any service in connection with the
operation of a massage establishment and receives compensation from the
operator of the establishment or a client.
LICENSEE — The person or business entity to whom a license has been
issued to own or operate a massage establishment as defined herein.
MASSAGE; PRACTICE OF MASSAGE — The application of a system of
structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the
human body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health
and well-being of the client. Practice of massage includes complementary
methods, including the external application of water, heat, cold, lubrication,
salt scrubs, body wraps, or other topical preparations; and
electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the actions possible by
the hands. Practice of massage does not include medical diagnosis; practice
of physical therapy; high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust to a joint; electrical
stimulation; application of ultrasound; or prescription of medicines.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any business which engages in the practice
of massage as defined in this section, either at that location or at another
location. "Massage establishment" includes a health club, health spa, or
any physical fitness club or business that offers massage on occasion or
incidental to its principal operation.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — Any person who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section.
OF SUITABLE CHARACTER — The propensity on the part of the person
to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, lawful, honest and open
manner.
PATRON — Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances
that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any
other consideration therefor.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, limited liability company or combination of
individuals of whatever form or character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or
perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
§ 447-3. Massage establishment license required; massage
therapist's license required.
§ 447-2 MARKET, CITY § 447-3
441:457
§ 447-4. Application for massage establishment license.
A. Business license required. No person shall engage in or carry out the
business of massage unless he has a valid massage establishment
license issued by the City of Royal Oak pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for each and every separate office or place of business
conducted by such person.
B. Massage therapist license required. No person shall engage in the
practice of massage unless he or she has a valid and subsisting massage
therapy license issued to him or her by the State of Michigan. This
requirement does not apply to an individual licensed by another state
from performing activities that are considered massage therapy if those
activities are within the scope of the individual's license.
C. It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager, or licensee
of a massage establishment hereunder to insure that each person
employed or engaged as a massage therapist at the establishment shall
either have a valid massage therapist license issued by the State of
Michigan or be exempt from the state's licensing requirements.
A. Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file a completed application under oath with the
City Clerk's office upon a form provided by the City of Royal Oak and
pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Commission. The application shall contain the
following information:
(1) A definition and description of all services to be provided, including
any other businesses conducted on the premises.
(2) All locations, mailing addresses and telephone numbers utilized by
the business.
(3) The name and residence address of each applicant and manager of
the applicant.
(a) If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company,
the names and residence addresses of each of the officers,
directors and members of the business and of each stockholder
owning more than 10% of the stock of the business, its address
(if different from the address of the massage establishment),
and the name and address of a resident agent in Oakland
County, Michigan. The applicant shall also provide
documentation that the business is in good standing in the
state in which it was formed.
(b) If the applicant is a partnership, the name and residence
address of each of the partners and the partnership itself (if
different from the address of the massage establishment), and
the name and address of a resident agent in Oakland County,
Michigan.
§ 447-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 447-4
441:458
(4) For all persons identified in Subsection A(3)(a) and (b):
(a) Previous addresses for the last 10 years.
(b) Height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and sex.
(c) Social Security number, driver's license number, if any, and
date of birth.
(d) One portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches.
(e) Business, occupation, or employment for the 10 years
immediately preceding the date of application, including the
name, address and telephone number of any and all employers.
(f) The massage or similar business history; whether such person,
in previously operating in this or another city or state, has had
a business license revoked or suspended or denied, the reason
therefor, and the business activity or occupation prior to and
subsequent to such action of suspension, revocation, or denial.
(g) The name and address of any other massage business or
establishment in which the person owns stock or has any
financial interest.
(h) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the
crime and place convicted.
(i) The name and address of any massage business or other
establishment owned, managed or operated wherein the
business or profession of massage is carried on.
(j) Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of
the applicant.
(5) The name and address of each massage therapist who is or will be
employed in said establishment.
(6) A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant.
B. All information required by this section shall be provided at the
applicant's expense. Upon completion of the above provided form and
the furnishing of all the foregoing information, the City of Royal Oak
shall accept the application for the necessary investigations.
C. Massage establishment licenses shall be renewed annually.
§ 447-4 MARKET, CITY § 447-4
441:459
§ 447-5. License procedures; investigation.
Any applicant for a massage establishment license pursuant to this chapter
shall present to the City Clerk's office an application in duplicate containing
the aforementioned and described information.
D. The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the City of
Royal Oak of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by
this section within 10 days after such change occurs.
A. Investigation. Upon receipt of such application, the City Clerk shall
retain one copy and refer one copy as follows:
(1) To the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative, who
shall investigate and determine whether the person making
application for such license is of suitable character to conduct or
maintain such a business in the City of Royal Oak. The Chief of
Police or his or her designated representative shall forward to the
City Clerk the results of such investigation along with a
recommendation concerning whether or not the license should be
granted.
(a) In making his or her determination, the Chief of Police shall
consider:
[1] Penal history. All applicant's convictions in the preceding
10 years, other than traffic violations, the reasons therefor,
and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her
release.
[2] License history. The license history of the applicant and his
or her employees; whether such person, while previously
operating in this City or state or in another state under a
license, has had such license denied, revoked or
suspended; the reasons therefor; and the demeanor of the
applicant subsequent to such action.
[3] Business history. The history of the business, the manner
in which the business is conducted, and the conduct of all
employees in providing services to the public.
[4] Other information. Any other information and
documentation which he or she considers relevant to make
a determination as to whether the applicant is of suitable
character.
(b) The Chief of Police or his or her designated representative
shall complete his or her investigation and determination
within 45 days of being provided with a completed application.
(c) If an applicant is found to be unqualified for a license because
of lack of suitable character, or similar criteria, the applicant
§ 447-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 447-5
441:460
§ 447-6. Renewal of license.
Application to renew a license to operate a massage establishment shall
be filed at least 45 days prior to the date of expiration. Such renewal
shall be annual and shall be accompanied by the annual fee to be set by
City Commission resolution. Procedures for review of a renewal application
shall be in accordance with Chapter 425, Article II, General Licensing, as
amended, and this chapter.
§ 447-7. License refusal, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal.
A license requested may be refused, and any license issued may be
suspended, revoked, or not renewed for cause. The term "cause" as used in
this chapter shall include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any
condition to exist for which a license is issued, or upon any premises used
in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is contrary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular or fraudulent
in nature, is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license issued, or is
forbidden by this chapter or any applicable law. "Cause" shall include, but
not be limited to:
shall be furnished by the City Clerk with a statement
containing information as to the basis for this determination.
B. In the case of a massage establishment license application, if the
investigation by the Chief of Police or his or her designated
representative does not evidence a lack of suitable character, the City
Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief Building Inspector, Fire
Chief, or their designated representatives, who shall cause a thorough
inspection of the premises to be made, if applicable, to ensure that all
pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinances, including the
applicable plumbing, heating, electrical and zoning codes, are being
complied with. The results of such inspections shall be returned to the
City Clerk within 30 days of the date the application was referred.
C. If an applicant is found to be unqualified for a license because of lack of
suitable character, or similar criteria, the applicant shall be furnished
by the City Clerk with a statement containing information as to the
basis for this determination.
A. A determination of lack of suitable character, or a failure of the
proposed licensed premises to meet applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application for a license.
C. Fraud or material misrepresentation in the operation of the licensed
business.
D. Any material violation of this chapter or of the regulations authorized
herein.
§ 447-5 MARKET, CITY § 447-7
441:461
§ 447-8. Revocation or suspension of license.
E. Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance which creates a
risk to the health, safety or welfare of the community, or brings into
question whether the licensee is of suitable character to operate the
business.
F. Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the
licensed premises. For purposes of this chapter, "nuisance" shall be
given the normal and customary meaning, and shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing,
zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes.
(2) A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is in violation of the
law and/or interferes with the health, safety and welfare of the
residential or commercial properties in the area.
(3) A pattern or practice of employee conduct which is in violation of
any state or federal law, local ordinance, or this chapter.
(4) Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties.
G. Failure of the licensee to pay personal property taxes, other City
obligations, and real property taxes by February 14 of each year arising
from the use and occupancy of the property. A licensee who does not
own the real property is not responsible for the payment of the real
property taxes unless the lease requires such payment.
H. Any violation of this chapter.
A. Each establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be operated
and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations
of the City of Royal Oak and the State of Michigan. Upon any violation
of this chapter or the violation of any other applicable ordinance, after
notice and hearing, the City Commission may revoke or suspend such
license.
B. The City Commission shall revoke a massage establishment license if
the State of Michigan suspends or revokes the massage therapist
licenses of three or more of the establishment's employees within a
twelve-month period.
§ 447-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 447-9
441:462
§ 447-9. Procedure for recommendation of refusal, nonrenewal,
revocation, or suspension.
Procedures for recommendation of refusal, nonrenewal, revocation or
suspension shall be in accordance with Chapter 425, Article II, General
Licensing, as amended, and this chapter.
§ 447-10. Posting of license.
Every license required under this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent
place on the premises.
§ 447-11. Records of employees.
The licensee or the person designated by the licensee of a massage
establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed or engaged
as massage therapists. Included in the register will be a copy of each
massage therapist's state license. Such register shall be available at the
massage establishment for inspection by representatives of the City of Royal
Oak and/or county or state health departments during regular business
hours.
§ 447-12. Facilities necessary.
A license to operate a massage establishment shall not be issued unless
inspectors of the City of Royal Oak reveal that the establishment complies
with each of the following minimum requirements:
§ 447-13. Operating requirements.
A. All provisions of all applicable City building, plumbing, fire, electrical
and health codes.
B. A recognizable and readable sign that complies with the City's Sign
Ordinance81 shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the
business as a massage establishment.
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
C. No massage shall be performed in a private room which is completely
closed off to the view of other persons nor fitted with a door capable of
being locked or barred. Reasonable measures may be used to offer
privacy to patrons such as partitions, walls, curtains and the like.
D. All employees, including massage therapists and other employees
attending the patrons, shall be clean and wear clean uniforms covering
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 607, Signs.
§ 447-9 MARKET, CITY § 447-13
441:463
§ 447-14. Persons under age 18 prohibited on premises.
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come
or remain on the premises of any massage establishment as a massage
therapist, employee, or patron.
§ 447-15. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises
of any massage business.
§ 447-16. Hours of operation.
No massage establishment shall be kept open between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 447-17. Employment of massage therapist.
No person shall employ a person as a massage therapist unless said
employee has a current and valid massage therapist license from the State
of Michigan or is exempt from the state's licensing requirements.
§ 447-18. Inspection required.
The Chief of Police or other authorized inspectors from the City of Royal
Oak shall at reasonable times during business hours make inspection of
each massage establishment for the purposes of determining that the
provisions of this chapter are fully complied with.
§ 447-19. Unlawful acts.
the torso. Such uniforms shall be nontransparent and of washable
material and shall be kept in a clean condition. Such clothing shall
cover the person's pubic area, perineum, buttocks, natal cleft and the
entire chest to four inches below the collarbone, and legs not exposed
more than two inches above the knees.
E. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity, and they shall be laundered
after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
F. No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of
this chapter shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be placed,
published, or distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement
which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be
known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any
person to purchase or utilize any massage services.
§ 447-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 447-19
441:464
§ 447-20. Location of massage establishments.
A massage establishment shall be located as provided by Chapter 770,
Zoning, of the Code of the City of Royal Oak.
§ 447-21. Sale, transfer, or change of location.
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
therefor shall be null and void unless approved as provided by this chapter.
It shall be the duty of all owners or licensees having knowledge of the sale,
transfer or relocation of a massage establishment to immediately report
such sale, transfer or relocation to the City Clerk's office. The failure to do
so shall result in an immediate suspension of all business.
§ 447-22. Name and place to be designated in license.
No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the
massage establishment under a name not specified in their license, nor shall
they conduct business under any designation or location not specified in
their license.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to touch,
fondle or massage the sexual or genital parts of another person, or any
portion thereof, for purposes of sexual arousal or gratification.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to touch,
fondle or massage his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion
thereof, for purposes of sexual arousal or gratification of any other
person.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, for
purposes of sexual arousal or gratification of any other person.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any
other person for purposes of his or her own sexual gratification.
E. It shall be unlawful for any employee, while in the presence of any other
person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal the sexual or
genital parts of his or her body with a fully opaque covering.
F. It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any
cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment which
is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment to permit any agent, employee, or any other
person under his control or supervision to perform any acts prohibited
in this section.
§ 447-19 MARKET, CITY § 447-23
441:465
§ 447-23. Transfer of license.
No license shall be transferable except with the consent of the Royal Oak
City Commission. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and
shall be accompanied by fees provided by City Commission resolution. The
written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as
requested herein for application for the license. Transfer shall include the
sale, or other transfer, of more than 10% of the stock of a corporation, or
interest of 10% in any other business entity.
§ 447-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person, except those who are specifically exempted by this chapter,
whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or
employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere agent or independent
contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or
worker in any way, directly or indirectly, who gives massages or operates a
massage establishment or any service defined in this chapter without first
obtaining a license and paying a fee to do so from the City of Royal Oak
or who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor upon conviction and shall be punished by imposition of a
fine not to exceed $500 and/or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed
90 days within the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 458
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 458, Merchants and Mercantile Establishments,
adopted 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-04, as amended, was repealed
4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 461
MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278. Tobacco products — See Ch. 684.
§ 447-23 ROYAL OAK CODE § 447-24
461:466
ARTICLE I
Diversion From Court System
[Adopted 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-17]
§ 461-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Diversion Ordinance."
§ 461-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSAULTIVE CRIME — An offense that, if committed by an adult, would
constitute an offense against a person described in section 82, 83, 84, 86,
87, 88, 89, 316, 317, 321, 349, 349a, 350, 397, 520b, 520c, 520d, 520e,
520g, 529, 529a, or 530 of the Michigan Penal Code, Act No. 328 of the
Public Acts of 1931, §§ 750.82, 750.83, 750.84, 750.86, 750.87, 750.88,
750.89, 750.316, 750.317, 750.321, 750.349, 750.349a, 750.350, 750.397,
750.520b, 750.520c, 750.520d, 750.520e, 750.520g, 750.529, 750.529a,
and 750.530 of the Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated.
COURT — The 44th District Court.
DIVERT or DIVERSION — The placement that occurs when a formally
recorded apprehension is made by a law enforcement agency for an act by
a minor for which a criminal charge could be authorized, but instead of the
authorization of a charge, either of the following occurs:
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The City of Royal Oak Police
Department.
MINOR — An individual who is 17 years of age.
§ 461-3. Powers of law enforcement official where criminal charge
has not been authorized.
The minor is released into the custody of his or her parent, guardian, or
custodian and the investigation is discontinued.
A.
The minor and the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian agree to work
with a person or public or private organization or agency that will assist
the minor and the minor's family in resolving the problem that initiated
the investigation.
B.
A. If in the course of investigating an alleged offense by a minor for which
a criminal charge has not been authorized, a law enforcement official
may do one of the following:
(1) Release the minor into the custody of his or her parent, guardian,
or custodian and discontinue the investigation.
(2) Divert the matter by making an agreement pursuant to § 461-5 with
the minor and the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian to refer
§ 461-1 MINORS § 461-3
461:467
§ 461-4. Factors to be examined.
Before a decision is made to divert a minor, all of the following factors shall
be examined;
§ 461-5. Conference; diversion agreement; noncompliance with
terms of agreement or plan.
the minor to a person or public or private organization or agency
that will assist the minor and the minor's family in resolving the
problem that initiated the investigation.
B. A minor may be diverted only as provided in Subsection A(1) or (2), and
Subsection C.
C. A minor accused of or charged with an assaultive offense shall not be
diverted.
A. The nature of the alleged offense.
B. The minor's age.
C. The nature of the problem that led to the alleged offense.
D. The minor's character and conduct.
E. The minor's behavior in school, family, and group settings.
F. Any prior diversion decisions made concerning the minor and the
nature of the minor's compliance with the diversion agreement.
A. If a decision is made to divert a minor with a referral under § 461-3A(2),
a conference with the minor and the minor's parent, guardian, or
custodian shall be held to consider alternatives to the authorization of a
criminal charge. The law enforcement official shall notify the minor and
the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian of the proposed conference
and shall inform the minor, and the minor's parent, guardian, or
custodian of all of the following:
(1) That participation in the conference or resulting referral plan is
voluntary.
(2) That an attorney may accompany the minor and the minor's parent,
guardian, or custodian at the conference.
(3) The alternative referral programs available and the criteria utilized
to determine whether to authorize a criminal charge or make a
referral.
(4) That if diversion is agreed to and the minor complies with the term
of the diversion agreement and the referral plan, a criminal charge
cannot be authorized.
§ 461-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 461-5
461:468
§ 461-6. Information to be filed; revocation.
B. The conference to consider alternatives to the authorization of a
criminal charge shall not be held until after the questioning, if any, of
the minor has been completed or after an investigation has been made
concerning the alleged offense. Mention of, or promises concerning,
diversion shall not be made by a law enforcement official in the
presence of the minor or the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian
during any questioning of the minor. Information divulged by the minor
during the conference or after the diversion is agreed to, but before a
criminal charge has been authorized, shall not be used against the
minor.
C. If a conference held under this section results in diversion that imposes
conditions on the minor and that will prevent the authorization of a
criminal charge, the terms of the diversion agreement shall be set forth
in writing, dated, and signed by the law enforcement official, the minor,
and the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian.
D. If a conference is held under this section and an agreement under
Subsection C is not reached, a criminal charge may be authorized as
provided by law. If an agreement under Subsection C is not reached and
a criminal charge is to be authorized, the charge shall be authorized not
later than 30 days after the conference.
E. If the minor fails to comply with the terms of the diversion agreement
and the referral plan, the law enforcement official may revoke the
diversion agreement. If the diversion agreement is revoked, a criminal
charge may be authorized as provided by law.
A. When a decision is made to divert a minor, the law enforcement official
shall file with the Court all of the following information:
(1) The minor's name, address, and date of birth.
(2) The act or offense for which the minor was apprehended.
(3) The date and place of the act or offense for which the minor was
apprehended.
(4) The diversion decision made, whether referred or released.
(5) The nature of the minor's compliance with the diversion
agreement.
B. If a diversion agreement is revoked pursuant to § 461-5E, the law
enforcement official shall file with the Court the fact of and reasons for
the revocation.
§ 461-5 MINORS § 461-6
461:469
Chapter 463
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 463, Motor Buses, adopted 12-27-1927 by Ord. No. 182,
as amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 469
MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transportation safety — See Ch. 703.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
Vehicles transporting flammable
liquids — See Ch. 733.
§ 469-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Motor Carrier Safety
Act."
§ 469-2. Adoption of Act and Rules.
The Motor Carrier Safety Act and Rules, promulgated to accomplish the
purpose of the Motor Carrier Safety Act, No. 181, PA 1963, as amended,82
by authority conferred on the Department of State Police by Section 4 of
Act No. 181, PA 1963, as amended,83 and Executive Reorganization Order
1982-1, hereby adopted by reference as in this chapter modified as effective
July 1984.
§ 469-3. References in Act and Rules.
References in the Motor Carrier Safety Act and Rules to "governmental
units" shall mean the City of Royal Oak.
§ 469-4. Notice to be published; availability of copies.
The City Clerk shall publish this chapter in the manner required by the
Charter and at the same time shall publish a supplementary notice that
complete copies of the Motor Carrier Safety Act and Rules are available at
the Office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times.
§ 469-5. Deletion of rules.
The following rules of the Motor Carrier Safety Act and Rules are hereby
deleted as set forth: Parts 1, 2 and 9. Part numbers as used in this chapter
82.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 480.11 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 480.14.
§ 461-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 469-5
469:470
shall refer to the like part number in the Motor Carrier Safety Act and
Rules.
§ 469-6. Violations and penalties.
Any driver or operator who violates a rule, or any owner or user of any
truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or any officer or agent of any individual
partnership, corporation or association who requires or permits the driver
or operator to operate or drive any truck, truck tractor, or trailer in violation
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 475
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 475, Moving Contractors; Moving of Buildings, adopted
11-12-1956 by Ord. No. 886, as amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 484
NUISANCES, PUBLIC
CHARTER REFERENCES
Special assessments — See Ch. 12.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 195.
Hauling and sale of dirt — See Ch. 273.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278.
Housing standards — See Ch. 400.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
Abandoned refrigerators and ice boxes — See
Ch. 574.
Rodent control — See Ch. 587.
Smoke pollution — See Ch. 619.
Solid waste — See Ch. 633.
Weeds — See Ch. 757.
§ 484-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Public Nuisance Ordinance."
§ 469-5 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 484-2
469:471
§ 484-2. Litter in public places.84
No person shall place, deposit, throw, scatter or leave in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the City any litter, rubbish, refuse, or
other waste material of any kind whatsoever, except in public receptacles or
in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 484-3. Distribution of handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the
City, nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any such public place; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City for
any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof
any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept same.
§ 484-4. Placing handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept same.
§ 484-5. Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which is temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 484-6. Distribution of handbills where property posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if required by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "no
trespassing," "no peddlers or agents," "no advertisement" or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupant of said premises does not
desire to be molested or have his right of privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 484-7. Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises;
provided, however, that in the case of inhabited private premises which are
84.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Disorderly Conduct.
§ 484-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 484-7
469:472
not posted, as provided in this article, such person, unless requested by
anyone upon such premises not to do so, shall have the authority to place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if
such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill
from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or
other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
§ 484-8. Posting notices prohibited.
No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign,
advertisement, or other matter, upon any lamppost, electric light, telephone
or telegraph pole, fire hydrant, shade tree, or on any pavement, sidewalk
or crosswalk, public building or any property or thing belonging to the City,
or any article or thing within any park; provided that this section shall not
be construed to prevent any public officer from so doing for any public
purpose. No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any
sign, advertisement or other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate, post
or tree without first having obtained the permission of the owner, agents or
occupants of the premises.
§ 484-9. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit any litter on any occupied private property
within the City whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
§ 484-10. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 484-11. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City whether owned by such person or not.
§ 484-12. Dumping of refuse and nauseous liquids.
No person shall discharge or pour any foul or nauseous liquids or any
refuse, vapor, gasoline, benzine, kerosene, cleaning solvent, or other crude
oil products, or any substance that will clog a sewer into any public sewer
or private sewer connecting with a public sewer, or into any receiving basin
or gutter, or upon any street, alley or public or private place.
§ 484-7 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 484-13
469:473
§ 484-13. Keeping of pets.
No person shall harbor or keep any animal, bird, bee, or pet, which causes
annoyance in the neighborhood either by:
§ 484-14. Keeping of livestock; removal of animals.
A. Barking, howling, braying, crowing, or making other sounds common to
its species.
B. Failure of the owner, caretaker, or custodian to maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition devoid of rodents and vermin and free from
objectionable odor, all structures, pens, coops, or yards wherein any
animal, fowl or bee is kept.
C. Failure of the owner, caretaker, or custodian to keep the said animal
confined on his own premises.
D. In the case of bees, stinging or molesting any person.
A. No person shall keep any livestock, or any other animals, in the City in
such a manner as to become a public nuisance. No person shall keep
any horses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs or similar animals in the City
without first obtaining a permit therefor. Application for such permit
shall be made to the City Clerk upon blanks furnished for the purpose.
Such application shall state the location where such livestock or other
animal is to be kept and describe the conditions under which the same
shall be kept. Such permit shall be granted by the City Clerk only after
investigation and recommendation by the Chief Inspector. No permit
shall be issued for the keeping of any such livestock or animal except
where it appears that the keeping of such livestock or animals is not
likely to create a public nuisance. If at any time it appears that the
keeping of any such livestock or animals creates a public nuisance, the
City Manager or Chief Inspector may, whether or not a permit has been
issued, order the owner or keeper to abate the nuisance or remove such
livestock or animals from the City, and if he fails to do so within seven
days after he has been served with said notice, the City Manager or
Chief Inspector may summarily remove said animals and abate said
nuisance. [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
B. The owner or keeper of any stable where horses or any kind of livestock
are kept, or of any chicken house, rabbit hutch, or any other building
used for the housing of animals shall keep such stable, hutch, or
building in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall as often
as is necessary remove the accumulations of manure or other excreta in
order to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance in the
neighborhood. No stable shall be maintained without concrete floor
draining to a sump of a style and character approved by the Building
Department with a drain connection to the sewer. Said concrete floors
shall be completely flushed and washed at least once each day. Every
stable shall have a complete set of screens on all openings for
§ 484-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 484-14
469:474
§ 484-15. Disposing of dead animals.
§ 484-16. Destructive compounds and chemicals.
No person shall drop, scatter, strew or place, or cause or permit to escape
from any receptacle or vehicle, any solid or liquid compound or chemical
compound of any description which shall be destructive to the pavements,
curbs, sidewalks, vegetation or other improvements, or to any plant or
structure within the limits of any public highway, alley or public place within
the City, or which shall endanger any person or animal, or cause damage to
any vehicle passing over the public highways, alleys or public places of the
City.
§ 484-17. Stagnant water; notice to remove; costs.
ventilation, or ingress or egress, so that insects may be excluded
therefrom. Such screens shall be kept closed at all times except when
opened for purposes of ingress or egress.
A. No person shall deposit, place or throw any dead or fatally sick or
injured animal, or part thereof, on any public or private place, or into
any reservoir, or into or on the banks of any stream or pond or other
body of water.
B. No person shall bury any dead or fatally sick or injured animal, or part
thereof, in the City except that the owner or occupant of any unplatted
property may bury thereon any dead animal owned by him dying on
such premises after having obtained written permit to do so from the
Health Officer. Such burial shall be made at a distance of not less than
200 yards from any residence or well, and the carcass shall be placed
under ground and well covered with at least four feet of earth from the
surface of the ground to the upper part of the carcass.
C. No person shall carry or convey any dead animal through or upon any
street, alley or public place unless the same is covered that no part of it
is exposed to view and no odors can emanate therefrom.
A. No person shall permit any land owned by him to become a menace to
the health, morals or safety of the public by reason of the collection of
stagnant water in ponds or pools upon such land. The City Commission
may, after notice to the owner and after holding a public hearing
thereon, declare any such condition to be a public nuisance by giving
notice to the owner of the land upon which such condition is located,
and requiring the owner to abate the nuisance within such reasonable
time as may be necessary to do or have done the work required by said
notice. Said notice may also provide a reasonable time within which
such work shall be commenced.
B. If, at the expiration of any time limit in said notice, the owner has not
complied with the requirements thereof, the City Manager shall cause
the requirements of said notice to be carried out. The cost of such
§ 484-14 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 484-17
469:475
§ 484-18. Parking of certain commercial vehicles. [Amended
4-9-1962 by Ord. No. 62-6]
No person shall park, store or operate any commercial motor vehicle on
private property zoned for residential use in such a manner as to cause
material annoyance, inconvenience or discomfort to other persons by
reason of noise, fumes, or any other circumstance incidental to the parking,
storage or operation of such commercial motor vehicle; provided that no
commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored in the required front yard of
any lot; provided, further, that where a corner lot adjoins the side boundary
of a lot in a residential zone, no commercial vehicle parked within 25 feet
of the common lot line shall be nearer the street bounding the side lot line
than the least depth of any front yard required along such side street.
§ 484-19. Dust control on private off-street parking lots. [Added
8-7-1972 by Ord. No. 72-15]
The ground surface of every privately owned and operated off-street
parking lot maintained for the parking of vehicles, if made of dirt, sand,
cinders, or other loose mixture, shall be treated with liquid calcium chloride
with sufficient frequency to effectively prevent dust from being raised,
carried, or blown by wind, movement of vehicles or other causes, into or
upon public property or the adjacent private property of others.
§ 484-20. Activity requiring police, code enforcement, or other
governmental response. [Added 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-0485]
§ 484-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-7; 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter Twelve of the City Charter.
A. No person shall engage in, assist another in engaging in, or allow
property that he or she owns or occupies to be used by another to
engage in, any activity that requires a response from the Police
Department, Code Enforcement Department, or other City department.
B. A violation of this section shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of any ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
A. A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a
fine of up to $500, plus the costs of enforcement and court costs. In
addition, the Court shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or
order necessary to enforce or enjoin further violation of this chapter.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 484-20 as
§ 484-21.
§ 484-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 484-21
469:476
Chapter 497
PARKING PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pull-off parking — See Ch. 498.
Parking stations — See Ch. 503.
Parking system — See Ch. 507.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
Ordinance No. 2005-10
§ 497-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to reduce hazardous conditions resulting
from the use of streets within residential areas for the parking of vehicles
by nonresidents; to protect those districts from polluted air, excessive noise
and trash and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles; to protect the
residents of those districts from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to
their residences; to preserve the character of those districts as residential
districts; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of those streets in a clean
and safe condition; to preserve the value of the property in those districts;
and to preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians and traffic
safety, and the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City.
§ 497-2. Designated residential parking area; violation as a civil
infraction. [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-17]
The City Commission is authorized to designate by resolution an area or
areas of the City allowing residential uses in which parking is restricted
to residents of the area and their guests and, upon discretion of the City
Commission, to occupants (including employees) of commercial buildings
which do not meet Zoning Ordinance86 requirements for the provision of offstreet
parking. Such resolution shall specify the hours during which such
restriction shall be in effect. The City Commission is authorized to adopt
regulations for the administration of such designated residential parking
areas.
B. Each act of violation, and each day upon which any violation shall occur,
shall constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition to any remedies provided for herein, any equitable or other
remedies may be sought.
A. The City Commission may by such resolution:
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 770, Zoning.
§ 484-21 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY § 497-2
469:477
Chapter 498
PARKING, PULL-OFF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking citations — See Ch. 115.
Parking Committee — See Ch. 39, Art. II.
Traffic Committee — See Ch. 39, Art. VI.
Parking stations — See Ch. 503.
Parking system — See Ch. 507.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 650.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
(1) Establish fees for a residential parking permit and a visitor's
parking permit and shall establish the guidelines for issuance of
such permits, including but not limited to determination of the
number of parking permits allowed to occupants of commercial
buildings.
(2) Establish criteria by which residential parking areas shall be
evaluated and approved including, but not limited to,
demonstration of verifiable hazardous condition or hardship,
percentage of properties in favor, standardization of days, time
frames for ease of enforcement, and other criteria and
prerequisites as recommended by the Traffic Committee.
(3) The criteria for the designation of residential parking areas and the
fees for permit parking are attached as Exhibit A,87 which is
expressly incorporated into this chapter by reference.
B. Such hours and days as thus established shall be posted on signs in the
residential parking area so as to give notice to the general public.
C. No person shall:
(1) Park in a residential parking area without a residential parking
permit or visitor's permit during the designated hours;
(2) Allow another person to use a residential parking permit;
(3) Falsify information to obtain such permits;
(4) Fail to surrender his or her permit(s) on demand to the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, if such permit(s) is used in violation
of this chapter;
(5) Duplicate a residential parking permit; or
(6) Otherwise violate the regulations governing the issuance of such
permit.
87.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 497-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 497-2
498:478
§ 498-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Pull-Off Parking Ordinance."
§ 498-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PULL-OFF PARKING — Any area used for vehicular stopping, standing, or
parking located between the road curb or edge of traveled roadway and the
adjacent private property line.
ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY — Property dedicated for public travel and utility use
and owned by the City of Royal Oak as shown on surveyor land plat maps
recorded at the Oakland County Register's Office in the State of Michigan.
§ 498-3. Permission required to improve right-of-way.
No person shall improve any portion of the road right-of-way by laying
of any gravel, concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface without the
previous permission of the City, including all applicable agreements and
permits.
§ 498-4. Application to improve right-of-way.
Applications to improve any portion of the road right-of-way, adjacent to
single-family residences, by the laying of any concrete or asphalt surface
shall be made to the City Engineer or designee and the Traffic Committee
(established by Ordinance 90-1288). The City Engineer shall establish the
application for pull-off parking. Incomplete applications will not be accepted
by the City.
§ 498-5. Traffic Committee review.
The Traffic Committee shall review the application and the recommendation
of the City Engineer and shall forward its recommendation to the City
Commission for approval, denial or approval with conditions.
§ 498-6. Conditions.
A. The applicant shall comply with all conditions set in the approval and
shall maintain the improvement in good condition.
B. Pull-off parking areas shall be paved in concrete or asphalt and shall
meet all lines, grades, standards, terms, and conditions established by
the City Engineer.
88.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 90-12 was repealed by Ord. No. 2003-27. The Traffic
Committee is included as Ch. 39, Art. VI, of this Code.
§ 497-2 PARKING, PULL-OFF § 498-6
498:479
§ 498-7. Fees.
The applicant shall pay all applicable fees necessary to cover the City's
expenses. The fees shall be set by resolution of the City Commission.
Applications for pull-off parking will not be accepted by the City unless the
fee is paid to the City Treasurer.
§ 498-8. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter is a civil infraction, punishable by fine of $100 for
each day the violation occurs, plus the cost of prosecution.
Chapter 503
PARKING STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 425.
Pull-off parking — See Ch. 498.
Parking system — See Ch. 507.
Signs — See Ch. 607.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 503-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTS, BEATS & EATS PARKING STATION — Any privately owned and
operated plot, piece, or parcel of land used for the purpose of parking motor
vehicles in the Festival Zone during the Arts, Beats & Eats Festival where
the owner or person parking such vehicle is charged a fee.
FESTIVAL ZONE — The following geographic area: on the north, Catalpa
Drive/Gardenia Avenue from Woodward Avenue to Alexander Avenue/
Longfellow Avenue; on the east, Alexander Avenue/Longfellow Avenue from
Gardenia Avenue to I-696; on the south, I-696 from Longfellow Avenue
C. The improvement shall be subject to removal at any time at the
complete discretion of the City Engineer, the Traffic Committee or the
City Commission. The applicants shall be responsible to remove the
improvement within 30 days of the City's request at their own expense.
D. The improvement can only be used for stopping, standing or parking of
any properly licensed vehicle eligible of City street parking.
E. The applicant shall execute a license agreement with the City before
any improvements are made, expressly agreeing that the City shall not
be liable for any damages to the pull-off parking area caused by work
performed within the public right-of-way.
§ 498-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 503-1
498:480
to Woodward Avenue; and on the west, Woodward Avenue from I-696 to
Catalpa Drive.
PARKING STATION — Any privately owned and operated plot, piece, or
parcel of land used for the purpose of parking motor vehicles where the
owner or person parking such vehicle is charged a fee.
§ 503-2. License required.
§ 503-3. Application for license.
A. No person, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall maintain or
conduct a parking station within the City of Royal Oak without a valid
parking station license.
B. No person, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall maintain or
conduct an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station within the City of Royal
Oak without a valid Arts, Beats & Eats parking station license.
A. An application for a license for a parking station shall be made to the
City Clerk by the person, partnership, corporation, or other entity
proposing to operate the parking station upon forms furnished by the
City Clerk.
(1) The application shall, at a minimum, set forth the following
information:
(a) The name under which and place where the parking station is
to be operated.
(b) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity.
[1] If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence
address and telephone number of the applicant.
[2] If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the
partnership, and the name, residence address and
telephone number of each of the partners having 10% of
an ownership interest if that individual is or will be
involved in the management and/or operation of the
parking station, and the name and address of a resident
agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
[3] If the applicant is a corporation, the name, residence
address and telephone number of each of the officers and
directors of said corporation and of each stockholder
owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation if
that individual is or will be involved in the management
and/or operation of the parking station, and the name and
address of a resident agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
The applicant shall also provide documentation that the
§ 503-1 PARKING, PULL-OFF § 503-3
498:481
corporation is in good standing in the state of
incorporation.
[4] If the applicant is another entity, the name, residence
address and telephone number of each of the managers of
the entity and of each member if that individual is or will
be involved in the management and/or operation of the
parking station, and the name and address of a resident
agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
(c) Whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant
and, if leased, the name and address of the owner of the
premises.
(d) The maximum number of motor vehicles that the applicant
intends to park on the premises at any one time.
(e) The hours during which the motor vehicles may be parked.
(f) A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for parking the
motor vehicles.
(g) Authorization for the City of Royal Oak, its agents and its
employees to seek additional information and conduct an
investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application. The applicant shall provide any additional
information needed to discover the truth of the matters
required to be set forth in the application.
(2) The application shall be signed and verified under oath by the
applicant, if the applicant is an individual, or by a duly authorized
agent if the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or other entity.
B. Plan or other graphic representation of property. A current, legible
scaled plan, diagram or other graphic representation showing location
and dimensions of the property designated on the application for a
license under this chapter, proposed locations and widths or entrances
and exits, type of surfacing to be used, proposed locations and type and
height of barriers, proposed arrangement and dimensions of parking or
storage stalls, maximum number of vehicles to be stored at any one
time, proposed widths of aisle ways within the premises providing
access to and egress from parking stalls, proposed locations and types
of shelters for attendants or customers, and such other information as
the City Clerk may deem advisable shall be submitted with the
application.
C. Schedule of rates; rate changes.
(1) With the application for a license for a parking station, the
applicant shall file a complete and accurate schedule of the
following rates:
(a) Weekday (Monday through Friday) daily rate.
§ 503-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 503-3
498:482
(b) Weekday (Monday through Thursday) evening rate.
(c) Weekend (Saturday and Sunday) daily rate.
(d) Weekend (Friday through Sunday) evening rate.
(e) Maximum daily rate.
(2) No charge other than the rates specified in this schedule shall be
made, except as otherwise provided in this section.
(3) In the event that a licensee intends to change the fee schedule, the
licensee shall give 10 days' written notice of the intended change to
the City Clerk and shall post notice of the amended fee schedule for
a period of 10 days in a conspicuous place on the premises. Upon
the expiration of that ten-day period, the rates may be changed in
accordance with the notice.
D. License fee. The fee for a parking station license shall be set by
resolution of the City Commission.
E. Required approvals.
(1) A license to operate a parking station shall not be issued until the
following departments file the following approvals with the City
Clerk:
(a) Planning Department:
[1] Capacity of the lot.
[2] Number, size and location of entrances and exits.
[3] Curb cuts, driveways, and hard surfacing.
(b) Building Department:
[1] Signage.
[2] Barriers.
[3] Buildings and structures.
(c) Police Department:
[1] Adequacy of ingress and egress.
(2) A full application is not required for the renewal of a parking
station license, unless substantial changes have been made to the
premises. If substantial changes have been made, approval by the
appropriate department(s) must be filed with the City Clerk prior to
renewal of a license. If substantial changes have not been made,
the licensee must file a written statement to that effect with the
City Clerk before a license will be renewed.
F. Issuance.
§ 503-3 PARKING, PULL-OFF § 503-3
498:483
(1) If, after investigation, the City Clerk is satisfied that the application
is complete and accurate, and that all required approvals have
been given, the Clerk shall issue the applicant a license for a
parking station.
(2) An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the City Clerk to deny an
application may appeal that decision to the City Commission by
filing a written request for a hearing with the City Manager within
10 days of the date of the denial.
G. Expiration. A parking station license shall expire on December 31 of any
given year.
H. Revocation.
(1) After notice and a hearing, the City Manager may revoke a license
for a parking station if at any time:
(a) The licensee has knowingly made a misrepresentation of a
material fact in his, her, or its application.
(b) The licensee knowingly violates or permits the violation of any
part of this chapter.
(c) The licensee knowingly violates or permits the violation of any
federal, state, or local statute, law, ordinance, or regulation
involving theft, larceny, or conversion of a motor vehicle, or the
operation of a vehicle without the owner's consent.
(2) A licensee aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager may appeal
that decision to the City Commission by filing a written request for
a hearing with the City Manager within 10 days of the revocation.
I. Liability of licensee.
(1) Each licensee under this chapter shall be liable for any damage to
any motor vehicle stored or parked in his parking station, by or
through his own negligence or that of his employees. This section
shall have no application to loss of or damage to personal property
left or contained in motor vehicles, the liability for which may be
disclaimed, limited or regulated by appropriate contractual
provisions contained in the parking ticket, provided a sign giving
notice to that effect is posted on the parking station.
(2) A license to operate a parking station shall be automatically
suspended upon the licensee's failure to satisfy any final judgment
for damage to or loss of a car arising from the use of the licensee's
parking station within 60 days after entry of the judgment. Said
suspension shall remain in effect until the final judgment is
satisfied.
(3) No contract, agreement, lease, receipt, rule or regulation shall
exempt any person operating a parking station from damage or loss
§ 503-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 503-3
498:484
caused by the negligence of such person or any employee of such
person or while in the employ of such person.
J. Duties of licensee. In operating a parking station, each licensee shall
faithfully perform its duties under this chapter and shall use its best
efforts to employ honest and competent attendants.
K. Duty of licensee to maintain premises. Each licensee shall keep the
parking station and any sidewalks surrounding the premises free from
dirt, ice, sleet and snow, and in a safe condition for pedestrian travel,
provided that a licensee may use a portion of the area designated for
parking motor vehicles for the storage of snow.
L. Enclosure of lots. Persons operating parking stations shall keep the
same enclosed with a proper or suitable fence, wall or other barrier so
that motor vehicles may not be removed from such stations except at
the regular established entrances and exits.
M. Cleanliness of lots. All licensees operating parking stations shall keep
the lots clean and free from refuse and debris and shall treat the
surface thereof in such a manner as to keep the same free from dust so
that it will not be a nuisance to adjacent property owners or others.
N. Use of streets for parking prohibited. No licensee shall use or permit
the use by his employees of any part of a public street for the purpose of
standing, maneuvering or parking motor vehicles.
O. Maximum capacity.
(1) When a parking station is filled to maximum capacity, the licensee
shall place a conspicuous sign at each entrance, reading, in letters
not less than six inches in height: "FILLED TO CAPACITY." Such
sign shall be displayed continuously as long as the premises are
full.
(2) The maximum capacity shall be clearly indicated on the license
issued for a parking station, and such certificate shall be
conspicuously displayed on the premises by the licensee.
(3) The maximum capacity shall be the number of motor vehicles that
can be handled on the lot without resorting to streets for the
maneuvering of the vehicles, as determined by the licensee and
approved by the Planning Department.
(4) A licensee shall have the right to refuse parking to any vehicle
which, because of its size, shape, or operating condition could, in
the opinion of the licensee, be a hazard, nuisance, or danger to
persons or other vehicles on the premises.
P. Signs denoting hours and rates. Each licensee shall maintain, at each
entrance to any parking station, a sign to apprise persons using such
parking station of the name of the licensee, the hours of the day and
night during which such places are open for the storing of motor
§ 503-3 PARKING, PULL-OFF § 503-3
498:485
§ 503-4. Arts, Beats & Eats parking station. [Amended 6-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-06]
vehicles, the rates charged and the closing hour of such station. Where
more than one rate is charged for parking, the figures for each rate
shall be of the same size and dimensions and such figures shall measure
not less than six inches in height, and the letters and figures indicating
the closing hours shall be not less than six inches in height.
Q. Claim checks.
(1) At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for storing or parking in a
parking station, the person conducting the same or his agent,
servant or employee shall furnish to such person parking his motor
vehicle a distinctive check, which shall be numbered to correspond
to a coupon placed upon such motor vehicle, which check shall
contain the name and address of the place owning or operating
such parking station and upon which shall be written or stamped
the date and the license number of the motor vehicle.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply where cars are stored
on a monthly fee basis.
(3) It shall be unlawful to affix any parking tags on any motor vehicle
so as to obliterate, in whole or in part, any portion of the motor
vehicle license plates on such vehicle.
R. Restrictions on subletting. A licensee shall not sublet, sublease, or
otherwise permit any parking station or any portion thereof to be used
by any vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, or services.
S. Code compliance. The operation of a parking station shall at all times
comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code, including but not
limited to the Zoning Ordinance89 (including the approved site plan for
the premises) and the Sign Ordinance.90 Parking that is required under
the Zoning Ordinance may not be used for a parking station.
A. Application for license.
(1) An application for a license for an Arts, Beats & Eats parking
station shall be made to the City Clerk at least 60 days prior to the
event by the person, partnership, corporation, or other entity
proposing to operate the parking station upon forms furnished by
the City Clerk.
(2) Upon a showing of good cause, the City Commission may waive this
deadline for a person, partnership, corporation, or other entity that
held an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station license in the year prior
and proposes to operate an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station in
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 770, Zoning.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 607, Signs.
§ 503-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 503-4
498:486
the same location and in the same manner as in the year before.
In addition to the regular license fee, the applicant shall also pay
a nonrefundable late application fee to be set by resolution of the
City Commission.
(3) The application shall, at a minimum, set forth the following
information:
(a) The name under which and place where the parking station is
to be operated.
(b) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity.
[1] If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence
address and telephone number of the applicant.
[2] If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the
partnership, and the name, residence address and
telephone number of each of the partners having 10% of
an ownership interest if that individual is or will be
involved in the management and/or operation of the
parking station, and the name and address of a resident
agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
[3] If the applicant is a corporation, the name, residence
address and telephone number of each of the officers and
directors of said corporation and of each stockholder
owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation if
that individual is or will be involved in the management
and/or operation of the parking station, and the name and
address of a resident agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
The applicant shall also provide documentation that the
corporation is in good standing in the state of
incorporation.
[4] If the applicant is another entity, the name, residence
address and telephone number of each of the managers of
the entity and of each member if that individual is or will
be involved in the management and/or operation of the
parking station, and the name and address of a resident
agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
(c) Whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant
and, if leased, the name and address of the owner of the
premises.
(d) The maximum number of motor vehicles that the applicant
intends to park on the premises at any one time.
(e) The hours during which the motor vehicles may be parked.
§ 503-4 PARKING, PULL-OFF § 503-4
498:487
(f) A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for parking the
motor vehicles.
(g) Authorization for the City of Royal Oak, its agents and its
employees to seek additional information and conduct an
investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application. The applicant shall provide any additional
information needed to discover the truth of the matters
required to be set forth in the application.
(4) The application shall be signed and verified under oath by the
applicant if the applicant is an individual, or by a duly authorized
agent if the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or other entity.
B. Plan or other graphic representation of property. A current, legible,
scaled plan, diagram or other graphic representation showing location
and dimensions of the property designated on the application for a
license under this chapter, proposed locations and widths or entrances
and exits, type of surfacing to be used, proposed locations and type and
height of barriers, proposed arrangement and dimensions of parking or
storage stalls, maximum number of vehicles to be stored at any one
time, proposed widths of aisle ways within the premises providing
access to and egress from parking stalls, proposed locations and types
of shelters for attendants or customers, and such other information as
the City Clerk may deem advisable shall be submitted with the
application.
C. Schedule of rates; rate changes.
(1) With the application for a license for an Arts, Beats & Eats parking
station, the applicant shall file a complete and accurate schedule of
the following rates:
(a) Weekday (Friday) daily rate.
(b) Weekday (Friday) evening rate.
(c) Weekend (Saturday, Sunday and Monday) daily rate.
(d) Weekend (Saturday, Sunday and Monday) evening rate.
(e) Maximum daily rate.
(2) No charge other than the rates specified in this schedule shall be
made.
D. License fee. The fee for an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station license
shall be set by resolution of the City Commission.
E. Required approvals.
(1) A license to operate an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station shall not
be issued until the following departments file the following
approvals with the City Clerk:
§ 503-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 503-4
498:488
(a) Planning Department:
[1] Capacity of the lot.
[2] Number, size and location of entrances and exits.
[3] Curb cuts, driveways and hard-surfacing.
(b) Building Department:
[1] Signage.
(c) Police Department:
[1] Adequacy of ingress and egress.
(2) A full application is required for the renewal of an Arts, Beats &
Eats parking station license. Notwithstanding any other part of this
chapter, an application for a license to operate an Arts, Beats &
Eats parking station may be denied if any final judgment against
the applicant for damage to or loss of a car arising from the use of
the applicant's parking station in a prior year is unsatisfied.
F. Issuance. If, after investigation, the City Clerk is satisfied that the
application is complete and accurate, and that all required approvals
have been given, the Clerk shall issue the applicant a license for an
Arts, Beats & Eats parking station. An applicant aggrieved by a decision
of the City Clerk to deny an application may appeal that decision to the
City Commission by filing a written request for a hearing with the City
Manager within 10 days of the date of the denial.
G. Revocation.
(1) After notice and a hearing, the City Manager may revoke a license
for an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station if at any time:
(a) The licensee has knowingly made a misrepresentation of a
material fact in his, her, or its application.
(b) The licensee knowingly violates or permits the violation of any
part of this chapter.
(c) The licensee knowingly violates or permits the violation of any
federal, state, or local statute, law, ordinance, or regulation
involving theft, larceny, or conversion of a motor vehicle, or the
operation of a vehicle without the owner's consent.
(2) A licensee aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager may appeal
that decision to the City Commission by filing a written request for
a hearing with the City Manager within 10 days of the revocation.
(3) Nothwithstanding any other part of this chapter, the Chief of Police
may revoke a license for an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station at
§ 503-4 PARKING, PULL-OFF § 503-4
498:489
any time if the operation of the parking station will constitute an
immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
H. Liability of licensee.
(1) Each licensee under this chapter shall be liable for any damage to
any motor vehicle stored or parked in his parking station, by or
through his own negligence or that of his employees. This section
shall have no application to loss of or damage to personal property
left or contained in motor vehicles, the liability for which may be
disclaimed, limited or regulated by appropriate contractual
provisions contained in the parking ticket, provided a sign giving
notice to that effect is posted at the Arts, Beats & Eats parking
station.
(2) No contract, agreement, lease, receipt, rule or regulation shall
exempt any person operating an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station
from damage or loss caused by the negligence of such person or
any employee of such person or while in the employ of such person.
I. Duties of licensee. In operating an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station,
each licensee shall faithfully perform its duties under this chapter and
shall use its best efforts to employ honest and competent attendants.
J. Duty of licensee to maintain premises. Each licensee shall keep the
parking station and any sidewalks surrounding the premises free from
dirt, ice, sleet and snow, and in a safe condition for pedestrian travel,
provided that a licensee may use a portion of the area designated for
parking motor vehicles for the storage of snow.
K. Enclosure of lots. Persons operating Arts, Beats & Eats parking stations
shall keep the same enclosed with a proper or suitable fence, wall or
other barrier so that motor vehicles may not be removed from such
stations except at the regular established entrances and exits.
L. Cleanliness of lots. All licensees operating Arts, Beats & Eats parking
stations shall keep the lots clean and free from refuse and debris and
shall treat the surface thereof in such a manner as to keep the same
free from dust so that it will not be a nuisance to adjacent property
owners or others.
M. Use of streets for parking prohibited. No licensee under this chapter
shall use or permit the use by his employees of any part of a public
street for the purpose of standing, maneuvering or parking motor
vehicles.
N. Maximum capacity.
(1) When an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station is filled to maximum
capacity, the licensee shall place a conspicuous sign at each
entrance, reading, in letters not less than six inches in height:
§ 503-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 503-4
498:490
"FILLED TO CAPACITY." Such sign shall be displayed continuously
as long as the premises are full.
(2) The maximum capacity shall be clearly indicated on the license
issued for an Arts, Beats & Eats parking station, and such
certificate shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises by the
licensee.
(3) The maximum capacity shall be the number of motor vehicles that
can be handled on the lot without resorting to streets for the
maneuvering of the vehicles, as determined by the licensee and
approved by the Planning Department.
(4) A licensee shall have the right to refuse parking to any vehicle
which, because of its size, shape, or operating condition could, in
the opinion of the licensee, be a hazard, nuisance, or danger to
persons or other vehicles on the premises.
O. Signs denoting hours and rates. Each licensee shall maintain, at each
entrance to any Arts, Beats & Eats parking station, a sign to apprise
persons using such parking station of the name of the licensee, the
hours of the day and night during which such places are open for the
storing of motor vehicles, the rates charged and the closing hour of
such station. Where more than one rate is charged for parking, the
figures for each rate shall be of the same size and dimensions and such
figures shall measure not less than six inches in height, and the letters
and figures indicating the closing hours shall be not less than six inches
in height.
P. Claim checks.
(1) At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for storing or parking in an
Arts, Beats & Eats parking station, the person conducting the same
or his agent, servant or employee shall furnish to such person
parking his motor vehicle a distinctive check, which shall be
numbered to correspond to a coupon placed upon such motor
vehicle, which check shall contain the name and address of the
place owning or operating such parking station and upon which
shall be written or stamped the date and the license number of the
motor vehicle.
(2) It shall be unlawful to affix any parking tags on any motor vehicle
so as to obliterate, in whole or in part, any portion of the motor
vehicle license plates on such vehicle.
Q. Restrictions on subletting. A licensee shall not sublet, sublease, or
otherwise permit any Arts, Beats & Eats parking station or any portion
thereof to be used by any vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, or
services.
R. Code compliance. The operation of an Arts, Beats & Eats parking
station shall at all times comply with all applicable provisions of the City
§ 503-4 PARKING, PULL-OFF § 503-4
498:491
§ 503-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of up to $500 and up to 90 days in jail, or both, in the discretion of the
court. Each day that a violation is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 503-6. through § 503-21. (Reserved)
Chapter 507
PARKING SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Committee — See Ch. 39, Art. II.
Parking citations — See Ch. 115.
Pull-off parking — See Ch. 498.
Parking stations — See Ch. 503.
§ 507-1. Automobile parking system established.
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary for the public benefit
and welfare of the City of Royal Oak, Michigan, to acquire, improve,
enlarge, extend and operate automobile parking facilities for the use of the
public under the provisions of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1947,93 and
to combine all municipal revenue-producing automobile parking facilities,
including both street parking and off-street parking, into one system to be
known as the "automobile parking system," and to be operated on a utilityrate
basis under the provisions of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as
amended.94
§ 507-2. Existing facilities and equipment to be operated as one
system.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, all automobile parking
facilities owned and/or operated by said City for the benefit of the public
and from which revenue is derived shall be operated and maintained as
Code, including but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance91 (including the
approved site plan for the premises) and the Sign Ordinance.92 Parking
that is required under the Zoning Ordinance may not be used for an
Arts, Beats & Eats parking station.
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 770, Zoning.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 607, Signs.
93.Editor's Note: Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1947 was repealed by Act No. 71 of the
Public Acts of 1957.
94.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ 503-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 507-2
507:492
one system on a utility-rate basis, to be known as the "automobile parking
system," which shall include all existing parking meters, parking lots,
garages, buildings, and all facilities, equipment and accessories used or
useful in connection therewith, as well as all additional parking meters,
parking lots, garages, buildings and other facilities and equipment
hereafter acquired or erected for public use for parking purposes and for
the use of which rates and charges shall be made; provided, however,
revenues from the present existing parking meters shall not belong to said
automobile parking system until June 1, 1949, and thereafter.
§ 507-3. Extensions and improvements.
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary for the public benefit
and welfare of said City to acquire and construct additional parking lots
and facilities as extensions and improvements to said automobile parking
system, and to operate and maintain said automobile parking system and all
such extensions and improvements thereto.
§ 507-4. Supervision; Director; Public Parking Committee.
The automobile parking system and its administration, operation and
maintenance shall be under the control of the City Manager, and whenever
it becomes necessary or advisable for the greater efficiency of such system,
to create a separate department for its active management, the City
Manager shall appoint a Director of the automobile parking system to whom
may be delegated the active management thereof. The City Commission
may appoint a Public Parking Committee consisting of at least one member
of the City Commission and two or more other persons to act in advisory
capacity to the City Manager or the Director of the automobile parking
system in determining the general policies of the system, particularly in
relation to the general public and the commercial interests of the City.
§ 507-5. Maintenance and operation of system.
It shall be the duty of the City Manager or the Director of the automobile
parking system to maintain said system in good repair and working order
and operate the same efficiently. He shall see that the rates and charges
as fixed by the City Commission for all services supplied by the system are
collected and turned over to the City Treasurer.
§ 507-6. Schedule of rates and charges.
The schedule of rates and charges to be collected for any parking or other
services of the system shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the
City Commission, which resolution shall give the time of the taking effect
of such rates and charges. The present parking meter charges or any other
parking charges shall remain in effect until changed by resolution as above
provided.
§ 507-2 PARKING SYSTEM § 507-7
507:493
§ 507-7. Financial records.
The Director of Finance shall keep the proper records of the receipts and
disbursements appertaining to the automobile parking system.
§ 507-8. Use of revenues.
The revenues of the automobile parking system shall be used as follows:
§ 507-9. Bonds.
The City may, from time to time by ordinance or resolution, issue bonds
or any other evidence of indebtedness in such amounts and for such time,
and according to such terms as may be deemed necessary and proper, for
the purpose of acquiring, or purchasing, any lands needed for the purpose
of public parking, and may acquire or construct any buildings or other
facilities and improvements necessary for such purpose, and may pledge the
revenues of the system or a portion thereof for the payment of such bonds
or any other evidence of indebtedness and interest thereon, and mortgage
or pledge all or any part of the parking facilities.
§ 507-10. Authority to limit parking time; signs; promulgation of
rules and regulations.
The City Commission may, by ordinance or resolution, limit the time of
parking in any public parking lot, building or other public place where
parking is permitted, and the City Manager or his representative shall post
suitable signs indicating such parking time limits and the parking spaces
where the same are in effect. Rules and regulations may be prescribed from
time to time by the City Manager for the governance of any public parking
lots and facilities.
§ 507-11. Violations and penalties.
Anyone violating any of the rules or ordinances of the City of Royal Oak
relative to parking shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
punished by fine not exceeding $300 or imprisonment not exceeding 90
days in the City prison or county jail.
A. Payment of all expenses of administration, operation and maintenance
of the system. Expense of operation shall be deemed to include the
salaries of any police officers, employees of the Department of Public
Works and all others whose time is largely or wholly spent in connection
with the operation of the automobile parking system.
B. Payment of such amounts as may be appropriated therefrom by the City
Commission for the purpose of purchasing additional land, constructing
buildings, improving the property used by said system and other capital
expenses which may be necessary.
§ 507-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 507-12
507:494
§ 507-12. Purpose.
This chapter is declared necessary to relieve traffic congestion in the City
of Royal Oak, to better facilitate the use of the streets for public travel and
to furnish better parking accommodations for the general public.
Chapter 515
PARKS AND PUBLIC RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Supervision of parks and playgrounds — See
Ch. 3, Sec. 26.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation and Public Service
Department — See Ch. 142.
Amusements — See Ch. 188.
Dogs — See Ch. 195, Art. III.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278.
Special events — See Ch. 312.
Fireworks — See Ch. 345.
Liquor — See Ch. 430.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 526.
§ 507-12 PARKING SYSTEM § 507-12
507:495

ARTICLE I
Parks and Playground
[Adopted 10-12-1959 by Ord. No. 59-10]
§ 515-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Parks and
Playgrounds Ordinance."
§ 515-2. Definitions.
§ 515-3. Protection of park property.
No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, trees, shrubs, flowers,
or any other park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal. No structure, booth, tent or stall shall be erected on park property
for any purpose without permission from the Director.
§ 515-4. Refuse and trash disposal.
No person shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
boxes, cans, rubbish, waste, garbage or other trash of any nature in a
public park, except in proper receptacles where these are provided; where
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
§ 515-5. Traffic regulations.
No person shall fail to comply with all provisions of the State Motor Vehicle
Code and all provisions of City ordinances, relative to equipment and
operation of motor vehicles. No person shall drive or park a motor vehicle
A. For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings given herein:
BOARD — The Parks and Recreation Board.
CITY — The City of Royal Oak, Michigan.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Recreation.
PARK — A park, playground, recreation center or any other area in the
City, owned or used by the City and devoted to recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 515-1 PARKING SYSTEM § 515-5
507:497
on any park area except roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may
on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the
Director.
§ 515-6. Loitering; disorderly conduct.
No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches
or other park areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive,
insulting or indecent language or behavior, or engage in any disorderly
conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
§ 515-7. Intoxicating beverages. [Amended 4-5-1976 by Ord. No.
76-13]
§ 515-8. Fireworks and explosives.
No person shall bring into a park, or have in his possession, or set off or
otherwise cause to explode in a park, any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or
other fireworks or explosives, or discharge them or throw them into any
park area from land or highway adjacent thereto.
§ 515-9. Building of fires.
No person shall build or attempt to build a fire in a park except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director.
§ 515-10. Merchandising, advertising and signs.
No person shall expose or offer for sale in a park any article or thing,
nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle in a park for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here
made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the
A. No person shall bring alcoholic beverages into a park, nor shall any
person drink alcoholic beverages in a park.
B. Exceptions. The City Commission may authorize the sale or dispensing
of alcoholic beverages by a nonprofit charitable, civic, educational or
religious organization in connection with a duly sponsored fund-raising
activity, and consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons attending
the activity; provided that authorization shall not be granted for any
location other than the enclosed structure known as the "Royal Oak
Arena" or the "Royal Oak Golf Club." Sales or dispensing of alcoholic
beverages shall be made in individual drinks only and for consumption
on the immediate premises where sold or dispensed; provided, further,
that any organization shall obtain a license from the Liquor Control
Commission. Any such authorization shall be subject to any additional
conditions that may be attached thereto by the City Commission,
provided that no organization shall be given authorization as provided
herein more than once during a twelve-month period. [Amended
6-10-1991 by Ord. No. 91-11]
§ 515-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 515-10
507:498
authority and regulation of the Board. No person shall paste, glue, tack or
otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever,
nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever in any
park.
§ 515-11. Dogs. [Amended 6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 93-9]
No person shall cause or permit any dog owned by him or under his control
or custody to enter any park where a sign or signs are posted bearing the
legend "No Dogs Allowed" or other words to that effect. This section shall
not apply to any dog which is used as a guide dog or leader dog for a blind
person as defined in MCLA § 393.351, to a hearing dog for a deaf or audibly
impaired person as defined in MCLA § 752.61, or to a service dog for a
physically limited person as defined in MCLA § 125.1351.95
§ 515-12. Games and unusual activities. [Amended 3-31-1975 by
Ord. No. 75-5]
No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving
thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, arrows, javelins, model
airplanes, or model rockets, except in areas specifically set apart for such
forms of recreation.
§ 515-13. Park closing hours. [Added 7-24-1967 by Ord. No. 67-20;
amended 7-28-1969 by Ord. No. 69-20]
All public parks shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. Any public park or any section or part of any public park may be closed
to the public by the Chief of Police during designated hours as the Chief of
Police shall find necessary. Appropriate signs shall be posted advising the
public the hours during which parks are closed, and no person shall be in
any park during said closed hours. The said closed hours shall not apply to
authorized, organized activities such as baseball games.
§ 515-14. Promulgation of rules and regulations. [Amended
7-24-1967 by Ord. No. 67-20]
The Board may, by suitable rules and regulations, implement the foregoing
provisions of this article. The Board may set aside park areas for specific
recreation activities and provide for the issuance of licenses and permits,
under suitable conditions, for the carrying on of unusual or dangerous
recreational activities. All such rules and regulations shall have the same
force and effect as the provisions of this article.
95.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 11A, Leash required, and Sec. 11B, Excrement removal device
required, which previously followed this section, added 6-21-1993, were repealed
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-08.
§ 515-10 PARKING SYSTEM § 515-15
507:499
§ 515-15. Enforcement.
The Director and the City police shall diligently enforce the provisions of
this article. They shall have the authority to eject from any park any person
acting in violation of this article, or in violation of any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 515-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90
days, or be both so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.
§ 515-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 515-16
507:500
ARTICLE II
Royal Oak Golf Course
[Adopted 11-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-12]
§ 515-17. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Royal Oak Golf Course
Ordinance."
§ 515-18. Statement of purpose.
This is an ordinance to designate Royal Oak Golf Course, including the
nearby driving range and miniature golf course, for continued use as a
public recreational facility.
§ 515-19. Findings.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby makes the following findings:
§ 515-20. Description of designated area.
The following property is hereby designated for continued use as a public
recreational facility:
A. The Royal Oak Golf Course (including the nearby driving range and
miniature golf course) has been used as a public recreational facility by
a significant number of residents of the City of Royal Oak and their
guests for a number of years.
B. The Royal Oak Golf Course (including the nearby driving range and
miniature golf course) is a valuable recreational resource for the City
and its residents.
C. The designation of Royal Oak Golf Course (including the nearby driving
range and miniature golf course) for continued use as a public
recreational facility would be in the best interest of the City and its
residents.
D. The designation of Royal Oak Golf Course (including the nearby driving
range and miniature golf course) for continued use as a public
recreational facility should be formalized by way of ordinance.
§ 515-17 PARKING SYSTEM § 515-20
507:501
T1N, R11E, Sec 5 Woodwardside Sub No 1 E 10 ft of vac Woodslee or, Lots
683 to 738 incl & Lots 765 to 943 incl & lots 956 to 999 incl & Lots 1095 to
1137 incl & Lots 1168 to 1179 incl & adj vac streets & 1/2 vac alley adj Lots
723 & 738 & vac alley adj Lot 1122 & all vac alley adj Lots 1123 & 1137,
exc those parts of Lots 989 to 999 incl re-platted to 'Memorial Parksub',
also exc those parts of Lots 817 & Lots 871 to 876 & Lot 956 & Lots 1136
& 1137 & Lots 1168 to 1171 incl taken for RR r/w, also exc W vac Fernlee
Ave adj Lot 1180
Parcel No. 63-72-25-05-376-015, commonly known as Royal Oak Golf
Course, 3417 Don Soper Drive
§ 515-20 ROYAL OAK CODE § 515-20
507:502
ARTICLE III
Normandy Oaks Park
[Adopted 11-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13; amended in its entirety
11-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
§ 515-21. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Normandy Oaks Park
Ordinance."
§ 515-22. Statement of purpose.
This is an ordinance to amend Article III of Chapter 515 of the Royal Oak
City Code, the Normandy Oaks Golf Course Ordinance, to authorize the
sale of up to 10 acres of the fifty-acre property and conversion of the
remaining property to a City park, with the sale proceeds to be dedicated to
improvements at this new park site, the existing Royal Oak Golf Course and
other City parks.
§ 515-23. Description of property.
For purposes of this article, the Normandy Oaks Golf Course is legally
described as follows:
T1N, R11E, Sec 5 Nordwood Estates Sub, Lots 65 to 78 incl, also Lots 93 to
113 incl, also lots 132 to 154 incl, also Lots 173 to 190 incl, also Lots 209 to
225 incl, also all of vac Nakota, Massoit, Leafdale and Elmhurst Roads adj
thereto, also 1/2 vac Woodland Ave adj Lots 67 to 70 incl
Part of Parcel No. 63-72-25-05-251-002, commonly known as Normandy
Oaks Golf Course, 4234 Delemere Boulevard.
§ 515-24. Findings.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby makes the following findings:
A. The Normandy Oaks Golf Course has been used as a recreational
facility by a significant number of residents of the City and their guests
for a number of years.
B. While the golf course property is a valuable recreational resource for
the City and its residents, its highest and best use is no longer as a golf
course.
C. Up to 10 acres of the fifty-acre property can potentially be sold. If this
portion of the property is sold, the remainder of the property can be
converted to a City park and the sale proceeds can be dedicated to fund
improvements at this new park site, the existing Royal Oak Golf Course
and other City parks.
D. The sale of this portion of the property for these purposes would be in
the best interest of the City and its residents.
§ 515-21 PARKING SYSTEM § 515-24.1
507:503
§ 515-24.1. Authorization of sale; dedication of proceeds.
The City is hereby authorized to sell up to 10 acres of the fifty-acre
Normandy Oaks Golf Course. If this portion of the property is sold, the
remaining property shall be converted to a City park and the sale proceeds
shall be dedicated to fund improvements at this new park site, the existing
Royal Oak Golf Course and other City parks.
§ 515-24.1 ROYAL OAK CODE § 515-24.1
507:504
ARTICLE IV
Memorial Park Parking Lot
[Adopted 11-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
§ 515-25. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Memorial Park Parking
Lot Ordinance."
§ 515-26. Statement of purpose.
This is an ordinance to designate Memorial Park Parking Lot for continued
use as a public recreational facility.
§ 515-27. Findings.
The Royal Oak City Commission hereby makes the following findings:
§ 515-28. Description of designated area.
The following property is hereby designated for continued use in support of
public recreation:
Being a part of the S/W 1/4 of Sec 5, T1N, R11E, and desc as: Beg at the
NE corner of Coolidge Highway and Thirteen Mile Rd., thn N'ly alg the E
line of Coolidge Highway 1090.16' to the S line of Starr Rd. Thence SE'ly
alg the S line of Starr Rd. 252.58' to the W line of vacated Edgar Ave.; thn S
alg the W line of vacated Edgar Ave 1054.61' to the N line of Thirteen Mile
Rd; thn W alg the N line of Thirteen Mile Rd 250' to the point of beginning,
containing 6.13 acres of land
A. Memorial Park is dedicated park property that has been used as a
public recreational facility by a significant number of residents of the
City of Royal Oak and their guests for a number of years.
B. Memorial Park is a valuable recreational resource for the City and its
residents.
C. The Memorial Park Parking Lot, which is located east of Memorial Park,
is an important accessory use to the park.
D. The designation of the Memorial Park Parking Lot for continued use in
support of public recreation would be in the best interest of the City and
its residents.
E. The designation of the Memorial Park Parking Lot for continued use in
support of public recreation should be formalized by way of ordinance.
§ 515-25 PARKING SYSTEM § 515-28
507:505
Chapter 521
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public auctions — See Ch. 201.
Sale of books, magazines and videos — See
Ch. 213.
Licensing — See Ch. 425.
City Market — See Ch. 441.
Merchants and mercantile
establishments — See Ch. 458.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 526.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 547.
Secondhand goods; junk — See Ch. 593.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 521-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Pawnbrokers
Ordinance."
§ 521-2. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The City of Royal Oak hereby adopts, by reference, Act 273 of the Public
Acts of 1917, as amended, being MCLA §§ 446.201 through 446.219 (except
MCLA § 446.218) of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and Act No. 231 of the
Public Acts of 1945, as amended, being MCLA §§ 445.471 through 445.476
of the Michigan Compiled Laws.96
§ 521-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Any person, corporation or member or members of a
copartnership or firm, who loans money on deposit, or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence
of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or
other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a
stipulated price.
§ 521-4. License required; expiration.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate as a pawnbroker in the City
of Royal Oak without having first obtained a license for that purpose. A
license shall expire December 31 following the date of issuance unless
sooner revoked.
96.Editor's Note: MCLA §§ 445.471 through 445.476 were repealed by P.A.2006, No. 675, § 1,
effective 3-30-2007.
§ 515-28 ROYAL OAK CODE § 521-5
507:506
§ 521-5. Application for license.
Every applicant for a pawnbroker's license shall file an application under
oath with the City Clerk's office upon a form provided by the City of Royal
Oak and pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee. Such fee shall
be set by resolution of the City Commission and shall be renewed annually.
The application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, residence address, and telephone number of each applicant.
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the names, residence addresses
and telephone numbers of each of the officers and directors of said
corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation itself, and the name, address and
telephone number of a resident agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the name, residence address and
telephone number of each of the partners, and the partnership
itself, and the name, address and telephone number of a resident
agent in Oakland County, Michigan.
(3) If the applicant owns stock or has a financial interest in any other
jewelry store and/or pawnbroker business, the name, address and
telephone number of the corporation and the name, address and
telephone number of the business.
B. The applicant's social security number, driver's license number, if any,
and date of birth.
C. Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years
immediately preceding the date of application, including the name,
address and telephone number of any and all employers.
D. All criminal convictions, including the date of convictions, nature of the
crime, and place convicted.
E. Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the Police Department.
F. Authorization for the City of Royal Oak, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application. Applicant shall give such
additional information as may be deemed necessary by the City of Royal
Oak for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
G. A detailed written plan of operation outlining the proposed manner in
which the business will be operated, including but not limited to hours
of operation, type property to be taken in for loan and number of
employees involved in the pawnbroker service. The City Commission
can reasonably restrict the type of objects to be pawned.
§ 521-5 PARKING SYSTEM § 521-6
507:507
§ 521-6. Investigation.
Upon receipt of such application, the City Clerk shall refer the same as
follows:
§ 521-7. Refusal, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license.
A license requested under this chapter may be refused by the City
Commission, and any license issued under the provisions of this chapter can
be suspended, revoked or not renewed by the City Commission, for any of
the following causes:
A. To the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative, who shall
investigate and determine if the applicant has been convicted of
violating any federal, state or local laws which would tend to show the
applicant is not a suitable person to conduct or maintain a pawnbroker
business in the City of Royal Oak. The Chief of Police or his or her
designated representative shall forward to the City Clerk the results of
such investigation along with a recommendation concerning whether or
not the license shall be granted.
B. Upon receiving a favorable recommendation from the Police
Department, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief
Building Inspector, Fire Chief, or their designated representatives, who
shall cause a thorough inspection of the premises to be made. If it is
found that all pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinances
have been complied with, such findings shall be endorsed upon the
application and returned to the City Clerk, who shall then forward the
application to the City Commission for its review and consideration.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for license.
B. Fraud or misrepresentation in the operation of the licensed business.
C. Any violation of this chapter or of the regulations authorized therein.
D. Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance.
E. A reasonable finding that the business would or does conduct itself in
an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a maintenance
of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning,
health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes;
(2) Patron conduct which is or would be in violation of the law and/or
interferes with the health, safety and welfare of the residential or
commercial properties in the area;
(3) Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties.
§ 521-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 521-7
507:508
§ 521-8. Annual license review.
The City Commission or a hearing officer appointed by the City Commission
may undertake a review of any license to determine whether or not the
license should be renewed. The Commission or hearing officer shall
consider whether a licensee has operated during the existing year in a
manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable laws or regulations of the City of Royal Oak and State of
Michigan.
§ 521-9. Revocation of license.
Each establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be operated
and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of
the City of Royal Oak and the State of Michigan. Upon any violation of
this chapter pursuant to § 521-7, after notice and hearing before the City
Commission or a hearing officer appointed by the City Commission, the City
Commission may revoke such license.
§ 521-10. Record of transaction. [Added 11-18-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-2497]
F. Failure of the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises
by the City's agents and employees in connection with the enforcement
of this chapter.
G. Failure of the licensee to provide and/or comply with provisions of a
plan of operation submitted and approved at the time of application.
H. Failure of the licensee to pay personal property taxes, other bills and
real property taxes by February 14 of each year arising from their use
and occupancy of the property. A licensee who does not own the real
property is not responsible for the payment of the real property taxes
unless the lease requires such payment.
A. A pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record of transaction
provided for in Subsection F, legibly written in ink in the English
language. Each record of transaction form shall be filled out in
duplicate by the pawnbroker or agent or employee of the pawnbroker,
with one copy going to the customer and one copy to be retained by the
pawnbroker pursuant to Subsection E. An electronic copy of the form
shall be sent to the Royal Oak Police Department pursuant to
Subsection F. At the time a pawnbroker receives personal property or
other valuable thing, the pawnbroker or agent or employee of the
pawnbroker shall ensure that the following information is recorded
accurately on a record of transaction form:
(1) The pawnbroker certificate or registration number.
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 521-10 and 521-11 as §§ 521-11
and 521-12, respectively.
§ 521-7 PARKING SYSTEM § 521-10
507:509
(2) A general description of the property received or purchased. In the
case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the
maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case
of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be
included in the description.
(3) The date of the transaction.
(4) The name of the person conducting the transaction.
(5) The name, date of birth, driver's license number, or State of
Michigan personal identification card number and street and house
number of the person with whom the transaction is being made,
together with a legible imprint of the right thumb of the person
with whom the transaction is being made, or if that is not possible,
then the left thumb or a finger of that person. However, the
thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of
transaction form retained by the pawnbroker. The thumbprint or
fingerprint shall be made available to the Police Department only
during the course of an investigation involving personal property or
items described on the record of transaction. After a period of one
year from the date of the record of transaction, if a police
investigation concerning the personal property or other valuable
thing described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the
pawnbroker and the Police Department shall destroy, and not keep
a permanent record of, the record of transaction. A pawnbroker
who goes out of business or changes his or her business address to
another jurisdiction either within or out of this state shall transmit
to the Police Department the records of all transactions made by
the pawnbroker within one year before his or her closing or
moving.
(6) The price to be paid by the pawnbroker for the personal property or
other valuable thing.
(7) The form of payment made to the customer (check, money order or
bank draft).
(8) The customer's signature.
B. The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively,
commencing with the number and the calendar year.
C. Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing personal property or
other valuable thing, the pawnbroker shall send a copy of the
transaction record to the Police Department electronically pursuant to
Subsection F, and, if the record of transaction form indicates that the
customer resides outside of the City of Royal Oak, to the police agency
of the city, village, or township in which the customer resides as set
forth on the record of transaction, or if that city, village, or township
does not have a police agency, to the sheriff's office of the county in
which the customer resides as set forth on the record of transaction.
§ 521-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 521-10
507:510
The record of transaction forms received by a police agency shall not
be open to inspection by the general public. Each police agency shall be
responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction
forms and ensuring that the forms are used only for the purposes for
which they were received.
D. The record of transaction forms of a pawnbroker and each item of
personal property received shall be open to an inspection by the
Oakland County Prosecuting Attorney, the Royal Oak City Attorney, the
Royal Oak Police Department, the Oakland County Sheriff's Department
and the Michigan State Police at all times during the ordinary business
hours of the pawnbroker. As a condition of doing business, a
pawnbroker is deemed to have given consent to the inspection
prescribed by this subsection. The record of transaction forms of a
pawnbroker shall not be open to inspection by the general public.
E. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each record of a
transaction shall be retained by the pawnbroker for not less than one
year after the transaction to which the record pertains.
F. A pawnbroker shall submit a record of transaction to the Royal Oak
Police Department electronically within 48 hours after receiving or
purchasing personal property or other valuable thing. The electronic
submission shall be by means of modem or a similar device, and in a
format that allows the Department to enter the data into its
computerized system. The Department shall notify all pawnbrokers of
the name of the employee or agent who is responsible for establishing
the computer system for electronic transmission and for providing
information on the system to pawnbrokers. All pawnbrokers shall have
the equipment, programs and/or electronic format installed at their
place of business no later than July 1, 2014. No paper forms will be
accepted after this date unless the Department requires a paper
submittal.
G. A record of transaction shall be 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches and
substantially in the following format:
Record of Transaction
Pawnbroker Certification #
(printed on form)
Transaction # (printed on form)
(1) Description of property:
(2) (Date) (3) (Name of pawnbroker/
employee)
(4) (Name of customer) (Date of birth of customer)
§ 521-10 PARKING SYSTEM § 521-10
507:511
§ 521-11. Procedure for recommendation of nonrenewal or
revocation. [Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-24]
§ 521-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90
days, or be both so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.
(Customer's driver's
license number or
Michigan personal
identification card
number)
(Customer's street address)
(City, state and zip code)
(County of residence)
(5) (Price paid) (Name of police agency where
customer resides)
(6) (Form of payment)
(Thumbprint or
fingerprint)
(Signature of customer)
A. Before taking any action concerning nonrenewal or revocation of a
license, the City shall serve the licensee by first class mail, mailed at
least 10 days prior to a hearing, with notice of hearing, which notice
shall contain the following:
(1) Date, time and place of hearing.
(2) Notice of the proposed action.
(3) Reasons for proposed action.
(4) Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify.
(5) A statement that the licensee may be represented by legal counsel,
present evidence, testimony and confront and cross-examine
adverse witnesses.
(6) A statement requiring the licensee to notify the City Attorney’s
office at least three days prior to the hearing date if the licensee
intends to contest the proposed action, and to provide the names of
witnesses known at that time who will testify on the licensee’s
behalf.
B. Upon completion of the hearing, the City Commission or hearing officer
shall submit to the licensee a written statement of its findings and
determination.
§ 521-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 521-12
507:512
Chapter 526
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charitable contributions for public
purposes — See Ch. 26.
Public auctions — See Ch. 201.
Sale of books, magazines and videos — See
Ch. 213.
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 244.
Hauling and sale of dirt — See Ch. 273.
Licensing — See Ch. 425.
City Market — See Ch. 441.
Merchants and mercantile
establishments — See Ch. 458.
Peddling and soliciting in parks — See Ch.
515.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 521.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 547.
Secondhand goods; junk — See Ch. 593.
§ 521-12 PARKING SYSTEM § 521-12
507:513

ARTICLE I
Sales on Streets
[Adopted 1-28-1929 by Ord. No. 216]
§ 526-1. Unlawful sales; exceptions; temporary permits. [Amended
8-19-1963 by Ord. No. 63-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to display, sell or
offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description
upon the public streets, ways and places of the City, with the following
exceptions:
§ 526-2. Public solicitations.
It shall be unlawful for any person in his own behalf or as agent for another
person, firm or corporation to personally solicit anyone upon the streets
and public places of the City of Royal Oak for the purpose of selling either
merchandise or service of any kind; provided, however, it shall not be
unlawful for newsboys and licensed vendors to so solicit.
§ 526-3. Advertising tourist accommodations. [Added 9-5-1939 by
Ord. No. 363]
It shall be unlawful for any person in his own behalf or as agent for any
other person or persons to personally solicit tourists, motorists or other
persons upon the streets and public places of the City of Royal Oak for
the purpose of directing such tourist or other person to a tourist home,
rooming house, lodging house, tourist camp or any other place used for
the purpose of lodging tourists, or for the purpose of advertising tourist
accommodations or persuading tourists or other persons to use such tourist
accommodations or the services provided thereat.
A. It shall be lawful for the City Commission to grant a temporary permit
upon application by the Chamber of Commerce or other merchant
organization for the display and sale of goods, wares and merchandise
by merchants on the public sidewalks in front of their respective stores.
The City Commission in granting any such temporary permit may attach
such conditions to such permit as the City Commission deems
necessary in order to ensure the safety and convenience of pedestrian
traffic, and in order to protect the public safety and general welfare.
B. It shall be lawful for newsboys to sell newspapers upon the public
streets.
C. It shall be lawful for venders duly licensed by the City to sell goods from
vehicles, so long as such vendors comply with all ordinances of the City
relative to such selling.
§ 526-1 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-4
507:515
§ 526-4. Violations and penalties.
Anyone found guilty of violating this article may be fined not exceeding
$100 or imprisoned in the County Jail of Oakland County, Michigan, for a
period not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
§ 526-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 526-4
507:516
ARTICLE II
Solicitations
[Adopted 4-30-1956 by Ord. No. 855]
§ 526-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY CLERK98 — The City Clerk of Royal Oak, or his or her authorized
delegate.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association or joint-stock association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request of money, credit, property,
financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation
that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of
value, or any part thereof, will be used for a charitable, religious, patriotic,
civic, educational or philanthropic purpose, by telephone, personal
interview, or otherwise. The said words shall also mean and include the sale
or offer to sell any article, tag, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement,
subscription or other thing, whether of value or not, on the plea or
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value, or any part thereof, whether received by the solicitor
or purchased by the buyer, will be used for a charitable, religious, patriotic,
civic, educational or philanthropic purpose.
§ 526-6. Permit required.
No person shall solicit for any cause whatsoever, except as herein otherwise
provided, within the City of Royal Oak, without a permit from the City
authorizing such solicitation; provided, however, that the provisions of this
article shall not apply to solicitations conducted exclusively within the
membership of an organization by its own officers and members.
§ 526-7. Application for permit.
Applications for permits under this article shall be filed with the City Clerk
upon forms to be furnished by the City Clerk. The application shall contain
the following information or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the
reason why such information cannot be furnished:
A. Name, address, telephone number and headquarters of the person
applying for the permit.
98.Editor's Note: The words "City Manager" were changed to "City Clerk" at the request of
the City pursuant to Ord. No. 92-7, adopted 5-4-1992.
§ 526-5 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-7
507:517
§ 526-8. Filing false application.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, knowingly, to file or
cause to be filed an application containing one or more false statements.
§ 526-9. Conditions for issuance of permit.
The City Clerk shall authorize the permit provided for in § 526-6 hereof
whenever he or she shall find the following facts to exist:
B. If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the
applicant's principal officers and managers.
C. The purposes for which such solicitation is to be made and the use or
disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom; or property
purchased if the same is to be distributed by the solicitor.
D. The name of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such
solicitation shall be disbursed.
E. The names and addresses of the person or persons who will be in direct
charge of conducting the solicitation.
F. An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the
solicitation.
G. The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the proposed
dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations.
H. The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments
to be expended or paid to any persons in connection with such
solicitation, together with the manner in which such wages, fees,
expenses, commissions, or emoluments are to be expended, to whom
paid and the amount thereof.
I. The estimated cost of the solicitation.
J. Such other information as may be required by the City Clerk for him or
her to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and
whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the
public welfare.
A. That the applicant is a person or organization which is, as a matter of
fact, engaged in charitable, patriotic, civic, educational, philanthropic
or religious activity, or engaged in raising funds for distribution to such
persons or organizations.
B. That the net proceeds derived from the solicitations authorized under
the permit shall be used exclusively for charitable, civic, educational,
patriotic, philanthropic or religious purposes.
§ 526-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 526-9
507:518
§ 526-10. Contents of permit; dates of solicitations. [Amended
1-7-1963 by Ord. No. 63-1]
Permits issued under this article shall bear the name and address of the
person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the date of issuance, the
dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the
permit does not constitute an endorsement by the City of the purpose or of
the person conducting the solicitation. The dates within which the permit
holder may solicit shall be determined by the City Clerk, but no permit
shall grant the right to solicit for a longer period than one year from its
date of issuance. In determining the dates of solicitation, the City Clerk
shall, whenever possible, honor the dates of solicitation proposed by the
applicant and shall only alter such dates when the dates proposed by the
applicant would conflict with other solicitations previously authorized and
where simultaneous solicitations by two or more groups would tend to be
confusing to the public.
§ 526-11. Fees.
At the time when application is made for a permit, there shall be paid to the
City Treasurer the sum of $2 to cover the cost of an investigation into the
qualifications of the applicant as above provided. There shall be no further
charge for the permit, but the sum of $0.10 shall be paid for each facsimile
copy of the permit that is desired.
§ 526-12. Permit nontransferable; copies of permits to be carried by
representatives; permits and copies to be returned upon expiration.
Any permit approved and issued under this article shall be nontransferable;
provided, however, that this shall not prevent any permittee from using
any number of solicitors and representatives and, provided further, that
the City Clerk may, at his or her discretion, require that each solicitor and
representative shall carry a facsimile copy of such permit while engaged in
C. That none of the proceeds derived from the solicitations authorized by
the permit will be divided in any manner with persons who actually
make the solicitations.
D. That the proceeds of the solicitations authorized by the permit will not
be divided or in any manner shared, either directly or indirectly, with
any person or organization other than the applicant for the permit, or
the person or organization for whose benefit the solicitation is made.
E. That expenses incidental to the solicitation shall not exceed 30% of the
gross proceeds, assuring the donor that at least 70% of the donation
shall be used for the charitable, civic, educational, patriotic,
philanthropic or religious activity named; provided, however, that
where the solicitation is incidental to the sale of something claimed to
be of value, the City Clerk may, in his or her discretion, authorize a
departure from the above ratio.
§ 526-9 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-12
507:519
solicitation. All permits and facsimile copies shall be returned to the City
Clerk within two days of the date of expiration.
§ 526-13. Permit not endorsement by City.
No person shall represent that the granting of a permit hereunder is an
endorsement by the City of Royal Oak of the particular organization
involved, and any such representation is hereby declared to be a
misrepresentation of fact and subject to the provisions for revocation of the
permit as herein provided.
§ 526-14. Revocation of permit.
If, upon receipt of written information or upon his or her own investigation,
the City Clerk has reason to believe that any officer, agent or representative
of a permittee is misrepresenting facts or making untrue statements, or
has misrepresented facts or made untrue statements either with words or
by implication, with regard to solicitations or the purposes thereof, or has
made untrue statements in the application, or that in any other way the
solicitations have been conducted, or are being conducted, in violation of
any part of this article and not in conformity with the intent and purpose
of this article, then the City Clerk shall immediately suspend such permit;
provided, however, that before any permit is revoked, the City Clerk shall
cause to be mailed to the permit holder a notice that a hearing is to be had
before the City Commission, and such notice shall be mailed or served upon
the permittee personally, at least 24 hours before said hearing, and at such
hearing the facts shall be ascertained and reported to the City Commission
at its next meeting, and if it shall find any of the reasons above set forth for
revoking the permit exist, the permit shall be revoked.
§ 526-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or filing, or causing
to be filed, an application for a permit or certificate under this article
containing false or fraudulent misstatements, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than
$100 and costs, or shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or may be
punished by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 526-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 526-15
507:520
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)99
§ 526-16. through § 526-26. (Reserved)
99.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Transient Merchants, adopted 8-20-1956 by Ord. No. 873, as
amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.
§ 526-16 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-16
507:521

ARTICLE IV
Private Residential Property
[Adopted 4-14-1969 by Ord. No. 69-15]
§ 526-27. Uninvited peddlers prohibited.
The practice of going upon private residential property by peddlers,
hawkers, or vendors of goods, wares or merchandise or by persons
soliciting orders for future delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or for
the performance of services for a fee, not having been requested or invited
so to do by the owner or occupant of such private residential property, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as a misdemeanor.
§ 526-28. Exceptions.
This article shall not be construed to prevent route salesmen or other
persons having established customers from calling upon such customers, or
from making not more than one call upon a prospective customer to solicit
an order for future, periodic route deliveries. Persons licensed pursuant to
Article II, Solicitations, of this chapter to make charitable solicitations are
not prohibited by this article from making such solicitations.
§ 526-29. Contracts may be voided.
Any contract entered into pursuant to a solicitation made in violation of the
provisions of this article shall be voidable at the option of the purchaser.
§ 526-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
§ 526-27 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-30
507:523

ARTICLE V
Peddling
[Adopted 5-4-1992 by Ord. No. 92-7; amended in its entirety
12-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-11]
§ 526-31. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Peddling Ordinance."
§ 526-32. Definitions.
For the purpose of the provisions of this article, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Royal Oak, or his or her
designated representative.
PEDDLE — Traveling, either by foot, motor vehicle, or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to
street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise for
sale, or taking or attempting to take orders for profit by the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, books or magazines, or personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future.
PEDDLER — Any person traveling either by foot, motor vehicle, or any other
type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise
for sale, or taking or attempting to take orders for profit by the sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, or personal property
of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished
or performed in the future. The word "peddler" shall include the words
"hawker," "huckster" and "canvasser."
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited-liability
company, or other entity.
§ 526-33. Peddling license required; Do Not Knock Registry
required.
A. No person shall peddle within the City of Royal Oak without a valid
license to peddle in his or her name in his or her possession.
B. No person shall peddle within the City of Royal Oak without a copy of
the Do Not Knock Registry maintained pursuant to § 526-38 in his or
her possession.
§ 526-31 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-34
507:525
§ 526-34. Application for license.
Applications for a license to peddle shall be filed with the City Clerk upon
forms to be furnished by the City Clerk. The application shall contain the
following information:
§ 526-35. Investigation.
A. The full name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The applicant's date of birth.
C. The applicant's driver's license number, if any.
D. The applicant's social security number.
E. A description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
F. If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the
applicant's employer.
G. The place where the goods or property are proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where
such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed,
and the proposed method of delivery.
H. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two
inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in
a clear and distinguishing manner.
I. A statement as to whether or not an applicant has been convicted of any
felony, misdemeanor or municipal ordinance violation, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof.
J. Any other information that the City may reasonably require in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the City Clerk shall refer the
application to the Chief of Police or his or her designated
representative, who shall investigate and determine whether the
person making application for such license is of suitable character to
possess a license pursuant to Chapter 425 of the City Code, as
amended.
B. If an applicant is found to be of suitable character for a license, the City
Clerk shall issue the applicant a license to peddle. If an applicant is
found to be unqualified for a license because of lack of suitable
character, or similar criteria, the City Clerk shall furnish the applicant
with a statement containing information as to the basis for this
determination.
C. An applicant whose request for a license is refused shall have the right
to appeal pursuant to Chapter 425 of the City Code, as amended.
§ 526-34 ROYAL OAK CODE § 526-36
507:526
§ 526-36. Fee for license; term of license. [Amended 3-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-03]
§ 526-37. Filing false application.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly file, or
knowingly cause to be filed, an application containing one or more false
statements.
§ 526-38. Do Not Knock Registry.
A. The fee for a peddler's license shall be set by resolution of the City
Commission.
B. Every peddler's license issued by the City shall be effective for a period
of 90 days from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or
revoked, or limited in duration by initial issuance.
A. The City Clerk shall establish and maintain a Do Not Knock Registry.
B. Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment, or other dwelling within the City may request that the City
place and maintain his or her residence, house, apartment, or dwelling
on the Do Not Knock Registry by submitting a written request on a form
supplied by the City Clerk. The written request shall contain the
following:
(1) The name of the person completing the form.
(2) The complete address of the residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling to be placed on the registry.
(3) The date the form was completed.
(4) A statement that peddlers shall not knock, ring the doorbell, or
otherwise call at his or her residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling.
(5) Any other information reasonably required by the City to verify the
identity of the person completing the form as a lawful occupant and
possessor of the residence, house, apartment, or dwelling.
C. Every person who requests that the City place and maintain his or her
residence, house, apartment, or dwelling on the Do Not Knock Registry
shall be required to re-register his or her residence, house, apartment,
or dwelling every five years. Any residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling that is not re-registered shall be removed from the registry
pursuant to Subsection E.
D. Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment, or other dwelling within the City may request that the City
remove his or her residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling from
the Do Not Knock Registry by submitting a written request on a form
§ 526-36 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-38
507:527
§ 526-39. Prohibited areas.
supplied by the City Clerk. The written request shall contain the
following:
(1) The name of the person completing the form.
(2) The complete address of the residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling to be removed from the registry.
(3) The date the form was completed.
(4) A statement that his or her residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling shall be removed from the Do Not Knock Registry.
(5) Any other information reasonably required by the City to verify the
identity of the person completing the form as a lawful occupant and
possessor of the residence, house, apartment, or dwelling.
E. After being placed on the Do Not Knock Registry, a residence, house,
apartment, or other dwelling shall remain on the registry until one of
the following occurs:
(1) The City Clerk receives a written request to remove the residence,
house, apartment, or dwelling from the registry pursuant to
Subsection D.
(2) The City receives written notice that that person who submitted the
request to have the residence, house, apartment, notice, or
dwelling added to the registry pursuant to Subsection A is no
longer a lawful possessor or occupant of the premises.
(3) The expiration of five calendar years, expiring on December 31 of
the fifth full calendar year, from the date of the form submitted
pursuant to Subsection A.
F. The City Clerk shall provide a copy of the then-current Do Not Knock
Registry to each person issued a peddler's license pursuant to § 526-38.
A copy of the Do Not Knock Registry shall also be available for public
inspection in the City Clerk's office during regular business hours and
on the City's website.
G. The failure to add a residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling to
the Do Not Knock registry, or to remove a residence, house, apartment,
or other dwelling from the registry, shall not be grounds for any claim
against the City.
A. No licensee, in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, shall obstruct
any street, alley, sidewalk or driveway except as may be necessary and
reasonable to consummate a sale, nor remain, barter, sell, offer or
expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in front of or at the
side of any property against the wish or desire of the property owner or
the tenant or occupant of such property.
§ 526-38 ROYAL OAK CODE § 526-39
507:528
§ 526-40. Prohibited practices.
§ 526-41. Misrepresentation of endorsement by City.
No person shall represent that the granting of a license under this article
is an endorsement by the City of the particular organization involved, and
any such representation is hereby declared to be a misrepresentation of fact
and subject to the provisions for revocation of the license.
§ 526-42. Assignment of license prohibited.
A license granted pursuant to this article may not be assigned, transferred,
or otherwise utilized by any person or entity other than the licensee.
§ 526-43. Suspension or revocation.
Upon a violation of this article, or any other applicable ordinance, a license
granted pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked pursuant to
Chapter 425 of the City Code, as amended.
§ 526-44. Violations and penalties.
B. No licensee shall engage in peddling on any street, alley or public place
after having been requested to desist by any police officer or code
enforcement officer of the City because of congested or dangerous
traffic conditions.
A. No licensee on a residential street shall shout or cry out his or her
goods or merchandise, nor blow any horns, sirens or use other similar
devices to attract the attention of the public.
B. No licensee shall enter upon property which has posted a "No
Solicitation" sign or its equivalent or which at that time is on the Do Not
Knock Registry established and maintained pursuant to § 526-38 for the
purpose of peddling, unless the licensee has previously been invited on
the premises by the owner, lessee, or an adult occupant thereof.
C. No licensee shall fail to leave premises when asked by the owner or
occupant to do so.
D. No licensee shall call at any residence within the City before 10:00 a.m.
nor after 7:00 p.m., except upon the previously arranged request of the
occupant thereof. [Amended 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
E. No licensee shall enter, or attempt to enter, any residence without an
express invitation from an adult occupant of the residence.
F. No licensee shall engage in any peddling other than that specified in his
or her application for a peddler's license.
A. A violation of § 526-40B is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to
$500.
§ 526-39 PARKING SYSTEM § 526-44
507:529
B. A violation of any other provision of this article is a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of up to $500 and/or 90 days in jail.
§ 526-44 ROYAL OAK CODE § 526-44
507:530
Chapter 547
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public auctions — See Ch. 201.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278.
General licensing — See Ch. 425.
City Market — See Ch. 441.
Merchants and mercantile
establishments — See Ch. 458.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 521.
Peddling, soliciting and transient
merchants — See Ch. 526.
Secondhand good; junk — See Ch. 593.
§ 547-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT of EMPLOYEE — A person who, for compensation or valuable
consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer.
DEALER — Any person, corporation, partnership, or association which, in
whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent
transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within
this state.
GOLD — Elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the
chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination
with its alloys or any other metal.
JEWELRY — An ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious
gem or coins made into jewelry.
LOCAL POLICE AGENCY — The police agency of the City of Royal Oak.
PLATINUM — Elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and
the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in
combination with its alloys or any other metal.
PRECIOUS GEM — A diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst,
emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline or
pearl.
PRECIOUS ITEM — Jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold,
silver or platinum. "Precious" item does not include the following:
Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or in behalf of, a
government or private mint.
A.
Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and commodity
exchanges.
B.
§ 526-44 PARKING SYSTEM § 547-1
507:531
SILVER — Elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the
chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination
with its alloys or any other metal.
§ 547-2. Administration; review of applications.
The Director of Public Safety for the City of Royal Oak, or his or her
designee, shall be responsible for reviewing all applications for a certificate
of registration and upon approval shall transmit a copy of the application
and the certificate of registration to the Clerk of the City of Royal Oak.
§ 547-3. Application for certificate of registration by dealers; fee.
Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered
under this Act,100 a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them
directly from a manufacturer.
C.
D. Industrial machinery or equipment.
An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item
was purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales receipt.
E.
An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner
that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the
customer.
F.
An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial
mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.
G.
Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum
which are recoverable as a by-product.
H.
Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater
value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer.
I.
A. A dealer who applies for a certificate of registration shall submit the
following information on the form provided:
(1) His or her name, home address, phone number, driver's license
number, date of birth, and right thumb print (print to be affixed to
the application by the Police Department). Applications for more
than one establishment shall be made on separate application
forms.
(2) The name, address, telephone number, and hours of the dealer's
business. If the dealer's business is a corporation, an updated copy
of the articles of incorporation or a valid certified copy of the
assumed name certificate from the Clerk of Oakland County must
be provided.
100. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 445.481 et seq., the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act.
§ 547-1 ROYAL OAK CODE § 547-3
507:532
§ 547-4. Record of transaction. [Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-23]
(3) The name, address, date of birth and right thumb print of each
employee or agent of the dealer.
B. The dealer shall also submit a signed statement indicating that he or
she has read and understands the provisions of Act No. 95 of the Public
Acts of 1981,101 as provided by him or her by the Police Department,
and further that said dealer has informed his or her agents or
employees, and will immediately inform all new agents or employees as
to the provisions of said Public Act No. 95 of 1981.
C. The dealer shall submit a signed statement that neither he nor she, nor
any of his or her agents or employees, has ever been convicted of a
felony under Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of 1981, or under Section 535
of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended,102 within the fiveyear
period preceding the date of the application, or convicted of a
misdemeanor under said laws within a one-year period preceding the
date of this application.
D. The dealer shall submit proof of proper zoning or other special
exception permits as required by Chapter 770, Zoning.
E. The dealer shall pay a fee of $50 for each licensed establishment in the
City of Royal Oak.
F. The application for dealer's certificate shall be as described in Exhibit
A.103
G. Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the local police
agency, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's
place of business.
H. Not less than 10 days before a dealer changes the name or address
under which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the local
police agency of the change.
A. A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of transaction provided for
in Subsection F, legibly written in ink in the English language. Each
record of transaction form shall be filled out in duplicate by the dealer
or agent or employee of the dealer, with one copy going to the customer
and one copy to be retained by the dealer pursuant to Subsection E. An
electronic copy of the form shall be sent to the Royal Oak Police
Department pursuant to Subsection F. At the time a dealer receives or
purchases a precious item, the dealer or agent or employee of the
dealer shall ensure that the following information is recorded
accurately on a record of transaction form:
101. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 445.481 et seq., the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act.
102. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 750.535.
103. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 547-3 PARKING SYSTEM § 547-4
507:533
(1) The dealer certificate or registration number.
(2) A general description of the precious item or items received or
purchased, including its type of metal or precious gem. In the case
of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and
the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry,
all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in
the description.
(3) The date of the transaction.
(4) The name of the person conducting the transaction.
(5) The name, date of birth, driver's license number, or State of
Michigan personal identification card number and street and house
number of the person with whom the transaction is being made,
together with a legible imprint of the right thumb of the person
with whom the transaction is being made, or if that is not possible,
then the left thumb or a finger of that person. However, the
thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of
transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or
fingerprint shall be made available to the Police Department only
during the course of an investigation involving a precious item or
items described on the record of transaction. After a period of one
year from the date of the record of transaction, if a police
investigation concerning a precious item or items described on the
record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and the Police
Department shall destroy, and not keep a permanent record of, the
record of transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or changes
his or her business address to another jurisdiction either within or
out of this state shall transmit to the Police Department the records
of all transactions made by the dealer within one year before his or
her closing or moving.
(6) The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item or items.
(7) The form of payment made to the customer (check, money order, or
bank draft).
(8) The customer's signature.
B. The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively,
commencing with the number and the calendar year.
C. Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the
dealer shall send a copy of the transaction record to the Police
Department electronically pursuant to Subsection F, and, if the record
of transaction form indicates that the customer resides outside of the
City of Royal Oak, to the police agency of the city, village, or township in
which the customer resides as set forth on the record of transaction, or
if that city, village, or township does not have a police agency, to the
sheriff's office of the county in which the customer resides as set forth
§ 547-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 547-4
507:534
on the record of transaction. The record of transaction forms received
by a police agency shall not be open to inspection by the general public.
Each police agency shall be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality
of the record of transaction forms and ensuring that the forms are used
only for the purposes for which they were received.
D. The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item
received shall be open to an inspection by the Oakland County
Prosecuting Attorney, the Royal Oak City Attorney, the Royal Oak Police
Department, the Oakland County Sheriff's Department and the
Michigan State Police at all times during the ordinary business hours of
the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is deemed to have
given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. The
record of transaction forms of a dealer shall not be open to inspection
by the general public.
E. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each record of a
transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year
after the transaction to which the record pertains.
F. A dealer shall submit a record of transaction to the Royal Oak Police
Department electronically within 48 hours after receiving or
purchasing a precious item. The electronic submission shall be by
means of modem or a similar device, and in a format that allows the
Department to enter the data into its computerized system. The
Department shall notify all dealers of the name of the employee or
agent who is responsible for establishing the computer system for
electronic transmission and for providing information on the system to
dealers. All dealers shall have the equipment, programs and/or
electronic format installed at their place of business no later than July
1, 2014. No paper forms will be accepted after this date unless the
Department requires a paper submittal.
G. A record of transaction shall be 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches and
substantially in the following format:
Record of Transaction
Dealer Certification # (printed
on form)
Transaction # (printed on form)
(1) Description of property:
(2) (Date) (3) (Name of dealer/employee)
(4) (Name of customer) (Date of birth of customer)
§ 547-4 PARKING SYSTEM § 547-4
507:535
§ 547-5. Retention period of precious items.
A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for
seven calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration
other than that required to make an accurate appraisal of its value.
§ 547-6. Prohibited conduct.
A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not:
§ 547-7. Allocation of fees.
The funds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be credited to the general
fund of the Police Department for the administration of this chapter and
shall be in addition to the Police Department's budget.
§ 547-8. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, if convicted, may be subject to a fine of not to exceed $100 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and penalty in the
discretion of the court.
(Customer's driver's
license number or
Michigan personal
identification card
number)
(Customer's street address)
(City, state and zip code)
(County of residence)
(5) (Price paid) (Name of police agency where
customer resides)
(6) (Form of payment)
(Thumbprint or
fingerprint)
(Signature of customer)
A. Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is
less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or
employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of
stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the person is
acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another.
B. Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless
that person presents a valid driver's license or a valid State of Michigan
personal identification card.
§ 547-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 547-8
507:536
Chapter 552
PROPERTY, LOST AND UNCLAIMED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned refrigerators and ice boxes — See
Ch. 574.
Abandoned and inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
716.
§ 552-1. Delivery and notice.
Whenever any person within the limits of the City of Royal Oak shall find
any lost money or any lost personal property of any other nature, having an
apparent value of $10 or more, and the owner of said money or personal
property is unknown to such finder, the finder shall, within seven days,
deliver the said money or personal property to the Police Department.
The finder may, within 30 days from the date of finding such money or
personal property, cause notice to be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City that such money or personal property
has been found, which notice shall briefly describe the property found, state
the place where found, and notify the owner that he may recover same
upon application to the Royal Oak Police Department, making satisfactory
identification of himself and the lost property, and paying for the cost of
aforementioned advertisement. If any finder shall fail to give notice of such
finding, as herein required, within the time limited, he shall forfeit all claims
to any property right in said found money or personal property which he
might otherwise have had upon termination of the custody of the Police
Department, under further provisions of this chapter.
§ 552-2. Property record.
Whenever any such money or other personal property shall be received by
the Police Department, it shall cause a record of same to be entered in a
book kept for that purpose. The record shall contain a description of the
money (numbers and amount) or personal property found, the place where
found, date of finding, and the name and address of the person by whom so
found. Such record book shall be a part of the public records of the City of
Royal Oak and shall be kept on file in the Police Department.
§ 552-3. Notice to owner.
If the identity of the owner shall be learned while such property is in the
custody of the Police Department, the Police Department shall cause to
be served upon such owner a written notice by registered mail, return
receipt requested, informing him that his money or personal property has
been found and is in the possession of the Police Department. Said notice
shall advise the owner that unless he shall claim the money or personal
property within 20 days from the date of service of such notice, he shall
have forfeited any claim to the return of such money or personal property.
§ 547-8 PROPERTY, LOST AND UNCLAIMED § 552-3
552:537
Any person making a claim for the return of lost money or personal property
shall establish his ownership to the satisfaction of the Police Department,
and such money or personal property shall be returned to him upon
payment of the cost of any advertising by the finder and expenses incurred
by the Police Department.
§ 552-4. Return to finder.
After any lost money or personal property shall have been in the custody
of the Police Department for 45 days and the owner shall not have been
found or has abandoned his claim to the money or personal property, and
there being no claim of ownership pending against such money or personal
property, the same shall be returned by the Police Department to the finder
thereof, if said finder shall have complied with the provisions of this chapter
regarding lost money or personal property.
§ 552-5. Unclaimed property.
As to any money or personal property remaining in the custody of the Police
Department to which there are no claims pending and no finder having
any rights therein, the Police Department shall cause said property, except
money, to be sold at public auction, reserving the right to reject any and all
bids. Notice of the time and place of such sale shall be given by publishing
notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Royal
Oak, the posting of such notice for 10 days prior to sale in three conspicuous
places in the City. The Police Department is hereby authorized to deliver
and convey such property to the successful purchaser, upon payment of the
full purchase price, without any warranty or representation as to title; and
with the understanding that, in the event the rightful owner receives the
property in an action at law against such purchaser, the liability of the City
of Royal Oak shall be limited to the amount paid by such purchaser for such
property. The proceeds of all such sales and any money which shall have
been held for 45 days against which there is no claim pending either by
any purported owner or by the finder thereof, shall be paid by the Police
Department to the City Treasurer to the credit of the general fund. The City
of Royal Oak may purchase property at any such sale in the same manner
as any other bidder.
§ 552-6. Property to which this chapter is inapplicable.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Perishable articles, which may be sold or destroyed within 12 hours
if unclaimed.
(2) Stolen articles.
(3) Bicycles.
(4) Abandoned vehicles.
§ 552-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 552-6
552:538
§ 552-7. Violations and penalties.
Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution, or
by imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 556
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction code enforcement — See Ch.
260.
Fences — See Ch. 323.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 340.
Hotels, boardinghouses, bed-and-breakfasts
and tourist homes — See Ch. 394.
Housing standards — See Ch. 400, Art. I.
Public nuisances — See Ch. 484.
Abandoned refrigerators and ice boxes — See
Ch. 574.
Rodent control — See Ch. 587.
Abandoned and inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
716.
Weeds — See Ch. 757.
§ 556-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk for the City of Royal Oak, being marked and designated as the
"International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition," as published by
the International Code Council, as amended, is adopted as the property
maintenance code of the City of Royal Oak, in the State of Michigan, for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use, and the demolition of such existing structures; providing for the
issuance of permits, collection of fees and imposition of fines; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
(5) Handguns, or other dangerous weapons, shall not be sold but shall
be delivered to the State Police Commissioner for disposition in
accordance with applicable provisions of state statutes, provided
that rifles and shotguns may be sold at auction. [Amended
8-19-1974 by Ord. No. 74-18]
(6) Alcoholic beverages seized by the Police Department.
B. All of the foregoing shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable
provisions of state statutes and/or City ordinances.
§ 552-6 PROPERTY, LOST AND UNCLAIMED § 556-1
552:539
said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are
referred to, adopted, and made a part, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 556-2
of this chapter.
§ 556-2. Revision of standards.
The following sections are revised as follows:
§ 556-3. (Reserved)
§ 556-4. Additional amendments to standards.
The following sections and subsections of the 2006 Edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby amended as set forth,
and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Section
numbers used in this chapter shall refer to the like-numbered sections in the
2006 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. The following
sections and subsections of the 2006 Edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby amended as set forth, and additional sections
and subsections are added as indicated. Section numbers used in this
chapter shall refer to the like-numbered sections in the 2006 Edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code.
A. In Section 101.1, insert: "City of Royal Oak" for "NAME OF
JURISDICTION."
B. Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows:
"103.5 Fees. Fees shall be set by resolution of the City Commission.
Such fees shall reflect the cost of processing, inspection, supervision
and other related costs of regulation. The fees shall be paid into the
City Treasury."
C. (Reserved)104
D. In Section 304.14, insert: "July 1 through October 1."
E. In Section 602.3. insert: "November 1 — May 1."
F. In Section 602.4, insert: "November 1 — May 1."
A. Section 104.8, Licenses and inspections, is hereby added to read as
follows:
104.8 Licenses and inspections:
(a) No person shall rent, lease, offer for rent or lease, or allow
any residential unit or property to be occupied by a nonowner
without first obtaining a license therefor.
104. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding an amendment to Section 302.4, was
repealed 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07. See now § 556-4R.
§ 556-1 ROYAL OAK CODE § 556-4
552:540
(b) A residential rental license shall be issued by the Code Official
if:
(1) An application is submitted indicating the owner, the
number of units and buildings for which the application is
sought, the type of units intended, and any other pertinent
data sought by the Code Official.
(2) An inspection is performed on the property sought to be
licensed and all violations disclosed thereby are either
corrected by the applicant or are waived by the Code
Official upon a showing of practical difficulty by the
applicant.
(3) All application and inspection fees are paid.
(c) A license shall be in effect until the expiration date indicated
on the license unless revoked for cause by the City. Failure to
secure or renew a license in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter or failure to pay such inspection fee is a violation
of this chapter. A late charge of $1 per day, per dwelling
unit, with a minimum of $5 shall be charged on all payments
received after the due date, which is 30 days after the
expiration of an existing license or 30 days after notification
that an initial license is required. All fees and charges shall be
paid by the owner. If the owner fails to pay the City as provided
within 30 days of demand by the City, the City shall have a
lien on the property for all unpaid fees and charges and may
enforce such lien in the manner prescribed by state law for the
enforcement of tax liens. [Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-07]
(d) Suspension or revocation of licenses. Any license issued by the
City under this chapter may be suspended by the Code Official
for cause, and any permit issued by the City may be suspended
or revoked by the City Commission for cause. The licensee
shall have the right to a hearing before the Commission on any
such action of the Code Official, provided a written request
therefor is filed with the City Clerk within five days after
receipt of said notice of such suspension. The Commission
may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate any such
license. The action taken by the Commission shall be final.
Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee
therefor shall not be refunded. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, any licensee whose license has been
revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new license for a
period of one year after such revocation.
§ 556-4 PROPERTY, LOST AND UNCLAIMED § 556-4
552:541
(e) Cause defined. The term "cause," as used in this chapter, shall
include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any
condition to exist in connection with any license or permit
granted under the provisions of this chapter, or upon any
premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act,
omission or condition is:
(1) Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the
public.
(2) Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature.
(3) Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted.
(4) Forbidden by the provisions of this chapter, or any duly
established rule or regulation of the City applicable to
housing.
(5) A nuisance on the licensed property.
(f) Inspections. In order to safeguard the safety, health and
welfare of the public, the Code Official or his representative
is authorized to enter any structure or premises at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and
performing his duties under this Code.
All one-family, two-family and multifamily dwelling units which
are rented or leased, or are intended to be rented or leased,
and all boardinghouses or lodging houses shall be inspected
biannually.
(g) Fees. Fees for such licenses shall be set by resolution of the
City Commission. Such fees shall reflect the cost of processing,
inspection, supervision and other related costs of regulation.
The fees shall be paid into the City Treasury.
B. Section 106.4, Violation penalties, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
106.4 Violations and penalties.
(a) A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil
fine of not less than $50, plus costs.
(b) A person violating this chapter for the second time is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to
payment of a civil fine of not less than $150, plus costs.
(c) A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil
fine of not less than $200, plus costs.
§ 556-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 556-4
552:542
(d) A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent
time is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
or to both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court.
C. Section 110, Demolition, is hereby deleted.
D. Section 110, Condemnation and demolition, is hereby added to read as
follows:
110 CONDEMNATION AND DEMOLITION
110.1 General: It is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to
keep or maintain any dwelling, structure or part thereof, which is a
dangerous building as defined in Section PM-110.2 below.
110.2 Definition of a dangerous building: As used herein,
"dangerous building" means any building or structure which has any
of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions:
(a) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other
means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the
City of Royal Oak.
(b) Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood,
deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or by any
other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or
stability is appreciably less than it was before the damage and
does not meet the minimum requirements of this chapter or
any building code of the City of Royal Oak for a new building
or similar structure, purpose or location.
(c) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely
to fall or become detached or dislodged or to collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property.
(d) Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls
or other structural portions have materially less resistance to
winds than is required in the case of new construction by this
chapter or the building code of the City of Royal Oak.
(e) Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or
because of the removal or movement of some portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building,
or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to partially
or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning is likely to fall or give way.
(f) Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure
or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it
is used.
§ 556-4 PROPERTY, LOST AND UNCLAIMED § 556-4
552:543
(g) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by
fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children
who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor
for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable
persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a
nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts.
(h) Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used
for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage
or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is
unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition
that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined
by the Health Officer, or is likely to work injury to the health,
safety or general welfare of those living within.
(i) Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open
at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed
to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers.
(j) Whenever the Code Official estimates the cost of placing the
building in safe and sanitary condition exceeds 50% of the real
value as determined by the City Assessor.
(k) Whenever any building or structure is under construction or
repair without a valid permit.
110.3 Notice of dangerous and unsafe condition:
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when the
whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in
a dangerous or unsafe condition, the City shall issue a notice
of the dangerous and unsafe condition.
(b) Such notice shall be directed to the owner, agent or lessee
registered with the City. If no owner, agent or lessee has been
registered, then the notice shall be directed to each owner of
or party of interest in the building in whose name the property
appears on the last local tax assessment records.
(c) The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on
the condition of the building or structure, at which time and
place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have
the opportunity to show cause why the building or structure
should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made
safe.
(d) The hearing officer shall be appointed by the City Commission.
The City's Code Enforcement Department shall file a copy of
the notice of dangerous or unsafe condition with the hearing
officer.
§ 556-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 556-4
552:544
(e) All notices shall be in writing and shall be served upon the
person to whom they are directed personally, or in lieu of
personal service may be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to such owner or party of interest
at the address shown on the tax records, at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any
person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served,
in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted
upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure.
110.4 Testimony, determination, order, compliance, hearing,
cost of compliance as lien, collection:
(a) The hearing officer shall take testimony of the Code
Enforcement Department, the owner of the property and any
interested party. The hearing officer shall render his decision,
either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be
demolished or otherwise made safe.
(b) If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or
structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he
shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or
lessee to comply therewith.
(c) If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or
refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall file
a report of his findings and a copy of his order with the City
Commission and request that the necessary action be taken to
demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure. A
copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be
served on the owner, agent or lessee in the same manner as
the notice.
(d) The City Commission shall fix a date for hearing, reviewing the
findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice
to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner described above of
the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner,
agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause
why the building should not be demolished or otherwise made
safe, and the City Commission shall either approve, disapprove
or modify the order for the demolition or making safe of the
building or structure.
(e) The cost of the demolition or making the building safe shall be
in a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the
City Assessor, who shall assess the cost against the property
on which the building or structure is located.
§ 556-4 PROPERTY, LOST AND UNCLAIMED § 556-4
552:545
(f) The owner or party in interest in whose name the property
appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be
notified of the amount of such cost by first-class mail at the
address shown on the records. If he fails to pay the same
within 30 days after mailing by the Assessor of the notice of
the amount thereof, the Assessor shall add the same to the
next City tax roll of the City and the same shall be collected
in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the
collection of taxes by the City.
E. Section 111, Means of Appeal, is hereby amended to read as follows:
111.1 Appeals Board: The Building Code Board of Appeals and its
rules shall also be the Existing Structures Code Board of Appeals and
Rules. The Board shall have the power to interpret the provisions of
this Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his/
her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, so that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public health, safety and welfare secured and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such interpretation when
granted or allowed and any decision of the Board shall be entered upon
the records, and a signed copy be furnished to the applicant.
F. Section 111.2, Membership of the Board, is hereby deleted.
G. Section 202, General Definitions, is hereby amended in part to amend
the definition of "dwellings" in part to read as follows:
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing one dwelling unit
with not more than two lodgers or boarders.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing two dwelling units
with not more than two lodgers or boarders in each dwelling unit.
BOARDINGHOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, TOURIST HOUSE: A
building arranged or used for lodging, with or without meals, for
compensation, for three or more, but not exceeding 10, persons.
H. Section 303.2.1 is hereby added to read as follows:
303.2.1 "Stagnant water" shall mean any accumulation that has not
dispersed within seven days of the last recorded local rainfall.
I. Section 303.9 is hereby added to read as follows:
303.9 Loading areas: All loading areas, automobile service stations
and drive-in food establishments shall be paved with bituminous,
concrete or equivalent surfacing and shall be free from dirt and other
litter and kept in good repair. When lighted for nighttime use, lights
shall not be permitted to cast directly upon dwellings nearby.
J. Section 303.10, Storage areas, is hereby added to read as follows:
§ 556-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 556-4
552:546
303.10 Storage areas: All approved open salvage yards and storage
areas shall be completely obscured from surrounding property by a
solid screen not less than six feet (1,829 mm) in height. Storage of
autos, trucks, equipment, debris, junk or construction materials, which
are not associated with an approved use or permitted construction at
that site, shall be prohibited.
K. Section 303.11 is hereby added to read as follows:
303.11 Exterior lighting:
(a) No owner or tenant of any residential property shall authorize,
maintain or permit the operation of outside security lighting
that shines upon or onto any adjoining residential property
from any residential property owned, leased, rented or under
his or her control, nor shall any owner or tenant of any
residential property authorize, maintain or permit the
operation of any light, including an incandescent light without
a reflecting surface and not exceeding 75 watts, that
unreasonably shines into or upon adjoining residential
property so as to interfere with the enjoyment of the property
rights by the owners or tenants of adjoining residential
property.
(b) The owner or tenant of any residential property where outside
security lighting is installed shall not permit such lighting to
operate unless such lighting is shielded in a manner to prevent
light from such installation from shining into or upon any
adjoining residential property.
(c) Exceptions: For purposes of this section, "outside security
lighting" means any electrically operated light mounted or
installed upon residential property on the exterior of any
building, or on or upon any exterior object located on the
property, except incandescent lights without a reflecting
surface and not exceeding 75 watts.
The exception to outside security lighting for incandescent lights
without a reflecting surface and not exceeding 75 watts would
not apply to incandescent lights installed within a ten-foot radius
of each other whose combined wattage exceeded 75 watts. The
exception would also not apply to incandescent lights without a
reflecting surface and not exceeding 75 watts, which unreasonably
shine into or upon adjoining residential property so as to interfere
with the enjoyment of the property rights by the owners or tenants
of adjoining residential property.
L. Section 304.13.1, Glazing, is hereby amended to read as follows:
304.13.1 Glazing: Every window sash shall be fully supplied with
approved glazing materials and shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
§ 556-4 PROPERTY, LOST AND UNCLAIMED § 556-4
552:547
M. Section 305.7, Free from dampness, is hereby added to read as follows:
305.7 Free from dampness: In every building, basements and
crawlspaces shall be maintained to prevent conditions conducive to
decay or deterioration of the structure.
N. Section 305.8, Floors, is hereby added to read as follows:
305.8 Floors: Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
floors of moisture-resistant material.
O. Section 503.5, Privacy, is hereby amended to read as follows:
503.5 Privacy: Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and
shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or
the exterior. Every nonresidential structure that requires or supplies a
water closet shall provide within the toilet room partitions, enclosures
or compartments for privacy.
P. Section 703.3, Residential unit, is hereby added to read as follows:
703.3 Residential unit: A dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not
be located within a structure containing an establishment handling,
dispensing, or storing flammable liquids or materials with a flashpoint
of 110° F. (43° C.) or lower, except as provided for in the Building Code
listed in Appendix A.
Q. Section 704.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
704.3 Power source: The power source for smoke detectors shall be
either an AC primary power source or a monitorized battery primary
power source; except that in Use Groups R-1 (hotels, motels and
rooming houses) the power source shall be an AC primary power
source.
R. Section 302.4 of the International Property Code is repealed in its
entirety and amended to read as follows: [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-07]
302.4 All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from plant growth in excess of eight inches; excluding trees, shrubs,
cultivated flowers, gardens and planned natural landscaping.
302.4.1 Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a
property to maintain it in compliance with Section 302.4 and after
service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution
in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority
having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation,
any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired
by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in
violation and bring the property in compliance with Section 302.4, and
the costs shall be paid by the owner or agent for the property.
§ 556-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 556-4
552:548
Chapter 574
REFRIGERATORS AND ICE BOXES, ABANDONED
§ 574-1. Door or fastening device to be removed.
It shall to unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of
any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any
kind which has an airtight door equipped with a lock or fastening device
which cannot be released from the inside, without first removing said door
or fastening device from said ice box, refrigerator or container.
§ 574-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $100 or imprisoned for not in excess
of 10 days. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
Chapter 580
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 580, Restaurants, Drive-In, adopted 12-8-1952 by Ord.
No. 703, as amended, was repealed by 4-20-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10.]
Chapter 587
302.4.2 "Native plants" are those plants identified as native plant
species in southern lower Michigan by Michigan State University
Native Plants and Ecosystem Services, a copy of which shall be
maintained at the City.
302.4.3 "Planned natural landscaping" is a planned, intentional and
maintained landscaping or cultivation of native plants, ornamental
grasses and ground covers, rain gardens, shrubs and trees. Nonnative
plants and invasive species of plants are prohibited. Planned natural
landscaping is not intended to allow a property owner to ignore lawn
care duties.
302.4.4 Planned natural landscaping shall be cut back, at least
annually, to remove dead or unmaintained growth. A person who is an
owner of real property shall cut or remove any dead or unmanaged
growth on his or her property, including a planned natural
landscaping.
302.4.5 Planned natural landscaping shall be designed not to attract
rats.
§ 556-4 REFRIGERATORS AND ICE BOXES, § 574-2
574:549
RODENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public nuisances — See Ch. 484.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
Drive-in restaurants — See Ch. 580.
§ 587-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
APPROVED — That which the Health Officer by established regulation
designates acceptable as a device, apparatus, or method which by
demonstration or test has proved workable for its intended use, and which
will not affect humans or animals other than rodents.
BUILDING — Any structure, public or private, that is adapted to or used
for dwelling occupancy as defined in the Housing Law of Michigan105;
for the transaction of business; for the rendering of professional service,
amusement, the display or sale or storage of goods, wares, merchandise,
articles or equipment; for office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters,
markets, restaurants, grain processors, abattoirs, factories, warehouses,
workshops, garages; for outhouses, sheds, barns or other structures or
premises used as an accessory to any such uses.
FOOD and FOODSTUFFS — Includes, besides human food, grain, and other
feed for animals or fowl.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Royal Oak, or his
authorized representative.
RAT CONTROL — The distribution of rat poison and/or setting of rat traps
and/or fumigation and/or such other methods of rat eradication as may be
approved by the Health Officer.
RAT HARBORAGE — Any condition under which rats may find shelter or
protection.
RATPROOFING — A form of construction which will prevent the ingress
or egress of rats to or from a given space or building, or the gaining of
access to food, water or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping
closed by the use of material impervious to rat gnawing of every opening in
foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, roofs, sidewalk
gratings, sidewalk openings and other places that may be reached and
entered by rats by climbing, burrowing or other methods.
105. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.401 et seq.
§ 574-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 587-2
587:550
§ 587-2. New buildings, alterations and extensions to be ratproofed.
Every building erected after the effective date of this chapter, the ground
around it and every alteration, addition, extension, enlargement, or repairs
thereto shall be ratproofed and maintained in such condition.
§ 587-3. Existing buildings and vacant or unimproved property to
be ratproofed.
Every building existing at the effective date of this chapter, the ground
around it and every alteration, addition, extension, enlargement, or repair
thereto shall be ratproofed when a rat harborage or potential rat harborage
exists, and shall thereafter be maintained in such condition. All vacant or
unimproved property shall be kept free of rat harborage at all times. The
owner or owners of any building, vacant or unimproved property within the
City shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this section.
§ 587-4. Storage.
All building material, lumber, boxes, cartons, barrels, cans, containers,
machinery, raw material, junk, fabricated goods, food, foodstuffs, and
similar things which may afford harborage or food for rats shall be kept,
stored, and handled in such a manner as to not permit rat harborage.
§ 587-5. Rat control.
Whenever there is a rat infestation in any building, open area, or other
premises, the occupants thereof, and in the case of multiple dwelling the
owner or owners thereof, shall institute rat control and shall continuously
maintain such measures until any such building, open area, or other
premises are declared by the Health Officer or the Chief Inspector to be free
of rat infestation.
§ 587-6. Buildings used for food storage.
No building or part thereof shall be used as a place where food and/or
foodstuff is stored, processed, prepared or manufactured, sold or offered for
sale unless such building or part thereof is free from vermin and rodents.
§ 587-7. Premises for licensed food establishments.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, no license shall be issued
for the storing, processing, preparing, manufacturing, selling or offering for
sale of any food, foodstuff or food products unless and until the premises
where such operation is to be conducted have been approved by the Health
Officer or the Chief Inspector as being of ratproof construction, or have
been rendered ratproof.
§ 587-2 RODENT CONTROL § 587-8
587:551
§ 587-8. Repairs.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, contractor, public utility, or any
other person in making alterations, additions, extensions, enlargements,
or repairs, or in making installation of wires, conduits, pipes or other
installations, or for any other purpose to remove and fail to restore in
like condition the ratproofing from any building or to make new openings
therein that are not ratproofed.
§ 587-9. Bird feeders.
No person shall feed wild birds other than by means of approved containers
elevated at least 48 inches above the ground level.
§ 587-10. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Health Officer is hereby empowered to promulgate and enforce all
reasonable rules and regulations for carrying out the purpose and intent of
this chapter.
§ 587-11. Approval of materials.
All ratproofing required by the provisions of this chapter shall be done with
materials approved by the Health Officer and the Chief Inspector for the
purpose intended.
§ 587-12. Storage requirements.
§ 587-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-9]
A. Exterior storage. All building material, lumber, boxes, cartons, barrels,
bottles, cans, containers, machinery, junk, raw materials, fabricated
goods and similar items which may afford harborage for rats shall be
stored or stacked either upon ratproof paved areas or elevated 18
inches above the ground, and shall be so separated into storage units as
to minimize the possibility of rat harborage and as to permit inspection
and extermination procedures.
B. Interior storage. All food and foodstuffs shall be stored in such a
manner that ample spaces between floors, walls, and partitions are
provided to permit proper cleaning, inspection, and exterminating
procedures.
A. A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $25, plus costs.
B. A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $50, plus costs.
§ 587-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 587-13
587:552
Chapter 593
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 593, Secondhand Goods; Junk, adopted 7-11-1938 by
Ord. No. 337, as amended, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10.]
Chapter 600
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Southeastern Oakland County Water
Authority — See Ch. 160.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 351.
Wastewater — See Ch. 740.
Water — See Ch. 745.
Waterworks — See Ch. 752.
C. A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $75, plus costs.
D. A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 587-13 RODENT CONTROL § 587-13
587:553

ARTICLE I
Sewage Disposal Charges
[Adopted 4-17-1944 by Ord. No. 446]
§ 600-1. Rates; billing. [Amended 1-5-1976 by Ord. No. 76-2;
8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13]
The rates for sewage disposal services furnished by the City of Royal Oak
shall be applied uniformly to all water consumers within its corporate limits
whose premises have available a sewer or sewers from which the sanitary
sewage is finally discharged into the Southeastern Oakland County Sewage
Disposal System. Such rates shall be applied on the basis of the quantity
of water used in or on said premises regardless of the purpose for which
the water is used or the character or concentration of the sewage delivered
from the property to the sewage disposal system. The amount thereof shall
be measured by the water meter installed on the premises, or, if there be
no such water meter, then for the purpose of determining sewage disposal
charges the water consumption thereon shall be estimated in a manner
prescribed or approved by the Detroit Board of Water Commissioners. The
rate per quarter shall be an amount determined by the City Commission and
established by Commission resolution taking into account all necessary and
related costs of sewage disposal and bearing a reasonable relationship to
the obligation imposed upon the City for sewage disposal. If the character
of sewage from any manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises
is such that it imposes an unreasonable additional burden upon the sewage
system of the City or upon said Southeastern Oakland County Sewage
Disposal System or upon the sewage disposal system of the City of Detroit,
then an additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates,
or it may be required that such sewage be treated by the person, firm
or corporation responsible therefor being emptied into any public drain or
sewer, or the right to so empty such sewage be denied, if necessary, for the
protection of any of the above systems or the public health or safety. The
City shall include each year in its tax budget an amount sufficient to pay
for sewage disposal service of a general public nature furnished to the City
at large, which charges shall be at the foregoing rate and shall be based
upon water consumption, which shall be estimated by the legislative body
of the City where the water is not actually metered. Charges for sewage
disposal shall be billed and collected quarterly except where water charges
are billed monthly, in which cases sewage disposal charges shall be billed
monthly, according to such rules and regulations as may be adopted from
time to time by the City Commission. Where possible, sewage disposal
charges shall be billed along with the charges for water service.
§ 600-2. Enforcement of charges; penalty; charge to turn on water.
[Amended 1-5-1976 by Ord. No. 76-2]
A. All sewage disposal charges shall be a lien upon the premises from and
after the due date thereof, and a penalty of 5% shall immediately attach
thereto. All unpaid sewage disposal charges which upon the 31st day of
December have remained delinquent for a period of two months shall
§ 600-1 RODENT CONTROL § 600-2
587:555
§ 600-3. Disposition of monies. [Amended 1-5-1976 by Ord. No.
76-2]
All monies received from the collection of sewage disposal charges shall
be used to pay the expenses in connection with the collection thereof and
the charges rendered by the County of Oakland to the City for sewage
disposal services. Any excess monies may be used for such purposes as the
legislative body of the City shall determine.
§ 600-4. Administration by City Manager.
It shall be the duty of the City Manager of said City to carry out and enforce
the provisions of this article, except where otherwise designated.
be placed on the delinquent water roll and shall have appended thereto
a five-percent penalty charge. If the items on the delinquent water roll
remain unpaid as of February 28, they shall be reported by the City
Clerk to the City Commission, and the City Commission may require
such charges to be transferred by the City Treasurer to the delinquent
tax rolls. In the process thereof, an additional, five-percent penalty
charge shall be added. Said delinquent charges shall then be dealt with
by the City Treasurer and enforced in the same manner and by the same
means as are similar lien interests.
B. If any premises to which sewage disposal charges shall be made shall
constitute a part only of any parcel of land assessed as a single unit
upon the tax roll, then any such delinquent charges shall be entered
against the entire parcel.
C. Whenever the water is turned off from any premises at the request of
the owner or because of default in payment of the water charges and/or
sewage disposal charges by the owner or occupant thereof, the same
shall not be turned on again until the owner has deposited with the City
the sum estimated by the Department of Public Service for such actual
labor. That portion of the deposit in excess of the actual labor costs to
the City shall be refunded to the owner. The owner shall be liable for
labor costs not covered by the deposit. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-01]
§ 600-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-4
587:556
ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 1-15-1951 by Ord. No. 631]
§ 600-5. Purpose.
This article is declared to be an ordinance to protect the public health and
safety of the City of Royal Oak by preventing the overloading of sewers, with
the consequent danger of contamination and flooding.
§ 600-6. Connections made outside special assessment district.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any sewer connection to be made to or
with any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or combined sewer from any lot or
parcel of land not located in the special assessment district created for the
purpose of building such sewer and for which the property was specially
assessed for the payment of the cost of said sewer, except in accordance
with the provisions and conditions hereinafter set forth.
§ 600-7. Special temporary sewer connection permit required.
No such sewer connection shall be permitted without obtaining a special
temporary sewer connection permit from the Inspection Department, as
well as securing any permit or permits required by other ordinances of
the City. Application for such permit shall be made to the Inspection
Department of the City, and the applicant shall pay the service charge for
such permit hereinafter provided.
§ 600-8. Issuance of permit; contract; revocation of permit.
Such special permit for temporary connection may be issued by the
Inspection Department only after ascertaining that the same may be
granted without danger of overloading the sewer to which such temporary
connection is proposed to be made and only after the applicant has signed
an agreement to discontinue said temporary connection whenever the
property to which connection is made is included in a special assessment
district created for the purpose of constructing a sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, or combined sewer to serve said district; such contract shall also
provide that the applicant will construct and maintain any temporary
connections made by him at his own expense and in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Engineering Department. Such contract
shall also provide that the applicant waive any objections on behalf of the
property served by the temporary connection to any future proceedings
assessing said property for a permanent sanitary, storm or combined sewer
constructed to serve the property in question and other properties. The
special permit may be revoked at any time when a permanent service
connection is available to the property affected, or when the continuance of
such special permit is deemed prejudicial to the properties regularly served
by the sewer affected.
§ 600-5 RODENT CONTROL § 600-9
587:557
§ 600-9. Determination of service charges.
The service charged for such temporary sewer permits shall be as follows:
§ 600-10. Refund of service charge upon discontinuance of
temporary connection.
Whenever the use of a temporary connection permitted by the terms of this
article is discontinued, and upon payment in full of any special assessment
levied against the property or properties for a permanent sewer built to
serve the district in which the property served by the temporary connection
is located, a refund of the service charge shall be made as follows: such
refund shall be payable to the person originally making payment if such
person is still the owner of the property using the connection; in other cases
such refund will be made to the person or persons owning said property
at the time such service connection is discontinued; provided, however,
the amount of refund due may be allowed as a credit against the special
assessment levied against the property to the extent such credit is required,
and the balance, if any, paid to the then owners of the property, provided the
balance, if any, of the assessment for the permanent sewer is paid in full.
A. Where the property of the applicant for which connection is desired is
located outside of the special assessment district in which said sewer is
located, the applicant shall pay a service charge equivalent to the
amount paid by the property owners located in the district who received
substantially the same benefit as the applicant.
B. If the connection is to be made to a main or lateral sanitary sewer or a
main or lateral combined sewer which was financed by the City at large,
the applicant shall pay a service charge equivalent to a benefit charge
were there available for his use a special assessment lateral sanitary or
combined sewer for which benefit assessments would be levied. In no
case shall such charge be less than $100.
C. In case a connection is desired to a main or lateral sewer constructed
by the City with the assistance of the Federal Works Process
Administration, and for which the only cost to the City was the cost of
materials for the construction of same, the applicant shall pay to the
City a sum equivalent to that paid by others using the same sewer,
which sum shall be ascertained by the Inspector by reference to the
records. In case he is unable to ascertain the proper amount, the City
Commission shall determine the charge upon recommendation by the
City Manager.
D. In case a connection is desired to a main or lateral sewer constructed
by the City at large, but paid for in part by special assessments or for
which service charges have been paid by other property owners having
connections to such main or lateral sewer, the applicant shall pay the
amount equivalent to that paid by others using the same main or lateral
sewer.
§ 600-9 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-10
587:558
§ 600-11. Review of applications for connections; determinations
regarding properties located outside special assessment district.
When any application for connection to a sanitary or combined main or
lateral sewer is made, it shall be the duty of the Chief Inspector, or other
persons delegated by him, to ascertain whether the property for which
such application is made is located within any special assessment district
specially assessed for the purpose of paying the cost of constructing the
sanitary or combined sewer for which a connection is desired. If he finds
that the property is not located in such special assessment district, he shall
ascertain whether such sewer connection will be feasible and practicable
and would not overtax the capacity of the sewer to which connection is
applied for. If he finds that said connection is practicable, he may authorize
issuance of a special permit for such connection upon payment of the proper
fee.
§ 600-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall make, authorize or permit a
connection to be made to a public sewer in the City of Royal Oak in violation
of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall, upon conviction, be fined not to exceed $100 or imprisoned not
to exceed 30 days in the Oakland County Jail or Royal Oak City Prison, or
both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Every day
an unauthorized connection continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. If the temporary service connection is used for a period not to exceed
three years, and the property using such connection has become
subject to a sewer assessment for the building of a permanent sanitary
or combination lateral sewer, a credit equal to the full amount of the
original deposit shall be allowed on the special assessment roll, and the
balance of such deposit, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the
property.
B. If said temporary connection under special permit from the Inspection
Department has been used for a period of more than three years but
less than 10 years, a refund shall be made as provided in Subsection A
above, equal to 75% of the amount of the original service charge.
C. If such temporary connection has been used more than 10 years, but
less than 25 years, a refund shall be made as provided in Subsection A,
equal to 50% of the original service charge.
D. If such temporary connection is used more than 25 years, no refund
shall be allowed.
§ 600-10 RODENT CONTROL § 600-12
587:559

ARTICLE III
Sewer Regulations
[Adopted 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 90-4]
§ 600-13. Purpose.
§ 600-14. Authority.
By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the County of
Oakland and the City of Detroit by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act;
the Constitution of the State of Michigan; the State of Michigan Act No.
245 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended; the Charter of the City of
Royal Oak; National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit for the
City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works; the Federal District Court
Consent Judgment pertaining to US EPA v. City of Detroit, et al, C.A. No.
A. It is the purpose of this article to protect public health and safety by
abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of
the disposal of sewage and the quantity and quality of wastes admitted
to be discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system
of the City of Royal Oak, the Oakland County Department of Public
Works, and the City of Detroit.
B. It is the further purpose of this article to enable the City of Royal Oak
and the governmental authorities with which it has contracted to
provide a public sewage disposal system for the properties within the
City of Royal Oak, the County of Oakland, and the City of Detroit, to
comply with the requirements of applicable state and federal laws,
including the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, as amended;
the State of Michigan Act No. 245 of 1929, as amended; the Federal
District Court Consent Judgment and Settlement Agreement, United
States District Court, Eastern District of Michigan, Southern Division,
C.A. No. 77-1100; and the applicable rules and regulations pertaining to
said Acts; and the requirements of applicable National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Permits. Further, this article is intended
to enable the City of Royal Oak to comply with State of Michigan Act
No. 185 of Public Acts of 1957, as amended,106 and/or State of Michigan
Act No. 342 of Public Acts of 1939, as amended.107
C. This article shall govern the design, construction and use of wastewater
facilities under the jurisdiction of the County of Oakland, enumerating
the permit requirements for tapping into county wastewater facilities,
for altering existing county wastewater facilities, for pumping stations
and for industrial connections to public sewers; and the authority of the
county's inspectors or authorized agents in the County of Oakland,
State of Michigan; and to provide a uniform policy for rates for
wastewater disposal service.
106. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 123.731 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 46.171 et seq.
§ 600-13 RODENT CONTROL § 600-14
587:561
77-1100, as amended; the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, as amended;
Public Act No. 35 of 1951, as amended108; and existing or future contracts
between the City of Royal Oak, County of Oakland, the Oakland County
Department of Public Works, the Oakland County Drain Commissioner, and
the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit, or by virtue of
common law usage of the system, this article shall apply to every property
and property owner which is a source of sewage and/or which contributes or
causes to be contributed pollutants or wastewater to the City of Royal Oak
Sewage Disposal System, Evergreen-Farmington Sewage Disposal System
and/or the Clinton-Oakland Sewage Disposal System and/or the Huron-
Rouge Sewage Disposal System and/or the Southeastern Oakland County
Sewage Disposal System and/or the City of Detroit Publicly Owned
Treatment Works.
§ 600-15. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
described in this section unless the context specifically indicates a different
meaning:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500,
also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Michigan Department of Natural Resources
or the Environmental Protection Agency.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Engineering drawings prepared after installations of
wastewater facilities which shall show a statement by a registered engineer
or surveyor certifying this to be "as-built plans" and shall include, but not
be limited to, length of sewer, invert elevation, locations with respect to
property lines, wye and riser locations and depths, sewer material and joints
used, and mechanical, electrical, and structural details for pump stations,
wastewater treatment facilities, and other appurtenances.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — Refers to a
corporate officer, if the industrial user is a corporation; a general partner
or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship,
respectively; or a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in either of the above, if such representative is responsible for
the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates or is the identified corporation, partnership, or proprietorship
representative for responding to discharge inquiries or actions.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of dissolved
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of
weight and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)] as measured by
standard methods.
BOARD — The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
108. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 124.1 et seq.
§ 600-14 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-15
587:562
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building's sewer (house
sewer). The latter begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain that connects
the building in which the sanitary sewage originates to the public sewer or
other place of disposal and conveys the sewage of but one building.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — The National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or a pretreatment standard as promulgated under authority of
the Act, 40 CFR 403.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygenconsuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or
wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable
and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with
biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed
and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine
applied and the amount of free chlorine available at the end of the contact
time, expressed in milligrams per liter.
CITY — The City in which this article is passed.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — BOD (biochemical oxygen demand), FOG
(fats, oils or grease), phosphorus, suspended solids, and fecal coliform
bacteria, plus other pollutants which do not exceed the Control Authority's
interference or pass through limitations or the limitations of this article.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A series of grab samples of equal volume taken
over a specified time period with no regard to the flow in the waste stream,
which are combined into one sample.
CONSENT JUDGMENT — The judgment issued by Federal District Court on
September 14, 1977, US EPA v. City of Detroit, et al, C.A. No. 77-1100, as
amended.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
(DWSD) which has been officially designated as such by the state under the
provisions of 40 CFR 403.12 or authorized representatives or employees of
the DWSD.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A suitable manhole, together with such necessary
meters, including, where appropriate, adequate power source, and other
appurtenances, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
wastewater to be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
county's engineering personnel.
COOLING WATER — The noncontact water discharged from any use such as
air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
§ 600-15 RODENT CONTROL § 600-15
587:563
COUNTY — The County of Oakland, State of Michigan, or its authorized
representative, the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.
COUNTY AGENCY — The Oakland County Drain Commissioner or the
Oakland County Department of Public Works.
CRITICAL MATERIALS — The organic and inorganic substances, elements
or compounds, listed in the register compiled by the Water Resources
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of
Michigan.
DAYS — For purposes of computing, a period of time prescribed or allowed
by this article, consecutive calendar days.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE — Charges levied to customers of the wastewater
system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of
retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. The
debt service charge is separate and distinct and may be in addition to the
user charge specified below.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly into the waters of the State of Michigan.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Detroit Department of Water and
Sewerage or the Director's deputy.
DOMESTIC USER — A person who contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the publicly owned treatment works from
a place of domicile for one or more persons, including, but not limited
to, single-family houses, apartment buildings, condominiums, townhouses
and mobile homes. It shall also mean churches, schools and government
buildings.
DWELLING — Any structure designed for year-round habitation, including,
but not limited to, houses, mobile homes, apartment buildings,
condominiums and townhouses.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the administrator or other authorized official of
said federal agency.
FATS, OIL OR GREASE (FOG) — Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats,
waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable, or
mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard
methods.
FEDERAL GRANT — A grant made or to be made for the construction
of wastewater collection, transportation, and/or treatment works provided
under the Act, P.L. 92-500, as amended.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE — A composite sample taken with regard
to the flow rate of the waste stream.
FOOTING DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter
of a building foundation and which intentionally admits groundwater.
§ 600-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-15
587:564
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods. It is composed of putrescible
organic matter and its natural moisture content.
GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS — The current edition of standard material
and construction requirements of the County of Oakland.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis without regard to the variations in flow rate, but which shall
reasonably reflect the characteristics of the waste stream at the time of
sampling.
GROUNDWATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from
which wells and springs are fed.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of pollutants
from any nondomestic source, regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the publicly owned treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A person who contributes, causes, or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the publicly owned treatment works from
a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade, or commerce, whether public or
private, commercial or charitable. Domestic users are specifically excluded.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The discharge into the publicly owned treatment
works of any liquid, solid, or gaseous waste or form of energy, or
combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry,
manufacturing, business, trade, or research, including the development,
recovery, or processing of natural resources.
INFILTRATION — Any waters entering the system from the ground, through
such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections
or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from
inflow.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW — The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow.
INFLOW — Any waters entering the system through such sources as, but
not limited to, building downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water
discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas, and storm drain
cross connections.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The waste from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of foods that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
A.
§ 600-15 RODENT CONTROL § 600-15
587:565
INTERFERENCE — A discharge by a user which, alone or in conjunction
with discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned
treatment works or its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use or disposal, and which causes a violation of any requirement
of the publicly owned treatment works' NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or the prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal by the publicly owned treatment works
in accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)
[including Title II, more commonly referred to as the "Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)," and including state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
LABORATORY DETERMINATION — The measurements, tests, and analyses
of the characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the methods
contained in the latest edition at the time of any such measurement, test, or
analysis of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American
Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation or in
accordance with any other method prescribed by the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to federal or state law.
LATERAL LINE — That portion of the sewer system located under the street
or within the street right-of-way from the property line to the trunk line
or interceptor and which collects sewage from a particular property for
transfer to the trunk line or interceptor.
LOCAL — A prefix denoting jurisdiction by the City.
MANAGER — The chief administrative officer of the City, or his authorized
representatives or agents.
MAY — Is permissive.
MUNICIPALITY — The City.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a
specific class or category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued to a publicly owned treatment works pursuant
to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
is commenced after the publication of the proposed National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be
§ 600-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-15
587:566
applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH SEWAGE or NORMAL DOMESTIC
STRENGTH WASTEWATER — A sewage or other wastewater effluent which
shall be a compatible pollutant with BOD of 275 milligrams per liter or less,
suspended solids of 350 milligrams per liter or less, total phosphorus of 12
milligrams per liter or less, and fats, oil, and greases of 100 milligrams per
liter or less.
OBSTRUCTION — Any object of whatever nature which substantially
impedes the flow of sewage from the point of origination to the trunk line or
interceptor. This shall include, but not be limited to, objects, sewage, tree
roots, rocks and debris of any type.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) — All work, materials,
equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the
wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with insuring
adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance
with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations,
and includes the cost of replacement.
OWNER — The owners of record of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgagor or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in
control of a building.
PASS THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through the publicly owned
treatment works into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations
which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a
cause of violation of any requirement of the publicly owned treatment
works' NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district or any other legal representative, agent or
assigns, or any combination thereof. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.
pH — The negative reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams
per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any substance or energy added or introduced into the user's
water source.
POLLUTION — The human-made or human-induced degradation or
impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of
water.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
§ 600-15 RODENT CONTROL § 600-15
587:567
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the publicly owned treatment
works. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means,
except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment other than a national categorical
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRIVATE — A prefix denoting jurisdiction by a nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC — A prefix denoting jurisdiction by any governmental subdivision
or agency.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency
or public utility.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT PLANT or POTW TREATMENT PLANT —
That portion of the publicly owned treatment works designed to provide
treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of
wastewater.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned in
this instance by the City of Detroit. This definition includes any sewers that
convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this
article, "publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" shall also include any
sewers under the jurisdiction of the City and/or the County of Oakland.
REPLACEMENT — The replacement in whole or in part of any equipment,
appurtenances and accessories in the wastewater transportation or
treatment systems to insure continuous treatment of wastewater in
accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal
regulations.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEPARATE — A prefix denoting a wastewater transmission facility or sewer
which is intended to transport sanitary wastewater only.
SERVICE AREA — Any area whose wastewater is received by the City or the
County of Oakland for the transmission for treatment by the City of Detroit
DWSD.
SEWAGE or WASTEWATER — Spent water which may be a combination of
the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, institutions, or other land uses, including drainage water
and groundwater inadvertently present in said waste.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT —
Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. See
the following definitions modifying sewer:
§ 600-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-15
587:568
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — The sum of the applicable user charge,
surcharges and debt service charges.
SHALL — Is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT USER — Any industrial user of the POTW as defined herein
who:
BUILDING SEWER — In plumbing, the extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. Also called "house
connection."
A.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intending to receive both wastewater
and storm- or surface or drainage water.
B.
COMMON SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights.
C.
D. COUNTY SEWER — A public sewer controlled by the county agency.
INTERCEPTING SEWER — A sewer that received dry-weather flow
from a number of transverse sewers of outlets in frequently additional
predetermined quantities of stormwater (if from a combined system)
and conducts such waters to a point for treatment of disposal.
E.
LATERAL SEWER — A sewer which is designed to receive a building
sewer.
F.
MUNICIPAL SEWER — A public sewer exclusive of a county sewer or
City of Detroit sewer.
G.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.
H.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
waste from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground-, storm-, and
surface waters and drainage water that are not admitted intentionally.
I.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries stormwater and surface water,
street wash and other wash waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic
wastewater and industrial wastewater. Also called a "storm drain."
J.
TRUNK SEWER or TRUNK LINE — A sewer which connects the lateral
sewer to the intercepting sewer and to which building sewers may be
connected.
K.
Has a discharge flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday,
exclusive of stormwater and sanitary wastewater; or
A.
Has discharges subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards; or
B.
Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations
of this article; or
C.
§ 600-15 RODENT CONTROL § 600-15
587:569
SLUG — Any pollutant released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
concentration which will cause interference or pass through at the POTW
as determined by the Control Authority.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — Refers to a
classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget, 1972, as amended.
STANDARD METHODS — The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136
"Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants."
Where these two references are in disagreement on procedures for the
analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR 136 shall be
followed.
STATE — The State of Michigan.
STORMWATER — The water running off from the surface of a drainage area
during and immediately after a period of rain.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the City Department of Public
Works or his duly authorized representative or agent.
SURCHARGE — An additional charge which may be imposed to cover
the cost of treatment of excess strength wastewater discharged by any
customer.
SURFACE WATER —
Has, in its discharge, toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section
307 of the Act, or other applicable federal and state laws and
regulations which are in concentrations and volumes that are subject to
regulation under this article as determined by the Control Authorities;
or
D.
Is required to obtain a permit for the pretreatment, storage, or disposal
of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by the state or
adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended,
by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and any
amendments thereto and who may or does contribute or allow waste
or wastewater into the POTW, including, but not limited to, leachate or
runoff; or
E.
Is found by the Control Authority to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
POTW, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air
emissions generated by the POTW.
F.
All water on the surface as distinguished from groundwater or
subterranean water.
A.
§ 600-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-15
587:570
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods.
TOTAL EQUIVALENT MASTER METERED WATER CONSUMPTION — The
equivalent to the total amount of potable water used by a municipality as
recorded by a master water meter for sewered premises, and shall include,
but not be limited to, fire protection water, gardening and lawn water.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of
Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in
the critical materials register promulgated by the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources, or other federal or state laws, rules or regulations.
UNCONTAMINATED INDUSTRIAL WASTE or UNPOLLUTED INDUSTRIAL
PROCESS WATER — Industrial process water or cooling water which has
not come into contact with any substance used in or incidental to industrial
processing operations and to which no chemical or other substance has
been added, and which is completely compatible with applicable stream
standards, excepting thermal limitations.
UPSET or UPSET CONDITION — An exceptional incident in which there
is an unintentional or temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under
this article or with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset
does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works as defined herein.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the
cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works pursuant to Section
204(b) of P.L. 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or
permitted to enter the publicly owned treatment works. Wastewater may
also contain infiltration and inflow waters and cooling water.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS — Permits issued by the Control
Authority or its designated representative as set forth in Section 7 of this
article.109
Water appearing on the surface in a diffused state, with no permanent
source of supply or regular course for any considerable time, as
distinguished from water appearing in watercourses, lakes, or ponds.
B.
109. Editor's Note: Original Section 7, General wastewater disposal regulations, was repealed
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-05.
§ 600-15 RODENT CONTROL § 600-15
587:571
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial waste, and
dispose of the effluent.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Refers to all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
§ 600-16. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
CWA — Clean Water Act.
DWSD — Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
FOG — Fats, oil or grease.
l — Liter.
MDNR — Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
mg — Milligrams.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
O&M — Operation and maintenance.
P — Phosphorus.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
SICM — Standard Industrial Classification Manual.
SS — Suspended soils.
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS — Total suspended solid.
USC — United States Code.110
§ 600-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-17
587:572
§ 600-17. General regulations of Oakland County Drain
Commissioner sewage disposal system.
A. This section sets forth the procedures and regulations governing the
granting of permits to connect into the Twelve Towns relief drains
directly and to all other county drains that are tributary directly or
indirectly to the facilities under the jurisdiction of the Southeastern
Oakland County Sewage Disposal System.
B. General.
(1) Each municipality is requested to furnish an up-to-date plan of its
sewerage system. Plan should include the location, size and
direction of flow in all existing sewers. Sewers should be identified
as separated or combined. Pumping stations, flow regulation and
diversion structure should be shown.
(2) Plans for laterals shall be submitted in the name of the municipality
by the municipal officials or a firm of consulting engineers officially
authorized to do so. Generally, this authority will be vested in the
City Engineer or a single firm of consulting engineers retained as
the City Engineer. All plans submitted to this office shall bear the
signature of the above designated official.
(3) A letter requesting the approval of plans by the Oakland County
Drain Commissioner's Office and the Water Quality Division of the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources (formerly known as the
"Michigan Health Department") shall be addressed to the Oakland
County Drain Commissioner and be accompanied by a minimum of
five sets of plans. Upon approval of the plans, the Drain
Commissioner's Office will retain one set and forward the
remaining sets to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources
along with a letter requesting its approval. Copies of this letter will
be sent to the applicant municipality and the consulting engineer.
The Michigan Department of Natural Resources, upon its approval
of the plans, will return at least three sets of approved plans
bearing the construction permit number to the applicant
municipality. The applicant municipality will keep one set, send one
set to the Oakland County Drain Commissioner and send one set to
the consulting engineer. In the event that the applicant
municipality or consulting engineer requires an extra set of
approved plans, additional sets shall be included with the initial
request for approval.
(4) Plan detail. Plans submitted to this office for review must meet the
following requirements:
110. Editor's Note: Original Section 5, General regulations of Oakland County Department of
Public Works, County of Oakland, sewage disposal systems, which previously followed this
section, was repealed 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10.
§ 600-17 RODENT CONTROL § 600-17
587:573
(a) General location plan which shows the relationship to existing
sewerage facilities, including outlet sewer interceptors,
pumping stations, etc.
(b) Detail plan and profile drawings along with criteria of
hydraulic design (storm frequency, line capacity, line velocities,
tributary areas, etc.).
(c) Material and construction standards, regular and special.
(d) Desirable scale and size for plan and profile drawings are:
[1] Horizontal scale: one inch equals 100 feet, one inch equals
50 feet.
[2] Vertical scale: one inch equals 10 feet, one inch equals five
feet.
[3] Plan size: 24 inches by 36 inches.
C. Regulations governing connections in combined sewer areas (including
Twelve Towns relief drains and county combined drains tributary
thereto).
(1) A connection permit must be obtained prior to connection to a
county drain from the Oakland County Drain Commissioner's
Office, One Public Works Drive, Pontiac, Michigan 48054
(858-0958). A legal description of the property to be served by the
connection is required.
(2) The fee as determined by the Drain Commissioner for connection
permits shall be $150 which is to cover the cost of the inspection of
the tap.
(3) The connection to the county drain will be made under the
supervision of an inspector from the Drain Commissioner's office in
accordance with approved plans of said connection.
(4) A minimum of 24 hours' notice (excluding Saturday, Sunday, and
holidays) must be given prior to tap to enable this office to arrange
for inspection.
(5) Requests for inspection shall be directed to the technician charged
with the responsibility of permit issuance (858-0978).
(6) All lines connected to county drains shall be clean (free from silt,
dirt, debris, etc.).
(7) Yard drains, catch basins, weep tile, perimeter drains or other
structures used for the collection and conveyance of stormwater
will be permitted to outlet into the county combined drains,
provided said properties lie within said drainage district.
Downspouts and eaves troughs shall not be directly connected to
any City sewer or county combined drains that lie within the
§ 600-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-17
587:574
combined drainage district. [Amended 5-3-1999 by Ord. No.
99-10]
(8) The contractor, during the construction of a lateral, shall install a
suitable bulkhead to prevent sand, silt, dirt or other debris from
entering the county drain. Upon work completion and removal of
any debris that may have collected, the contractor shall contact the
Inspection Office for permission to remove the bulkhead.
(9) A connection from any industrial plant or facility using chemical
processes shall be provided with a readily available sampling point
(manhole or equivalent).
(10) All wastes discharged into county drains shall meet the standards
as specified in Section 7 of this article.111
D. Regulations to prevent the discharge of stormwater and groundwater
into the southeastern system from those areas lying outside the
designated combined sewer area.
(1) All sanitary sewer systems (lying in these areas of the SOCSDS
district, designated as separated) to be connected directly or
indirectly into the intercepting sewer or sewers of the SOCSDS
prior to connection shall meet the following requirements: [NOTE:
"System" defined as a lateral having two or more connections. A
construction permit from the Michigan State Department of
Natural Resources is required for a sewer system.]
(a) A connection permit shall be obtained by the owner or
contractor from the Oakland County Drain Commissioner's
Office. Said connection permit shall show the location of the
work, the extent of the work, information regarding the
contractor, the owner and the engineer, the scheduled date of
infiltration test and any other pertinent information as shall be
determined necessary by the Oakland County Drain
Commissioner. A fee shall be charged for said permit to cover
the cost of inspection of the connection and system connected.
(b) All sewer systems shall be subjected to infiltration, air, or
exfiltration tests or a combination thereof in accordance with
the following requirements prior to acceptance of the system
by the Oakland County Drain Commissioner's Office.
[1] Infiltration test. All sewers over twenty-four-inch diameter
shall be subjected to infiltration tests. All sewers of twentyfour-
inch diameter or smaller where the groundwater level
above the top of the sewer is over seven feet shall be
subjected to an infiltration test.
111. Editor's Note: Original Section 7, General wastewater disposal regulations, was repealed
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-05.
§ 600-17 RODENT CONTROL § 600-17
587:575
[2] Maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed 250
gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours
for the overall project. Maximum allowable infiltration
shall not exceed 500 gallons per inch of diameter per mile
of pipe per 24 hours for any individual run between
manholes.
[3] Air test or exfiltration test. All sewers of twenty-four-inch
diameter or less, where the groundwater level above the
top of the sewer is seven feet or less, shall be subjected to
air tests or exfiltration tests. For exfiltration tests, the
internal water level shall be equal to the external water
level plus seven feet as measured from the top of pipe. The
allowable exfiltration rate shall be the same as that
permitted from infiltration. The procedure for air testing of
sewers shall be as follows:
[a] The sewer line shall be tested in increments between
manholes. The line shall be cleaned and plugged at
each manhole. Such plugs shall be designed to hold
against the test pressure and shall provide an airtight
seal. One of the plugs shall have an orifice through
which air can be introduced into the sewer. An air
supply line shall be connected to the orifice. The air
supply line shall be fitted with suitable control valves
and a pressure gauge for continually measuring the
air pressure in the sewer. The pressure gauge shall
have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2 inches and a range
of 0-10 PSIG. The gauge shall have minimum divisions
of 0.10 PSIG and an accuracy of plus/minus 0.04 PSIG.
[b] The sewer shall be pressurized to four PSIG greater
than the greatest back pressure caused by
groundwater over the top of the sewer pipe. At least
two minutes shall be allowed for the air pressure to
stabilize between 3.5 and four PSIG. If necessary, air
shall be added to the sewer to maintain a pressure of
3.5 PSIG or greater.
[c] After the stabilization period, the air supply control
valve shall be closed so that no more air will enter the
sewer. The sewer air pressure shall be noted and
timing for the test begun. The test shall not begin if
the air pressure is less than 3.5 PSIG, or such other
pressure as is necessary to compensate for
groundwater level.
[d] The time required for the air pressure to decrease 1.0
PSIG during the test shall not be less than the time
shown in the Oakland County Drain Commissioner's
Air Test Tables.
§ 600-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-17
587:576
[e] Manholes on sewers to be subjected to air tests shall
be equipped with a one-half-inch-diameter galvanized
capped pipe nipple extending through the manhole,
three inches into the manhole wall and at an elevation
equal to the top of the sewer pipe. Prior to the air test,
the groundwater elevation shall be determined by
blowing air through the pipe nipple to clear it and then
connecting a clear plastic tube to the pipe nipple. The
tube shall be suspended vertically in the manhole and
the groundwater elevation determined by observing
the water level in the tube. The air test pressure shall
be adjusted to compensate for the maximum
groundwater level above the top of the sewer pipe to
be tested. After all tests are performed and the sewer
is ready for final acceptance, the pipe nipple shall be
plugged in an acceptable manner,
(c) If a sewer fails to pass any of the previously described tests,
the contractor shall determine the location of the leaks, repair
them and retest the sewer. The tests shall be repeated until
satisfactory results are obtained.
(d) All visible leaks and cracks shall be repaired regardless of test
results.
(2) Stormwater and groundwater control.
(a) Yard drains, patio drains, catch basins, downspouts, weep tile,
perimeter and footing drains or any other structure used for
the collection and conveyance of stormwater and/or
groundwater shall not be permitted to discharge into any
sanitary sewer connected directly or indirectly to the county
system, except as provided below.
(b) Perimeter and footing drains installed after August 22, 2013,
shall either be connected to an existing public combined or
separate storm sewer, or shall discharge onto grade at least 15
feet from the nearest property line. [Amended 8-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-13]
(c) The crock to iron joint shall be sealed by approved flexible
adaptor fittings such as those manufactured by Fernco Joint
Sealer Company, or as approved by the Oakland County Drain
Commissioner's Office. The iron pipe inside the building shall
be plugged and leaded and remain plugged and watertight
until such time as the plumbing is carried on to the first floor,
the basement backfilled and the roof is on the building, thereby
providing that no water from the excavated basement will
enter the sanitary sewer.
(3) Building sewers.
§ 600-17 RODENT CONTROL § 600-17
587:577
(a) House connection sewer from lateral sewer in the street or
easement five feet from house shall be:
[1] Six-inch diameter extra strength vitrified sewer pipe,
manufactured in accordance with current NCPI
Designation ER 4-67 Standards, or equal, with Drain
Commissioner approved premium joint; or
[2] Six-inch diameter ABS plastic solid wall sewer pipe
conforming to ASTM designation D-2751 SDR 35 or 23.5;
or
[3] Six-inch diameter PVC plastic solid wall sewer pipe
conforming to ASTM designation ASTM D-3034 SDR 35 or
ASTM D-2665 Schedule 40.
[4] Other pipes and joints as may be approved by the Oakland
County Drain Commissioner.
(b) House connection sewers should be six-inch minimum
diameter; however, four-inch pipe of comparable strength and
joint material may be used if permitted by the local unit of
government. All joints shall be tight and, when tested for
infiltration, shall not exceed 500 US gallons per inch of
diameter, per mile, per 24 hours.
(c) The crock to iron joint shall be sealed by an approved
bituminous filler, enclosed in concrete to provide a watertight
seal. The iron pipe inside the building shall be plugged and
leaded and remain plugged and watertight until such time as
the plumbing is carried on to the first floor, thereby providing
that no water from the excavated basement will enter the
sanitary sewer.
(d) The municipality shall issue tap permits for each structure that
is connected into the SOCSDS and be responsible to see that
the above specifications pertinent to materials and
installations are followed.
(4) The SOCSDS, through its agent, the Drain Commissioner, shall, at
his option, be permitted to set up and operate flow metering
equipment to gauge sanitary flow, either on a temporary or
permanent basis, in any sanitary sewer lying within the said
separated areas.
(5) Plans and specifications covering the construction of all new
sewers, both combined and sanitary (separate), lying within the
SOCSDS service area shall be submitted to the office of the
Oakland County Drain Commissioner for review and approval prior
to construction.
§ 600-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 600-17
587:578
§ 600-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days in the Oakland County Jail, or both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court, plus costs of prosecution.
(6) The quality of domestic and industrial waste outletted into the
SOCSDS facilities shall conform to the current City of Detroit
Ordinance pertinent to domestic and industrial wastes. It is the
contractual obligation of the municipality, reference Section 16 of
contract with county, to use SOCSDS facilities to enforce these
standards.
(7) No requirements of the SOCSDS or permits issued hereunder by
said system through its agent, the Oakland County Drain
Commissioner, shall relieve the property owner of complying with
all the rules and regulations of the local unit of government,
wherein such property is located, where such are not in conflict
with requirements of the SOCSDS.
(8) All sewer construction shall comply with the general specifications
of the Oakland County Drain Commissioner; copies of said
specifications may be obtained from the office of the Drain
Commissioner.112
112. Editor's Note: Original Section 7, General wastewater disposal regulations, which
previously followed this section, was repealed 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-05.
§ 600-17 RODENT CONTROL § 600-18
587:579
Chapter 607
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction code enforcement — See Ch.
260.
Special events — See Ch. 312.
General licensing — See Ch. 425.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 607-1. Intent; purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to permit and regulate signs and to
minimize outdoor advertising within the City so as to protect public
safety, health and welfare; to minimize the abundance, nature, type and
size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss of
sight distance; to promote public convenience; to preserve property
values; to support and complement the land use objectives set forth in
the City's Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance;113 and to enhance the
aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the City. The standards
contained herein are intended to be content-neutral.
B. These objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum
amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement,
construction, illumination, and other aspects of signs so as to:
(1) Protect the public right to receive messages, including
noncommercial messages such as religious, political, economic,
social, philosophical and other types of information protected by
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
(2) Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to
motorists and nonmotorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of
signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces
desired uniform traffic flow, and creates the potential for accidents.
(3) Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to
structural deficiencies or disrepair.
(4) Reduce visual pollution and physical obstructions caused by a
proliferation of signs or a magnitude of illumination which would
diminish the City's image, property values, or quality of life.
(5) Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs should be
for identification of an establishment on the premises, and not for
advertising special events, brand names, or off-premises activities;
alternative channels of advertising, communication and media are
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 770, Zoning.
§ 600-18 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-1
587:580
§ 607-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance,
Ordinance No. 2017-09, An Ordinance To Regulate the Construction, Repair,
Alteration and Maintenance of Signs Within the City of Royal Oak."
§ 607-3. Definitions.
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning(s) set forth
in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined
in other City of Royal Oak ordinances shall be given the meanings set forth
in such ordinance(s). All other words and phrases shall be given common,
ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action, motion or the appearance of action
or motion, such as flashing lights, color changes, moving parts or reflective
materials. This definition does not include revolving signs.
AWNING — An ornamental overhanging structure or frame covered with
cloth or metal or other material, designed to provide shelter from sunlight
or the elements, and which structure or frame is affixed to an exterior wall
of a building in such a manner that the structure or frame may be raised or
available for advertising which do not create visual blight and
compromise traffic safety.
(6) Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without
excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and
placement of signs.
(7) Prevent the placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs
of adjacent uses.
(8) Regulate the size, location, etc., of a sign rather than its content.
The regulations and standards of this chapter are considered the
minimum necessary to achieve the substantial governmental
interests of public safety, aesthetics, and protection of property
values, and are intended to be content-neutral.
(9) Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with other allowed land
uses.
(10) Maintain and improve the City's image by encouraging signs of
consistent size which are compatible with and complementary to
related buildings and uses, and harmonious with their
surroundings.
(11) Prohibit portable commercial signs in recognition of their
significant negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics.
(12) Preserve and enhance the image of the City's Central Business
District.
§ 607-1 RODENT CONTROL § 607-3
587:581
retracted to a position against the building or retracted so as to be within a
container or device for storage.
BACKGROUND AREA — The area of a sign face upon which copy could be
placed.
BALLOON — Any device capable of being inflated with air, helium, or other
gas and mounted, tied or tethered in such a manner as to hold such balloon
from being carried away by the wind.
BANNER — A sign produced on lightweight flexible fabric, such as canvas,
cloth, paper or similar material. Flags should not be considered banners.
BEACON — Any stationary or revolving light which flashes, projects or
directs one or more beams of single- or multiple-colored light, in any
manner which, intended or not, attracts or diverts attention.
BUILDING FACADE — That portion of the front, side or rear exterior
wall(s), or any portion thereof, of a building which is exposed to view,
including areas of fenestration.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign cut into a masonry surface or made of
bronze or other permanent material, which is constructed, affixed or
otherwise made an integral part of the building.
CANOPY — A permanent ornamental overhanging structure or frame,
covered with canvas, cloth or other material, affixed to and extending from
the exterior wall of a building, designed to provide shelter from sunlight or
the elements.
CHANGEABLE-COPY PANEL — A sign, or portion thereof, containing
changeable copy, regardless of method of attachment, without altering the
face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more
than five times per day shall be considered an animated sign. An animated
sign shall not be considered a changeable-copy sign for purposes of this
chapter.
COPY AREA — The actual area occupied by a message, whether or not
applied to any background. Copy area is computed by straight lines drawn
closest to copy extremities by the appropriate method identified in § 607-4H
herein.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Incidental on-premises sign, the sole purpose of
which is to guide pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — A sign that can be electronically
changed by remote or automatic means, or that appears to change or
have movement caused by any method other than manually removing and
replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or
change is in the display, the sign's structure, or any other component of
the sign. This includes any video display, revolving, flashing, or animated
displays, and displays that incorporate rotating or swinging panels,
intermittent illumination or the illusion of such illumination, light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) manipulated through digital input, "digital ink," or any other
§ 607-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-3
587:582
method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of
images.[Added 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The City of Royal Oak Building Official or his
or her designee.
EXISTING SIGN — Any sign which is legally displayed on or before the
effective date of this chapter.
FLAG — Lightweight flexible fabric, such as canvas, cloth, or similar
material, that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges, which
is more or less subject to movement by the wind.
FLASHING SIGN — An illuminated sign which does not have the source
of light, be it artificial or natural, maintained stationary or constant in
intensity and color at all times when in use.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign not attached to a building or other
improvement but instead permanently erected upon or standing in the
ground and usually supported from the ground by one or more poles,
columns, uprights, braces or cement anchors. Freestanding signs include
monument signs but do not include portable signs.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign in which an artificial source of light is
employed in order to light the sign or make the message readable. This
definition includes internally and externally lighted signs.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the transmission of a commercial message for the lot on which
it is located, such as "No Parking," "Entrance," "Loading Only," "Telephone,"
or other similar directives.
INFLATABLE SIGN — A temporary or permanent sign consisting of a
nonporous bag, balloon, or other object inflated by any means. Inflatable
seasonal display items sold retail to the general public and intended
primarily for private home display are not considered inflatable signs.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building or buildings
and any accessory buildings or any other single activity, and which is under
single ownership. A lot may consist of a lot of record, a portion of a lot of
record, a combination of complete lots of record, a combination of complete
lots of record and portions of lots of record, or a parcel described by metes
and bounds.
MAJOR STREET — Any street with an existing or proposed right-of-way
greater than 66 feet.
MARQUEE — A permanent roof-like structure attached to a building and
projecting over an outer entrance door to a building, and which projects
over public property.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to or constructed on the face of a
marquee.
§ 607-3 RODENT CONTROL § 607-3
587:583
MASTER SIGNAGE PLAN — A master plan of signage used in a
development indicating the maximum square footage and locations of all
signs of any type on a lot.
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign permanently supported from the
ground by one or more poles, columns, uprights, braces or cement anchors
or a freestanding sign permanently erected to rest on the ground level or
monument base designed as an architectural unit with the sign.
MURAL — A design or representation painted, drawn or sculpted on the
exterior surface of a building or other structure.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign existing after the effective date of
this chapter which does not comply with one or more of the provisions for
signs as contained in this chapter.
PENNANT — A sign produced on lightweight flexible fabric, such as canvas,
cloth or similar material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or
more edges and which is more or less subject to movement by the wind.
PERSON — An individual person, association of persons, firm, company,
corporation, partnership or organization of any kind.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission, with the power,
procedures, and duties as described in § 607-16 hereof.
POLITICAL SIGN — Including, but not limited to, a sign relating to the
election of a person to public office, a political party, or an issue to be voted
on at an election called by a public body.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign not permanently mounted or affixed to the
ground, building or structure, which is designed to be transported or
moved, including, but not limited to, the following: signs attached to a
support structure with wheels; trailer signs; A-frame or T-frame signs;
signs mounted on a vehicle, parked and visible from a right-of-way, except
when the vehicle is being used in normal day-to-day operations; menu and
sandwich boards; beacon and searchlight stands; and balloons or inflatable
caricatures.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses
may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages and
other clearly accessory uses or structures shall not be considered principal
buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is supported by a building wall, and
which has its copy area oriented perpendicular to the building wall
supporting it; or secondly, a sign, any part of which extends more than 12
inches from the building wall.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign or sign structure that rotates or gives the
appearance or optical effect of rotating.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a
building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
§ 607-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-3
587:584
SETBACK — The distance from a lot line to the nearest part of the
applicable building, structure or sign measured perpendicularly to the lot
line.
SIDEWALK SIGN — A sign placed on the ground that is not permanently
mounted or affixed, which is not designed to be transported or moved while
on display.
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is
affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or
other outdoor surface which directs attention to, or is designed or intended
to direct attention to, the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization, or business. For purposes of this chapter,
any work of art or creative artistic expression designated by the City
Commission as "public art" based upon a recommendation from the Royal
Oak Commission for the Arts shall not be considered a sign.[Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
SIGN FACE — The background and copy area of a sign which can be seen
when viewed from a direction perpendicular to the background and copy
area.
SIGN STRUCTURE — A structure used or intended to be used to support a
sign, with or without a sign thereon; provided, however, that this definition
shall not include a building facade or boundary fence or wall.
STREET — The entire width between lot lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open, or may be opened, to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or as a principal means of access
to abutting property.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not constructed or intended for longterm
use or permanently mounted or affixed to the ground, a building, or a
structure.[Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
TRAILER SIGN — A sign with a copy area supported on a mobile chassis,
other than a motor vehicle.
UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN — A lighted or unlighted sign attached to the
underside of a marquee.
WALL SIGN — A sign which is affixed to a building facade and which does
not extend beyond any horizontal or vertical end of the wall surface on
which it is affixed, nor projects more than 12 inches from the building
facade, and which has its copy area located so as to be parallel to the wall
upon which it is affixed.
WINDOW AREA — The actual total window square footage, calculated from
the summation of individual window panels, taken from all facades of any
building or other site improvement.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign within a building placed within 12 inches of a
window or upon a window pane and that is visible from the exterior of the
building.
§ 607-3 RODENT CONTROL § 607-4
587:585
§ 607-4. General sign regulations.
A. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or
maintained in the City of Royal Oak only in conformance with the
restrictions, procedures, standards, exemptions and requirements of
this chapter.
B. All signs shall be so placed as to not interfere with the visibility or
effectiveness of any official traffic sign or signal, or with a driver's
vision of any access point to a street or street intersection, or to
otherwise constitute a visual obstruction to motorists traveling along,
entering or leaving streets.
C. Freestanding and monument sign height shall be measured from the
existing grade level adjacent to a proposed sign to the upward-most
extremity of the sign.
D. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to hinder
ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape or prevent
ventilation.
E. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the horizontal or vertical ends of the
wall surface on which they are affixed, nor project more than 12 inches
from the building facade. No wall sign shall be attached to a building
facade at a height of less than eight feet above a public sidewalk and at
a height of less than 15 feet above public driveways, alleys and streets.
F. In no case shall any sign exceed a level of illumination of 0.08
footcandle and a luminance brightness of 2,400 Lambert, when
measured at the property line.
G. Signs may be located upon awnings or canopies in lieu of either a wall
sign or a window sign, but not both, in those sign areas that permit wall
or window signs, under the same conditions and criteria imposed upon
the wall or window sign. Awnings or canopies with signs located
thereon may project further than 12 inches from the building facade;
however, no such sign shall project from the surface of the awning or
canopy, and must be an integral part of the awning or canopy; nor shall
any sign be located upon the end panels of any awning or canopy. The
area of an awning or canopy sign shall be determined using the same
method utilized for a sign without a defined background.
H. The area of a sign is computed as follows:
(1) For a sign having a defined background area, the size of the sign
shall be measured as the total area of the defined background. For
all shapes of defined background area other than square,
rectangular, oval or circular, the size of the sign shall be measured
as the area of the smallest square, rectangle, oval or circle which
encloses the entire defined background.
§ 607-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-4
587:586
(2) For a sign without a defined background area, such as individual
letters or symbols mounted directly on a building wall or applied to
an awning or canopy, the size of the sign shall be measured as the
area of the smallest square, rectangle, oval or circle which encloses
the entire undefined background; e.g., the individual letters or
symbols.
(3) Where the elements of a single sign are located on two or more
canopies or awnings, the size of the sign shall be the accumulative
total of the area of each awning or canopy measured as if they were
individual signs.
I. Sign area map.
(1) The sign areas as provided in §§ 607-5 through 607-7 of this
chapter are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled
"Sign Area Map of the City of Royal Oak." The Sign Area Map, along
with all notations, references, and other explanatory information,
shall accompany and be made a part of this chapter.
(2) Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Sign Area
Map which may be published, a true and current copy of the Sign
Area Map available for public inspection shall be located in and
maintained by the office of the City Clerk. The Clerk's copy shall be
the final authority as to the current status of any land in the City in
regards to its designated sign area.
(3) Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of
the sign areas indicated on the Sign Area Map, the following rules
shall apply:
(a) A boundary indicated as approximately following the center
line of a highway, alley, or easement shall be construed as
following such center line.
(b) A boundary indicated approximately following a recorded lot
line or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as
following such line.
(c) A boundary indicated as approximately following a municipal
boundary line shall be construed as following such line.
(d) A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be
construed as being located midway in the right-of-way.
(e) A distance not specifically indicated on the official Sign Area
Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(f) Where an existing physical feature is at variance with that
shown on the official Sign Area Map or any other
circumstances not covered by Subsection I(3)(a) through (e),
the Planning Commission shall interpret the location of the
sign area boundary.
§ 607-4 RODENT CONTROL § 607-5
587:587
§ 607-5. Permitted signs in Sign Area 1.
In Sign Area 1, the following signs are permitted:
§ 607-6. Permitted signs in Sign Area 2.
In Sign Area 2, the following signs are permitted:
A. Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: [Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
(1) One wall sign on each building facade.
(2) The maximum area of the wall sign located upon each building
facade shall not exceed 10% of the building facade area or 100
square feet, whichever is less.
B. Monument signs, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Each lot is permitted one monument sign.
(2) The maximum height of the monument sign shall be five feet, and
the maximum area of the sign shall be 30 square feet for a singleface
sign and 60 square feet for signs of two or more faces.
(3) The monument sign shall be set back a minimum distance of 10
feet.
(4) Where the lot frontage on a major street exceeds 300 feet, the
number of monument signs may be increased by one for each
additional 300 feet of frontage or portion thereof.
(5) The maximum height of a monument sign may be increased by one
foot and/or the maximum size by six square feet for a single-face
sign or 12 square feet for signs of two or more faces if both the
following conditions are met:
(a) The sign is completely surrounded by a landscaped area, the
plans for which have been prepared and sealed by a registered
landscape architect, or architect.
(b) The sign consists of individual characters mounted on, or
carved into, a background constructed of brick, stone, wood, or
other natural material as may be approved by the Planning
Commission.
C. Signs permitted pursuant to §§ 607-8 and 607-9 of this chapter.
A. Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: [Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
(1) One wall sign on each building facade.
§ 607-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-6
587:588
(2) The maximum area of the wall sign located upon each building
facade shall not exceed 10% of the building facade area or 100
square feet, whichever is less.
B. Freestanding or monument signs, provided the following conditions are
met:
(1) Each lot is permitted one freestanding or monument sign.
(2) The maximum height of the freestanding or monument sign shall be
16 feet, and the maximum area of the sign shall be 42 square feet
for a single-face sign and 84 square feet for signs of two or more
faces.
(3) Where the lot frontage on a major street exceeds 300 feet, the
number of freestanding or monument signs may be increased by
one for each additional 300 feet of frontage or portion thereof; or
the area of a single freestanding sign may be increased up to 84
square feet for a single-face sign and 168 square feet for signs of
two or more faces, and the height increased up to 24 feet.
(4) Flashing or moving lights, moving parts, or animation may be
incorporated into a freestanding or monument sign when approved
as part of a master signage plan by the Planning Commission for
sites with frontage along Woodward Avenue, in recognition of
Woodward Avenue's status as a Heritage Route and a National
Scenic Byway.
C. Window signs, provided the number of window signs shall not exceed
one in each window, and the maximum area of each window sign shall
not exceed 15% of each window area.
D. Electronic message centers, provided the following conditions are met:
[Added 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11114]
(1) An electronic message center shall not contain any visible moving
parts, revolving parts, or mechanical movement of any description
or other apparent visible movement, including intermittent
electrical pulsation or by action of normal wind currents, except for
electronic messages.
(2) A single, continuous electronic message may be permitted on each
sign face. Electronic messages may occupy all of the actual copy
and graphic area of the electronic message center. [Amended
2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
(3) The images and messages displayed must be static or still images.
Animation, video streaming, moving images, or other pictures and
graphics displayed in a progression of frames that give the illusion
of motion or moving objects shall be prohibited.
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D as Subsection E.
§ 607-6 RODENT CONTROL § 607-6
587:589
§ 607-7. Permitted signs in Sign Area 3.
In Sign Area 3, the following signs are permitted:
(4) The transition from one static image or message to another on an
electronic message shall be instantaneous without any delay or
special effects accomplished by varying the light intensity or
pattern, where the first message gradually reduces intensity or
appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the
gradual increase in intensity, appearance and legibility of the
second message, such as, but not limited to, flashing, blinking,
spinning, revolving, shaking, zooming, fading, dissolving, scrolling,
dropping, traveling, chasing, exploding, or similar effects that have
the appearance of movement, animation, changing in size, or being
revealed sequentially rather than all at once.
(5) An electronic message shall have a minimum duration of 30
seconds, except for changes that are necessary to correct time,
date, and/or temperature information. Time, date, and/or
temperature information shall be considered one electronic
message and may not be included as a component of any other
electronic message.
(6) Electronic messages shall be designed and equipped to freeze the
device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must
also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the
display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately
stop the electronic message when notified by the City that it is not
complying with the standards of this section.
(7) Audio speakers shall be prohibited in association with any
electronic message.
(8) An electronic message center shall automatically dim.
(9) An electronic message center shall be a freestanding sign. The
maximum area of the sign shall be 50% of the maximum area of a
freestanding sign that is not an electronic message center, with an
aspect ratio of 16:9 or less.
E. Signs permitted pursuant to §§ 607-8 and 607-9. [Amended 6-12-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-11]
A. Wall signs, provided the following conditions are met: [Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
(1) One wall sign on each building facade.
(2) The maximum area of the wall sign located upon each building
facade shall not exceed 10% of the building facade area or 100
square feet, whichever is less.
§ 607-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-7
587:590
B. Projecting signs, in recognition of the pedestrian-oriented nature of the
downtown, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Each projecting sign shall consist of a background area, which shall
be affixed to a separate support arm(s), which shall be affixed to a
building facade. The background area shall not be directly affixed
to the building facade, but shall be affixed only to the support
arm(s).
(2) The maximum background area of a projecting sign shall be four
square feet.
(3) A projecting sign may have suspended therefrom a supplemental
sign. The supplemental sign shall not exceed 1/2 square foot in
area.
(4) The bottom of the projecting sign, including any supplemental sign
and support arm(s), shall be at least eight feet above the adjacent
public right-of-way, and the top of the sign, including support arm,
shall not be greater than 12 feet above the adjacent public right-ofway.
(5) A projecting sign, including all support arms, may not extend from
a building facade more than 30 inches.
(6) A projecting sign may not be internally illuminated.
(7) A projecting sign and a sidewalk sign may not be displayed at the
same location.
C. Window signs, provided the number of window signs shall not exceed
one in each window, and the maximum area of each window sign shall
not exceed 10% of each window area.
D. Sidewalk signs, as follows:
(1) On private property, subject to compliance with specifications for
sidewalk signs promulgated by the City.
(2) On public property, pursuant to a license agreement with the City
(including compliance with specifications for sidewalk signs
promulgated by the City).
(3) The City Manager or his designee is authorized to grant a variance
from specifications for sidewalk signs promulgated by the City
where, due to unique characteristics of the property, the strict
application of those specifications would result in practical
difficulties to the advertiser; provided, however, that such relief
would do substantial justice to all properties in the immediate area.
E. Signs permitted pursuant to §§ 607-8 and 607-9 of this chapter.
§ 607-7 RODENT CONTROL § 607-8
587:591
§ 607-8. Permitted signs at all locations.
Signs specified in this section are permitted at all locations throughout
the City of Royal Oak, except as noted, but are subject to the conditions
and limitations set forth in this section. Permits are not required unless
otherwise indicated.
A. Building or house address. Any sign which sets forth the house or
building address, provided such signs shall be displayed and clearly
visible from the street to which it has been assigned, and placed in
accordance with the City's Property Maintenance Code.115
B. Building markers. A building marker shall not exceed an area of 30
square feet on each building facade.
C. Flags. Flags, as defined herein, provided their size does not exceed the
wind load capacity of the pole or other anchoring structure to which
they are attached, as determined by the Building Official. Poles or other
anchoring structures shall be constructed in accordance with the City's
Building Code.
D. Institutional uses.
(1) Wall signs for uses such as churches, schools, community centers,
day care, health care and other permitted institutional uses shall be
permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) The area of all permitted signs shall not exceed 20 square feet
on each building facade fronting on a street.
(b) Wall signs for nonresidential developments shall not be
internally illuminated unless the sign is located upon a building
facade which faces a major street.
(c) A permit is required for a wall sign for an institutional use.
(2) Monument signs for institutional uses, as defined above, shall be
permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) Each lot is permitted to have one sign, provided it has frontage
on a major street. Any monument sign so permitted shall be
oriented toward the major street.
(b) The maximum height of the monument sign shall be five feet,
and the maximum area of the sign shall be 25 square feet for a
single-face sign and 50 square feet for signs of two or more
faces.
(c) The monument sign shall be set back a minimum distance of 10
feet.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 556, Property Maintenance.
§ 607-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-8
587:592
(d) Monument signs for nonresidential developments shall not be
internally illuminated unless the sign is adjacent to a major
street.
(e) A permit is required for a monument sign for an institutional
use.
(f) The monument sign may include an electronic message center,
provided that the conditions required in § 607-6D(1) through
(9) are met. [Added 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
E. Multiple-family residential uses.
(1) Wall signs for multiple-family residential developments shall be
permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) Each development with four or more dwelling units shall be
permitted one wall sign per frontage on a major street, which
sign shall be oriented toward the major street.
(b) The area of each permitted sign shall not exceed two square
feet for each dwelling unit in the development to a maximum of
20 square feet.
(c) Wall signs for residential developments shall not be internally
illuminated.
(d) A permit is required for a wall sign for a multiple-family
residential use.
(2) Monument signs for multiple-family residential developments shall
be permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) Each development with 12 or more dwelling units shall be
permitted one monument sign, provided it has frontage on a
major street. Any monument sign so permitted shall be
oriented toward the major street.
(b) The maximum height of a monument sign shall be five feet, and
the maximum area of the sign shall be 25 square feet for a
single-face sign and 50 square feet for signs of two or more
faces.
(c) The monument sign shall be set back a minimum distance of 10
feet.
(d) Monument signs for residential developments shall not be
internally illuminated.
(e) A permit is required for a monument sign for a multiple-family
residential use.
F. Pennants, provided the following requirements are met:
§ 607-8 RODENT CONTROL § 607-8
587:593
§ 607-9. Special signage provisions.
In addition to other permitted signage, and in order to meet the special
circumstances of some land uses, the following special provisions shall
apply to each use as it is permitted and defined by Chapter 770, Zoning.
(1) Pennants must be securely affixed to a building facade. Pennants
placed directly into the ground or upon light poles, etc., are
prohibited.
(2) No part of a pennant shall be lower than a height of eight feet or
greater than a height of 15 feet above a public sidewalk. No
pennant shall project more than four feet into a public right-of-way
used for sidewalk purposes. No pennant shall project over any part
of a public right-of-way used for street or alley purposes.
(3) No pennant shall exceed a maximum size of nine square feet.
(4) For nonresidential uses of property, one pennant shall be permitted
for each 10 feet of building facade fronting a major street, up to a
maximum of six pennants per lot.
G. Private traffic direction signs and other incidental signs. Signs directing
traffic movement onto a lot or within a lot, when such signs are located
on the lot, do not exceed five square feet in area for each sign, and, if
freestanding, do not exceed three feet in total height. Such signs are
considered to include parking directions, exit or entrance signs, driveup
window signs, restroom signs, and the like. Horizontal directional
signs flush with paved areas are exempt from these standards.
H. Public signs. Signs of a public nature, to include safety signs, danger
signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or
historical points of interest, memorial plaques, and the like, and all
signs erected by or on order of a public officer in the performance of a
public duty.
I. Temporary signs. Including, but not limited to, signs advertising
property currently for sale or lease, signs advertising an on-going
garage or estate sale, and political signs.
J. Underground public utility warning signs. Standard types of warning
signs marking the routes of underground public utility pipes, conduits
and cables.
K. Vehicle signs. Signs painted on or attached to vehicles which are
licensed and used upon public streets for transportation of persons,
goods or equipment are permitted.
A. Filling stations.
(1) Structures customarily erected to provide light and shelter to
gasoline pump islands shall be permitted one wall sign, not
exceeding eight square feet in area, to be located upon each
§ 607-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-9
587:594
structure fascia; provided, however, that the total accumulative
area of all such signs shall be included as part of the maximum wall
sign area permitted on the lot for the building facades fronting on
a major street.
(2) Product price signs may be provided under the following
conditions:
(a) Each lot is permitted one product price sign.
(b) The maximum area of the product price sign shall not exceed
25 square feet per sign face. This is in addition to the maximum
area permitted for any other signage.
(c) A product price sign must be an integral part of another
monument sign or be attached to a building facade.
(3) Customary lettering and data required by law shall be permitted on
a gasoline pump.
B. Drive-through restaurants (i.e., those where the ordering or pickup of
food products occurs out-of-doors or from an automobile):
(1) In addition to other permitted signage, outdoor signs may be
provided under the following conditions:
(a) Only one shall be permitted per order window on a lot.
(b) The maximum area of each sign(s) shall not exceed 20 square
feet per sign face, and the maximum height shall not exceed six
feet.
C. Time-and-temperature or stock market display signs.
(1) No such sign shall exceed the height of the building to which it is
accessory, nor an area of 40 square feet per sign face. Such signs
shall be maintained in proper working order. Cycle time shall not
be less than 10 seconds.
D. Theater-hotel marquee.
E. Merchandise showcase signs.
(1) Where outdoor showcase racks are permitted, such racks or
showcases shall be limited to one sign not exceeding 10% of the
largest visible face area and shall comply with the placement
requirements set forth for monument signs.
F. Vending machines and structures used for storage and sale of ice and/or
beverages.
(1) Each machine or structure is permitted three signs.
(2) The maximum area of such signs shall not exceed 18 square feet for
each sign.
§ 607-9 RODENT CONTROL § 607-9
587:595
(3) All portions of such signs shall be located within the surface area of
the structure.
G. Automobile sales agencies and showrooms. In addition to other
permitted signage, the following shall apply to automobile sales
agencies:
(1) Such agencies shall be permitted a maximum of two additional
monument signs to identify other services provided on the lot, such
as used car/truck sales. Each additional sign shall not exceed 25
square feet in area and a height of five feet.
(2) Where an agency sells the new products of more than one
manufacturer, one additional monument sign shall be permitted for
each manufacturer. Each additional sign shall not exceed 42 square
feet per sign face, and a height of six feet. One additional wall sign
shall be permitted on each building facade for each additional
manufacturer; provided, however, that the total maximum area for
wall signs on each facade does not exceed 5% of the building face
or 100 square feet.
H. Large single-use buildings. A building with a single occupant, which has
a gross floor area greater than 60,000 square feet, shall be permitted to
increase the wall sign maximum square footage listed for the particular
sign area in which it is located by a maximum of 50%.
I. Shopping center sign. A freestanding sign is permitted in Sign Area 2,
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Election to erect signs authorized under this section precludes the
erection of any other freestanding signs.
(2) The maximum area of a shopping center sign is 42 square feet for a
single-face sign and 84 square feet for a sign of two or more faces.
(3) The maximum height of any shopping center sign is 16 feet.
(4) Where the lot frontage on a major street exceeds 300 feet, an
additional freestanding sign may be permitted for each additional
300 feet of frontage or portion thereof; or the area of a single
freestanding sign may be increased up to 84 square feet for a
single-face sign and 168 square feet for signs of two or more faces,
and the height increased up to 24 feet.
(5) One shopping center sign is permitted per frontage on a major
street that provides direct vehicular access to the shopping center.
J. Transit shelters.
(1) Each shelter is permitted four signs.
(2) The maximum area of such signs shall not exceed 18 square feet for
each sign.
§ 607-9 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-9
587:596
§ 607-10. Prohibited signs.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained at any
location within the City, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter:
(3) All portions of such signs shall be located within the surface area of
the structure.
K. One-family and two-family residential uses. Temporary signs with a
maximum area of six square feet are permitted on property lawfully
used for one- and two-family residential uses. [Added 6-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-11]
A. A sign not expressly permitted is prohibited.
B. Signs which incorporate, in any manner, flashing or moving lights,
except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
C. Banners, spinners, and streamers.
D. String lights, but specifically excluding seasonal decorative displays.
E. Any sign which has any visible moving part, visible revolving part, or
visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent
visible movement, including intermittent electrical pulsations, or by
action of normal wind currents. Automatic change-of-message with
cycle time of less than 30 seconds is expressly prohibited. [Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
F. Roof signs.
G. Beacons, except as may be authorized by a special event permit.
H. Signs projecting over or located in the public right-of-way, other than as
may be permitted in Sign Area 3.
I. Portable signs, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
J. Any sign or sign structure which:
(1) Is structurally unsafe; or
(2) Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment; or
(3) Is not kept in good repair; or
(4) Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in
contact with it.
K. Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, color, or manner of
illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety
by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or detracting
from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on public streets.
§ 607-9 RODENT CONTROL § 607-10
587:597
§ 607-11. Permit requirements.
L. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a door, window,
fire escape or other exitway.
M. Any sign or other advertising structure containing any obscene
message, pursuant to state statute.
N. Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
O. Any sign painted upon the wall of a building, fence or screening wall.
P. Any sign which is attached to a tree, utility pole or other structure not
intended to support a sign as defined in this chapter.
Q. Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
A. Permits required.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within the City any sign as
defined herein without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
enforcement official, and making payment of any fee required. For
purposes of this section, "alter" shall include replacing a sign face
or a sign panel. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
(2) To erect, alter or relocate any sign requiring a permit, application
shall be made upon forms provided by the enforcement official,
which application shall contain the following information:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant,
property owner and owner or person(s) entitled to possession
of the sign.
(b) Location of building, structure, or lot on which the sign(s) are
to be erected, altered or relocated.
(c) Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures
and property lines.
(d) Two drawings of the plans and specifications and method of
construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
(e) Copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary,
showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind
pressure.
(f) Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or
association erecting the structure.
(g) Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign.
(h) A master signage plan as provided in § 607-12.
§ 607-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-11
587:598
§ 607-12. Master signage plan.
§ 607-13. Authorized sign erectors.
No person shall engage in the business of erecting, repairing or dismantling
of signs for which sign erection permits are required by this chapter without
first being licensed as an authorized sign erector.
(i) Such other information as the enforcement official may require
to show full compliance with this and all other applicable laws
of the City of Royal Oak and State of Michigan.
B. Permit fees. A fee shall be paid for the issuance of sign permits in
accordance with a schedule of fees, which shall be adopted and
amended from time to time by the City Commission. Such schedule of
fees shall be designed to reimburse the City for all of its direct costs
incurred in the inspection and regulations of signs and the issuance of
permits.
C. Servicing and maintenance. The provisions of § 607-15 shall not apply
to the ordinary servicing or repainting of existing signs, cleaning of a
sign, or to the changing of advertising on a sign specifically designed
for periodic change of message without change in sign structure.
A. A master signage plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department
whenever a building or structure shall be erected, converted to other
use or structurally altered so as to require site plan review pursuant to
Chapter 770, Zoning. The master signage plan shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Planning Commission in the course of its site
plan review process.
B. The master signage plan shall show the size and location of all signs
existing upon a lot at the time site plan review is requested, the removal
of all signs not in compliance with this chapter, and the size and
location of all new signs to be placed upon the lot. The Planning
Commission shall approve a master signage plan in conformance with
this chapter; however, in reviewing the master signage plan for
compliance with this chapter, the Planning Commission may further
restrict the location, number, or size of sign(s) if it finds such action
necessary to prevent the placement of signs in a manner which will
conceal or obscure other signs, directional and/or warning, or signs of
adjacent businesses.
A. License fee. The City Commission shall by resolution from time to time
establish fees for examinations, licenses, registrations, permits and
inspections required by this chapter. Such fees shall not exceed the cost
of processing, inspection, supervision, and other related costs of
regulation. The fees shall be paid into the City Treasury.
B. Insurance. Permits may be issued to sign erectors only under the
following conditions:
§ 607-11 RODENT CONTROL § 607-13
587:599
§ 607-14. Material requirements, construction, loads and stresses.
Requirements concerning details of construction, materials, loads and
stresses are governed by the provisions of the State of Michigan
Construction Code, as amended, and every sign shall be erected and
maintained in compliance with such provisions.
§ 607-15. Nonconforming signs.
It is the legislative intent to recognize that the eventual elimination of
existing signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter
is a valid objective of the police power, but it is also the legislative intent
that such elimination of nonconforming signs shall be brought about over
a period of time and in such manner as to avoid the invasion of vested
(1) Insurance certificates. The company making application shall
provide the City with a certificate of liability insurance, with the
form and amount of coverage subject to the prior approval of the
City.
(2) Lapsing of insurance. If, at any time, the insurance of any sign
erector is permitted to lapse, the right to obtain permits shall
automatically be revoked.
(3) Notification of change. A sign erector shall notify the enforcement
official of any change in address and, if a firm or corporation, any
change in ownership or management if other than that indicated on
the insurance certificates.
C. Revocation of licenses. Sign erectors' licenses may be revoked by the
City pursuant to Chapter 425, Article II, General Licensing, as
amended.
A. Combustible materials. Any sign for which a permit is required shall be
constructed of approved fire-retardant material, except that
combustible structural trim may be used thereon.
B. Fastenings. Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely
and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts, or
approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support
safely the loads applied. All building fastenings must be of galvanized
noncorrosive materials.
C. Windloads. For the purpose of design, wind pressure shall be taken
upon the gross area of the vertical projection of all signs and sign
structures at not less than 25 pounds per square foot for those
structures above ground. In calculating wind pressure on curved
surfaces such as cylindrical or spherical signs or sign structures, this
pressure shall be assumed to act on 6/10 of the projected area. In all
open-frame signs or sign structures, the area used in computing wind
pressure shall be 1/2 times the net area of the framing members
exposed to the wind.
§ 607-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-15
587:600
rights of owners of nonconforming signs and the infliction of unnecessary
hardship. The provisions of this section shall be construed to that end.
§ 607-16. Compliance; violations; appeals; variances.
A. Maintenance of nonconforming signs. Signs rendered nonconforming
by the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in a condition of
good repair until removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
but no such nonconforming sign shall: [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-11]
(1) Be changed to another nonconforming sign. Replacing a sign face
or a sign panel shall be considered a change to another
nonconforming sign.
(2) Be structurally altered or changed in shape, size, type or design.
(3) Be repaired or replaced after damage or destruction if the expense
of repair exceeds 50% of the cost of replacing or duplicating the
existing sign.
(4) Continue to be used or allowed to remain in place following any
activity that requires site plan review by the Planning Commission,
according to Chapter 770, Zoning.
(5) Continue to be used or allowed to remain in place following the
installation of any additional signage on the same premises
following the effective date of this section.
B. Due to their demonstrated historical significance and considering their
integral nature to the building on which they are attached, the
provisions of § 607-15A(3) through (5) shall not apply to any of the
following signs which may have become nonconforming with the
adoption of this chapter:
(1) Building markers.
(2) Marquee signs for theaters.
A. Compliance. The Building Official or his or her designee may inspect
any sign to determine whether it conforms to the provisions of this
chapter. Any person who erects, constructs, builds or causes to be
erected, built, or constructed a sign or who owns or leases property
upon which a sign is located shall permit the Building Official or his or
her designee access to inspect said sign to determine whether it
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Violations. Failure to comply with any written notice from the Building
Official or his or her designee shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
§ 607-15 RODENT CONTROL § 607-16
587:601
C. Appeals. Appeal from the decision of the Building Official shall be
permitted to the Planning Commission in a manner and in conformance
with the rules promulgated by the Planning Commission.
D. Variances.
(1) Upon an appeal, the Planning Commission is authorized to grant a
variance from the strict provisions of this chapter, whereby
extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict
application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional undue hardship
upon the owner of such property, provided such relief may be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
(2) In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may attach
thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other
features of the proposed signs as it may deem reasonable in
furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. Further, in granting a
variance, the Planning Commission shall state the grounds upon
which it justifies the granting of a variance as outlined below. When
granting any variance, the Planning Commission must ensure that
the spirit of this chapter is observed, public safety secured, and
natural resources protected. The Planning Commission shall
determine that the variance approval, either as proposed by the
applicant or as otherwise determined by the Planning Commission
based upon the record, is the minimum relief necessary in order to
achieve substantial justice.
(3) The applicant must present evidence to show that, if this article is
applied strictly, unnecessary hardship and/or practical difficulties
to the applicant will result, based upon the following criteria:
[Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
(a) That the property could not reasonably accommodate a sign
permitted at that specific location;
(b) That the appeal results from exceptional and unique
circumstances peculiar to the property and not from general
neighborhood or City-wide conditions, including unique
architectural character of the building or innovative
techniques that are determined not to be detrimental to the
building or the character of the area;
(c) That the sign requested by the variance would not alter the
essential character of the area;
(d) That the alleged hardships and practical difficulties, or both,
which will result from a failure to grant the variance include
substantially more than mere inconvenience or monetary
concern;
§ 607-16 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-16
587:602
(e) That the alleged hardship has not been created by the
petitioner or any other person presently having an interest in
the property;
(f) That the variance would do substantial justice to the applicant
as well as to other property owners in the immediate vicinity
that would be affected by granting the variance, considering
the public benefits intended to be secured by this chapter, and
the individual hardship that will be suffered by a failure of the
Planning Commission to grant a variance; and
(g) That a lesser relaxation than that requested would not give
substantial relief to the owner of the property or be more
consistent with justice to other property owners.
(4) The above findings of fact shall be made by the Planning
Commission, which is not empowered to grant a variance without
an affirmative finding of fact on the categories above. Every finding
of fact shall be supported in the record of the proceedings of the
Planning Commission. Nothing contained herein shall be construed
to empower the Planning Commission to change the terms of this
chapter or to add to the signs permitted at any location.
(5) Appeal procedure.
(a) Appeals shall be commenced by a person filing a notice of
appeal with the Building Official, on a form to be supplied by
the Building Official. The notice of appeal shall specify the
particular grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall be
signed. It shall also specify the regulations from which a
variance is sought and the nature and extent of such variance.
(b) The Planning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing of appeals and shall give due notice thereof to all
owners of record of real property adjacent to the premises in
question, such notice to be delivered personally or by mail
addressed to the respective owners at the address given in the
last assessment roll.
(c) Any person shall be accorded the right to appear in person or
be represented by a duly authorized agent.
(d) The Planning Commission shall prepare an official record for
each appeal and shall base its decision on the record. The
official record shall include the following:
[1] The relevant administrative records and the
administrative orders issued thereon relating to the
appeal.
[2] The notice of appeal.
§ 607-16 RODENT CONTROL § 607-16
587:603
§ 607-17. Enforcement; duties of enforcement official; notice of
violation; removal of signs; inspection of signs.
[3] Such documents, exhibits, photographs or written reports
as may be submitted to the Planning Commission for its
consideration.
[4] The requisite written findings of fact, the conditions
attached, and the decisions and orders by the Planning
Commission in disposing of the appeal shall be entered
onto the official record after they have been signed by the
Building Official and after written notice of the disposition
of the appeal has been served, either in person or by mail,
upon the parties to the appeal, the Building Official and
the City Clerk. The Building Official shall, within 10 days
after the date the Planning Commission reached its final
decision on an appeal, sign the necessary order to
effectuate the decision of the Planning Commission.
[5] A copy of the official record of an appeal shall be made
available for the parties to the appeal upon request and
after the payment of such fee therefor as may be provided
by the rules and regulations of the Planning Commission.
A. The enforcement official is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter and to
establish rules and regulations incidental thereto. Whenever necessary,
the officials of other departments of the City shall give such assistance
as is consistent with the usual duties of their respective departments.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the enforcement official or his
duly authorized representative may enter at reasonable times any
premises when necessary to perform any duty imposed upon him by this
chapter.
B. Notice.
(1) Whenever it shall appear to the enforcement official that any sign
has been constructed or erected, or is being maintained in violation
of any of the terms of this chapter, or after a permit for a sign has
been revoked or become void, or that a sign is unsafe or in such
condition as to be a menace to the safety of the public, the
enforcement official shall issue a notice in writing to the owner,
agent or lessee registered with the City of the premises upon which
the sign is erected or maintained. If no owner, agent or lessee has
been registered, then the notice shall be directed to each owner of
or party of interest in the building in whose name the property
appears on the latest tax assessment records.
(2) Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person
to whom it is directed personally, or in lieu of personal service may
be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to
§ 607-16 ROYAL OAK CODE § 607-17
587:604
§ 607-18. Substitution clause.
Notwithstanding any provision, standard, or regulation in this chapter to
the contrary, a noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or
in part, for any commercial message on any sign permitted pursuant to
this chapter. If a noncommercial message is substituted, the sign must
still comply with the provisions, standards and regulations of this chapter
applicable to the original sign prior to any substitution. The purpose of
these provisions is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial
speech or messages over noncommercial speech or messages.
§ 607-19. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, enlarge,
alter, move or convert any sign in the City of Royal Oak, or cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter. Every day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
such owner or party of interest at the address shown on the tax
records, at least 10 days before the date of the hearing described
in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not
personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof
shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or sign.
(3) Such notice shall inform such person of the violation and shall
direct him to make such alteration, repair, or removal as necessary
to secure compliance with this chapter, within a reasonable time
limit which shall not be less than 20 days nor more than 90 days.
(4) Upon failure of the sign owner to comply with the terms of the
notice of violation, the enforcement official is authorized and
empowered to remove, alter, or repair the sign in question so as to
make it conform to this chapter, and the expenses for such work
shall be assessed against the premises in the manner provided in
the City Charter.
(5) Except as otherwise provided, the enforcement official may remove
or cause to be removed a sign immediately and without notice if, in
his opinion, the condition of the sign is such as to present an
immediate threat to the safety of the public. The City Commission
finds that sidewalk signs in the public right-of-way that do not
conform with the requirements of § 607-7D present an immediate
threat to the safety of the public, and therefore may be removed
without notice to the owner.
C. Signs may be inspected periodically by the enforcement official for
compliance with this chapter and with other ordinances of the City. All
signs and their component parts are to be kept in good repair and in
safe, sanitary condition.
§ 607-17 RODENT CONTROL § 607-19
587:605
Chapter 612
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND IN-LINE SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 650.
§ 612-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Skateboard
Ordinance."
§ 612-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIVIC CENTER AREA — That area bounded by and including Williams
Street north from Third Street to Eleven Mile Road, east to Phillips Place,
south to Third Street, and west to Williams Street.
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS AREA — That area bounded by and including
Main Street north from Lincoln Avenue to Fifth Street, east to Troy Street,
north to Eleven Mile Road, west to West Street, south to Lincoln Avenue,
east to Main Street.
IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLER BLADES and ROLLER SKATES — A shoe with a
set of wheels attached for skating over a flat surface.
A. A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for civil
infraction and is subject to a civil fine of not less than $100, plus the
cost of prosecution and any other costs permitted by law.
B. A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible for a
civil infraction and is subject to a civil fine of not less than $250, plus
the cost of prosecution and any other costs permitted by law.
C. A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for a
civil infraction and is subject to a civil fine of not less than $500, plus
the cost of prosecution and any other costs permitted by law.
D. A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, plus the cost of prosecution
and any other costs permitted by law.
E. In addition to any penalties provided for herein, the court shall be
authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or
enjoin further violation of this chapter. [Added 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-11]
§ 607-19 ROYAL OAK CODE § 612-2
612:606
PEDESTRIANS — Persons on foot.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway designed for or ordinarily used for
pedestrian traffic.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform mounted on wheels, which is propelled
solely by human power and which has no mechanism or other device with
which to steer or to control the movement or direction of the platform.
§ 612-3. Operation of skateboards; authority to impound
skateboards. [Amended 9-21-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
The operation of a skateboard is prohibited in the Downtown Business Area
and the Civic Center Area. A person's skateboard may be impounded and
held as evidence pending prosecution of an alleged offense.
§ 612-4. Prohibited areas for use of in-line skates, roller blades or
roller skates.
§ 612-5. Violations and penalties.
A person violating this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. The court
in its discretion may impose the following sanctions:
Chapter 619
SMOKE POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public nuisances — See Ch. 484. Air pollution; unlawful burning — See Ch.
633, § 633-7.
§ 619-1. Smoke emissions; violations and penalties.
A. The use of in-line skates, roller blades or roller skates is prohibited in
the Civic Center Area.
B. The use of in-line skates, roller blades or roller skates is prohibited in
municipal parking structures and parking decks.
A. For the first violation: a civil fine of not more than $50.
B. For a second or subsequent violation: a civil fine of not more than $100.
A. The emission of dense smoke within the City of Royal Oak from the
smoke stack of any locomotive, steam roller, steam derrick, steam pile
driver, tar kettle, or other similar machine or contrivance, or from the
smoke stack or chimney of any building or premises excepting for a
period or periods aggregating not to exceed six minutes in any one
hour, whether consecutive or not, or during which the fire box is being
§ 612-2 SMOKE POLLUTION § 619-1
619:607
§ 619-2. Measurement of density of smoke.
§ 619-3. Enforcement; records.
cleaned out or a new fire being built therein, is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and may be abated by the Building Inspector or by
anyone whom he may duly authorize for such purpose. Such abatement
may be in addition to the fine hereinafter provided. Any person, firm
or corporation owning, operating or in charge or control of any
locomotive, steam roller, steam derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle, or
other similar machine or contrivance, or of any building or premises,
who shall cause or permit the emission of dense smoke within the City
from the smoke stack or chimney of any such locomotive, steam roller,
steam derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle or other similar machine
or contrivance, or from the smoke stack or chimney of any building
or premises so owned or controlled or in charge of him, her or them
excepting for a period or periods aggregating not to exceed six minutes
in any hour whether consecutive or not, or during which the fire box
is being cleaned out or a new fire being built therein, shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense, and
each day of such emission of dense smoke shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Flats and apartment houses shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter, but the same shall not apply to buildings used exclusively for
private residences.
A. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States
Geological Survey shall be the standard of observation and comparison,
and smoke shall be considered and hereby is deemed to be "dense"
when it is of a degree of density of No. 3 of said chart or greater, for
more than six minutes in any one hour, from any smoke stack, chimney
or other structure for the purpose of emitting smoke, whether such
period of time is consecutive or not.
B. A copy of such chart shall be kept at all times in the office of the City
Clerk and shall be open to public inspection at reasonable hours.
A. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to investigate all complaints made with reference to
any violations thereof. Upon the filing with said Building Inspector of a
complaint, it shall be his duty to proceed at once either by himself or by
such of his assistants as he may direct to take observations of smoke
stacks or chimneys complained of, testing and grading the density of
smoke by said Ringelmann Smoke Chart, and it shall be his duty to keep
a record of such observations, which record shall be open to public
inspection at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations.
§ 619-1 ROYAL OAK CODE § 619-3
619:608
Chapter 625
SNOW EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned and inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
716.
§ 625-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Snow Emergency
Ordinance."
§ 625-2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this chapter:
POLICE CHIEF — The Royal Oak Police Department Police Chief or his
designated representative.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 625-3. Parking prohibited during snow emergencies.
It shall be unlawful for a person to park or leave any vehicle on a street in
the City of Royal Oak when a snow emergency has been declared.
§ 625-4. Public announcement of snow emergency.
The Chief of Police shall cause each declaration of a snow emergency to be
publicly announced by means of broadcasts and/or telecasts from stations
with a normal operating range covering the City, including cable television.
The Chief of Police may cause such declaration to be further made in a
newspaper of general circulation when feasible.
§ 625-5. Termination of prohibition.
Once in effect, the prohibition under this chapter shall remain in effect
until terminated by announcement of the Police Chief in accordance with
this chapter, except that any street which has become substantially clear of
snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be
automatically excluded therefrom.
B. It shall further be the duty of the Building Inspector to prosecute all
persons, firms or corporations violating the provisions of this chapter
regulating the emission of smoke.
§ 619-3 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 625-6
625:609
§ 625-6. Stalled or disabled vehicles.
Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled or disabled for any reason, whether
or not in violation of this chapter, on any portion of a City street to which
the parking prohibition applies, the person operating the vehicle shall take
immediate actions to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the street. No
person shall abandon or leave his or her vehicle in a City street (regardless
of whether the person indicates, by raising the hood or otherwise, that the
vehicle is stalled), except for the purpose of securing assistance during the
actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage,
automobile service station or other place of assistance and return without
delay.
§ 625-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 625-8. Evidentiary presumption relating to parking or leaving
vehicle.
In any proceeding for a violation of this chapter relating to the parking
or leaving of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the
complaint was parked or left in violation of this chapter, together with
proof that the respondent named in the complaint was, at the time of such
parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a
presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who
parked or left such vehicle at the location such violation occurred.
§ 625-9. Impoundment of vehicle.
Any vehicle parked or left on any City street in violation of this chapter
constitutes a public hazard and an obstruction of traffic and may be towed
and impounded immediately. No person may recover any impounded vehicle
without first paying the cost of removal and storage, notwithstanding, and
apart from, any fine which may also be imposed for violation of this chapter.
§ 625-10. Exemptions; special parking permit.
An owner of a vehicle who occupies a premises that does not have a
driveway shall be exempt from the requirement to move said motor vehicle
in the event of a snow emergency. The owner of the vehicle, upon
application to the Police Department, will receive a special parking permit
which shall be displayed in the front-side window on the driver's side of the
vehicle.
§ 625-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 625-10
625:610
Chapter 633
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials and incendiary-type
fires — See Ch. 379.
Littering — See Ch. 430.
Public nuisances — See Ch. 484.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
Abandoned refrigerators and ice boxes — See
Ch. 574.
Rodent control — See Ch. 587.
Smoke pollution — See Ch. 619.
§ 633-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, wastewater
sludge, or other combustible materials.
BRUSH — Tree trimmings and shrubbery trimmings not exceeding one inch
in diameter.
CHIPPER BRUSH — Tree trimmings, cuttings, branches and limbs
exceeding one inch in diameter but not more than five inches in diameter
with all stumps and roots removed for disposal by the chipper machine.
COMPOST — A mixture that consists largely of decayed organic matter that
can be used for fertilizer or for conditioning land.[Added 2-2-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-03]
COMPOST BIN — A receptacle for a compost pile.[Added 2-2-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-03]
COMPOSTING — Converting to compost.[Added 2-2-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-03]
COMPOST PILE — An accumulation of compost.[Added 2-2-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-03]
GARBAGE — Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal,
fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetable.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste or a combination of waste and other
discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
material which because of its quality, concentration, or physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or increase in serious irreversible illness or serious
incapacitating, but reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or
§ 625-10 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 633-1
625:611
potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
MIXED WASTES — Includes animal and vegetable waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods and all other
organic matter subject to rapid decomposition, as well as cardboard, paper,
cartons, boxes, crockery, and ordinary wastes from residential and business
establishments. Refuse other than yard waste, newspaper, recyclables, and
brush shall also include items too large for regular hand pickup such as
discarded furniture, appliances, toys, tools, clothing and similar materials.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, owner, occupant, tenant, corporation,
partnership or person in charge of premises.
RECYCLABLES — Specific garbage, rubbish or solid waste that is required
to be picked up separately for the purpose of recycling. These items include
newspapers, glass containers, metal cans, Type 1 and 2 plastics, and
household batteries but are not necessarily limited to same.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator
residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, and solid
commercial and solid industrial waste, animal waste, but does not include
human body waste, liquid or other waste regulated by statute, ferrous or
nonferrous scrap directed to a scrap metal processor or to a reuser of
ferrous or nonferrous products.
SPECIAL PICKUP — The collection of household or institutional items,
including but not limited to refrigerators, water heaters, stoves, television
sets, batteries, mufflers, bicycles, radios, household furniture, plumbing
fixtures, automobile parts, rugs, washers, dryers, furnaces or similar items
which may not be collected as part of the regular garbage and refuse
service, but may be picked up and disposed of by the City upon payment of
a specific charge as determined by resolution of the City Commission.
YARD WASTE — Materials resulting from landscaping for collection for
composting.
§ 633-2. Refuse receptacle.
A. Suitable garbage and rubbish receptacles shall be provided and used by
the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises. Such containers
shall be of the type described below:
(1) For containment of mixed refuse:
(a) Watertight metal or plastic containers equipped with tightfitting
covers sufficient to keep out water and to prevent
disturbance by animals. For one- and two-family residential
dwellings, garbage receptacles shall be not less than fivegallon
nor more than thirty-two gallon capacity. For multiplefamily
dwellings, industrial and commercial buildings, such
receptacles shall be not less than five-gallon nor more than
§ 633-1 ROYAL OAK CODE § 633-2
625:612
thirty-two gallon capacity. All such receptacles shall be
equipped with suitable handles by which they may be lifted.
(b) Plastic rubbish can liners with a maximum capacity of 30
gallons, which may be used either as liners for containers or
independently for garbage and rubbish storage.
(2) For containment of recyclables: a City-approved eighteen-gallon or
six-gallon plastic container clearly marked for recyclables only.
(3) For newspaper; all newsprint and materials that are a part of
newspaper only. Newspaper must be stored in such a manner to
keep them dry and placed at the curb on refuse day in paper bags
or tied in bundles. Improperly contained newspapers will be tagged
and left at the curb.
(4) For containment of yard waste: All single-family and multiple
dwellings will be required to contain yard waste in SOCRRA or City
of Royal Oak approved bio/photodegradable bags or refuse
containers, metal or plastic, up to 32 gallons, that are designated
"Yard Waste" with a City decal attached. Improperly contained yard
waste will be tagged and left at the curb.
(5) Multiple-family dwellings and commercial or industrial
establishments that generate two or more cubic yards of refuse per
week shall be required to enclose such refuse in a suitable Cityapproved
container provided by the management and located on a
cement pad.
B. All bulk rubbish accumulating on any premises, such as cardboard
containers, wooden crates and similar rubbish, shall be flattened and
tied in bundles or packed in suitable container, and in no case shall any
such bundle be larger than two feet by three feet, nor weigh more than
60 pounds.
C. Brush shall be cut into three-foot lengths and tied into bundles
weighing not more than 60 pounds.
D. Chipper brush will be chipped at the curb after minimum payment is
made to the City, as set by the City Commission. The minimum payment
will cover fifteen-minute increments.
E. All garbage from residential buildings shall be securely wrapped and
placed in approved garbage receptacles as hereinbefore described.
Large noncombustible and bulk rubbish shall be separated and shall be
in no case intermingled with garbage or placed in garbage receptacles.
F. Rubbish receptacle storage shall be located within the rear yard
setback.
G. Improperly contained mixed waste, yard waste, and/or recyclables, or
other refuse will be tagged and left at the curb. If the City is required to
§ 633-2 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 633-2
625:613
§ 633-3. Building materials.
It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor or other person responsible
for construction work to maintain the site clean and free of excess debris
during construction and to remove from the premises within a reasonable
time after the completion of such construction work all surplus construction
material and all refuse building material. Such materials shall be removed
outside the City limits or disposed of within the City in accordance with the
directions of the City Manager or his authorized representative.
§ 633-4. Collection schedule.
§ 633-5. Collection procedures.
clean up improperly contained material for reasons of health, safety or
welfare, all costs will be assessed as per § 633-10C.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his duly authorized
representative to provide for the collection and disposal of all refuse
within the City of Royal Oak. He shall establish and publish at least
once in a newspaper circulating within the City of Royal Oak a schedule
for the collection of solid waste throughout the City and shall provide
the proper labor and equipment for carrying out such schedule. He
shall change such schedule whenever he deems such change advisable,
but shall publish notice of such change as herein provided in the case of
the original schedule.
B. Refuse collected by the City upon payment of a specific charge as
determined by resolution of the City Commission shall include the
following:
(1) Chipper brush in excess of one inch in diameter, but less than five
inches in diameter.
(2) Other items as may from time to time be necessary.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of any
dwelling house, store or other business establishment, manufacturing
company or other building to place or cause to be placed on the days
scheduled for the collection of solid waste from the said premises the
receptacles containing such solid waste at the curbline in front of the
building. Such solid waste containers shall not be set out for collection
prior to 5:00 p.m. in the afternoon preceding the day of collection nor
later than 7:00 a.m. in the morning on the day of collection. After such
receptacles are emptied, they shall be removed from the street on the
same day collections are made. In case an alley is located at the rear or
side of developed property in a business or manufacturing zone,
garbage and rubbish receptacles shall be placed in the alley or at such
other locations as may be designated by the City Manager or his duly
authorized agent. However, if any waste material is placed between the
sidewalk and curb for collection, it shall be picked up by City-
§ 633-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 633-5
625:614
authorized forces and charged accordingly, whether a call or special
pickup has been made or not.
B. It shall be the duty of the owners, occupants or other persons in charge
of any dwelling house, store, business establishment, manufacturing
company or building to see that no rubbish, either combustible or
noncombustible, is placed or permitted to remain in any street, alley or
other public place, or in any private place except a building or other
suitable storage place. It shall also be unlawful for any such person to
store any hazardous waste, flammable rubbish or other waste material
where it would cause a fire hazard. When any such owner, occupant or
other person in charge of any premises permits any rubbish or
combustible material to accumulate in any public alley, street or other
public place, or in any private place, outside of a storage or other
approved building, after the last regular scheduled time for collection
in any week by the City-authorized vehicles according to the published
schedule hereinbefore provided, the City Manager shall have the
authority to cause to be collected such rubbish or other material at any
time between the last scheduled time for collection at the end of said
week and the first scheduled regular collection in the following week.
The cost of said special collections shall be charged to the owners or
occupants of property permitting such rubbish or other material to
accumulate. The City Manager or his designee shall establish a
schedule of charges sufficient to cover the cost of such special
collections, which schedule of charges shall be filed with the City Clerk,
approved by the City Commission and a notice thereof published at
least once in a newspaper having circulation in the City of Royal Oak at
least 10 days before such schedule of charges becomes effective. The
minimum charge against any owner or occupant shall be $25. The
respective occupants or owners requiring such special collections of
rubbish and other waste materials shall be billed each month for their
respective costs of collection. Before the adoption of the annual budget
in each year, any such charges remaining unpaid shall be reported to
the City Commission and may be assessed against the premises as a
special assessment in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12,
Sections 8, 9, and 10 of the City Charter. The City Manager, through the
Department of Public Works, shall make whatever arrangements are
necessary for special collections of rubbish.
C. It shall be the duty of the City Fire Chief or his designee and the City
Code Enforcement Division to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
They shall see that no rubbish or other combustible material is
permitted to accumulate on any premises or in any public or private
place except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Fire
Chief or his designee shall have the authority to enter any premises
where rubbish or other waste material has accumulated and which
creates a fire hazard, and order the removal of the same. They shall
cooperate with the Department of Public Works in determining where
special weekend collection of rubbish and waste material should be
made. The Fire Chief or his designee shall have the authority and it
§ 633-5 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 633-5
625:615
§ 633-6. Unlawful transportation of refuse; antiscavenging.
[Amended 6-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
shall be his duty to require the assistance of any member of the Fire
and/or Police Department on duty to assist him in determining where
special weekend collections of rubbish and other waste material are
required and in otherwise enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
D. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of any
dwelling house, store or business to dispose of any tree limbs or tree
trunks in excess of five inches in diameter, tree stumps, roots or
diseased elms.
E. No person shall place at the curb for City collection any portion of a tree
that is not brush (see § 633-2C) which has been removed by private
contractor, homeowner or by an act of God. It shall be the duty of said
person to dispose of any tree removed in such manner unless directed
otherwise by the City Manager or his designee.
F. The City or its duly authorized agent will collect up to two cubic yards
of refuse per business per week. Any necessary additional disposal shall
be made at its own expense by the business, its owner, occupant or
lessee.
G. If refuse containers are not accessible, the property owner will be
responsible for the proper disposal of the refuse.
H. The City will not be responsible for the curbside collection of hazardous
waste as defined above. A dropoff location shall be designated for the
proper disposal of household hazardous wastes.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport,
cart, carry or convey through or over any of the streets, alleys or public
places of the City of Royal Oak any garbage, unwashed refuse and
unwashed food containers without the written consent of the City
Manager. Whenever such permission is granted, the vehicle used for
such purpose shall be watertight and provided with a suitable covering.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport or
otherwise convey through or over any of the streets or public places of
the City of Royal Oak any rubbish or other waste material except under
written regulations or with the written consent of the City Manager or
his designee, except rubbish or waste material accumulating on
property owned or controlled by him and then only by approved
methods of conveyance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than the
owner or occupant, his/her employees or agents, or City employees or
agents to tamper or meddle with, take, carry away, pick through, or
scavenge any brush, chipper brush, garbage, mixed waste, recyclables,
solid waste, special pickup, or yard waste from the location where the
same has been properly placed for collection.
§ 633-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 633-7
625:616
§ 633-7. Unlawful burning.116
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of air
contaminants consisting of smoke, vapors, fumes, odors, gas, dust,
mist, particulate matter, or any combination thereof, caused by burning.
EXISTING INCINERATOR — An incinerator purchased, acquired or
used before the effective date of this section.
INCINERATOR — A device specifically designed for the destruction, by
burning, of garbage or other combustible refuse or waste material.
MULTIPLE-CHAMBER INCINERATOR — An incinerator with two or
more refractory lined combustion chambers in series physically
separated by refractory walls, interconnected by passages, and
employing adequate design parameters necessary for maximum
combustion of waste materials.
OPEN BURNING — A fire from which the products of combustion are
emitted directly into the open air without passing through a stack or
chimney.
PERMIT TO INSTALL — A permit issued by the Building Department
authorizing the construction, installation or alteration of any fuelburning
incinerator in accordance with approved plans and
specifications.
B. Open burning. No person shall cause or permit any open burning of
fuel, garbage, or other combustible refuse or waste material, including,
by way of description but not by way of limitation, leaves, brush, tree
trimmings, and grass. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit
fires of charcoal or a non-ash-producing fuel when used on private
property for the exclusive preparation of food for human consumption,
nor to prohibit non-ash-producing fuels from being used not less than
15 feet from combustible materials when used in metal containers for
the heating of building materials and for the warmth of workers;
provided that special or occasional open fires may be allowed with
permission of the Fire Chief or his designee, upon a determination by
the Fire Chief or his designee that the maintenance of such a fire is not
likely to create a hazard or nuisance condition to adjacent property or
persons in close proximity thereto, and that the purpose for which such
fire is to be maintained is legitimate. Any such permission granted by
the Fire Chief or his designee shall be subject to any conditions that
may be attached thereto. [Amended 10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 91-20]
C. Incinerators. Incinerators shall be used in the City of Royal Oak only in
compliance with the following conditions:
116. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 619, Smoke Pollution.
§ 633-7 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 633-7
625:617
§ 633-8. Prohibited storage.
§ 633-9. Prohibited disposal.
(1) Permit to install. No person shall hereafter install, use or cause to
be used any incinerator without a permit to install first having been
issued by the Building Department. Permits shall be issued only for
fuel-burning multiple-chamber incinerators which comply with all
regulations of the Michigan Air Pollution Control Commission, all
regulations of the Oakland County Health Department, and such
general rules and regulations as may be promulgated from time to
time by the City Commission. Outdoor incinerators shall be
permitted only on premises occupied by commercial or industrial
buildings or multiple-family dwellings. The Building Code Board of
Rules shall establish fees to be charged for issuance of permits to
install, which fees shall not exceed the cost of processing such
permits.
(2) Existing incinerators. No person shall hereafter use or cause to be
used any existing incinerator unless such incinerator is a fuelburning
multiple-chamber incinerator or is equally effective for the
purpose of air pollution control.
(3) Air pollution nuisance. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated any incinerator, whether installed before or after the
effective date of this section, which creates a condition of air
pollution as defined herein.
D. Intent. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent to reduce air
pollution resulting from burning to the optimum extent that is
reasonably feasible, and the provisions of this section shall be strictly
construed to effectuate that purpose.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person in charge or in
control of any commercial or industrial establishment to place any
garbage, rubbish or other waste material outside of a building, except
in the type of receptacles permitted by this chapter.
B. A multiple-family dwelling or a commercial or industrial establishment
that generates two cubic yards or more of refuse per week shall be
required to enclose it in a suitable City-approved container provided by
the management and located on a cement pad.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw
or bury any garbage, rubbish, or other waste material in or upon any
street, alley or other public place except in garbage and/or rubbish
receptacles as provided in this chapter. It shall be unlawful to deposit,
throw or leave such material on the premises of any other person, and it
shall be unlawful to bury garbage anywhere in the City.
§ 633-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 633-9
625:618
§ 633-10. Lots with brush or debris; removal by City; costs.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any
garbage or rubbish, or material which requires payment of a specific
charge upon the property of another without prior approval.
A. It shall be the duty of every owner of every lot or property to keep such
lot or property free of rubbish and debris. The Chief Inspector or other
duly authorized official shall notify, by certified mail with return receipt
requested, the owner, agent or occupant of any such property on which
rubbish or debris is found. Such notice shall be in substantially the
following form:
CITY OF ROYAL OAK
RUBBISH REMOVAL NOTICE
TO: (Name and address)
RE: (Location of land where rubbish is found)
Notice is hereby given that rubbish has been found upon the abovedescribed
property in the City of Royal Oak. This rubbish must be
removed within 10 days from the date of this notice.
In case you fail or refuse to comply with this notice, the undersigned
will enter upon said property and remove said rubbish. The expense
incurred by the City for the removal of said rubbish will constitute a
lien against the above-described property, which lien will be enforced
as provided by law.
Dated
(Signature)
B. Failure of the City to give such notice shall not, however, constitute a
defense in any action to enforce the payment of any penalty provided
for, or debt created, under the provisions of this chapter. In case any
such owner, agent or occupant neglects or refuses to comply with the
notice, the City may enter upon such lands and remove such rubbish or
cause the same to be removed. Express power to so enter upon such
property and remove such rubbish is hereby conferred upon the City.
Any expense incurred in such removal shall be paid by the owner or
owners of such property, and the City shall have a lien against such
lands for such expense, which lien shall be enforced in the manner now
provided by law for the enforcement of mechanic's liens.
C. The cost of the cleanup shall be a lien against the real property and
shall be reported to the City Treasurer who shall assess the cost against
the property.
D. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears
upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the
amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the
§ 633-9 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 633-10
625:619
§ 633-11. Enforcement.
Officers of the Police Department, City Inspectors, City Code Enforcement
Officers and Aides, City Fire Chief, and the City Public Works
Superintendent are hereby authorized to issue ordinance violation notices
to any person violating any provision of this chapter.
§ 633-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-12]
§ 633-13. Composting. [Added 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-03]
The construction and maintenance of composting bins is permitted subject
to the following conditions:
records. If he fails to pay the same within 30 days after mailing by the
Assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the Assessor shall add the
same to the next City tax roll, and the same shall be collected in the
same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of
taxes by the City as provided in Section 8, Chapter 12, of the Charter.
A. A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $25, plus costs.
B. A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $50, plus costs.
C. A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $75, plus costs.
D. A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
A. Composting shall take place in a compost bin that has at least three
vertical sides, made of plastic or metal. Compost bins made of wood are
prohibited.
B. Compost bins shall be located in a rear yard, at least 15 feet from any
dwelling on adjacent property and at least five feet from the property
line.
C. Compost piles may include the following materials: yard and garden
waste (such as weeds, branches, bark, grass clippings, leaves, stalks,
stems, brush and/or vines) and straw.
D. Compost piles may not include meat, dairy products, vegetable or
animal oils, animal fats, cooked foods, bones, manure or fish. Plastics,
§ 633-10 ROYAL OAK CODE § 633-13
625:620
Chapter 644
STORMWATER DETENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 323.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 351.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
Weeds — See Ch. 757.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 644-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Stormwater Detention
Ordinance of the City of Royal Oak" and will be referred to herein as "this
chapter."
§ 644-2. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to specifically apply to stormwater detention which
is a prevailing need and which the absence of detention could endanger the
property, health, safety and general welfare of the residents and property
owners of the City.
§ 644-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — Any addition to an existing building.
APPROVAL — Written approval by the City Engineer of the City of Royal
Oak, Michigan, or by his duly authorized agents, assistants, or
representatives, limited to the specific duties assigned or entrusted to them.
BASIN — All designated or specified areas or devices where stormwater is
detained to meet the requirements of this chapter.
synthetic products or other nonbiodegradable materials are prohibited
from the compost pile.
E. Compost bins are not permitted in drainage easements.
F. Compost bins are limited to a maximum of three feet by length and
width and three feet in height, and a maximum of three compost bins
per yard.
G. Compost bins shall be maintained to prevent the attraction of rodents
and pests and to prevent noxious odors.
§ 633-13 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 644-3
625:621
CITY — The City of Royal Oak, Michigan. When used in this chapter in
connection with any filing, submittal, delivery or payment to, or review,
approval or other action, refers to the City Engineer.
CITY'S RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any and all public rightsof-
way, streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, thoroughfares, public
easements and public places located within the City, including within any
curbs, shoulders, landscaped areas and/or other areas incidental and/or
appurtenant.
DEVELOPMENT — Any new building, or paved driveway, parking lot or
sidewalk, not including public roadways.
ENGINEER or CITY ENGINEER — City Engineer of the City of Royal
Oak, Michigan, or his duly authorized agents, assistants or representatives,
limited to the specific duties assigned or entrusted to them.
PUBLIC EASEMENT — Any area of land which has been granted or
dedicated to the City or to public use, including, but not limited to, road
or right-of-way, utility, water main, sewer line, access, drainage, recreation,
conservation and other public areas, whether in easements or in fee.
RENOVATION — Any existing building converted to other use or
structurally altered, and which requires a City building permit and/or site
plan for City Plan Commission review and approval as described in § 770-12,
Site plan review, or any similar ordinance. Also, any paved parking lot,
private street, drive or sidewalk removal and replacement. Renovation shall
also include the pulverizing and/or crushing of existing pavement for use as
a new pavement base material.
SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Additions, developments and renovations
proposed for a specific property as defined.
STORM DETENTION SYSTEM — All features that comprise the
requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to storm detention
basins and their required components and finishes, restrictors, pumps and
freeboard structures; and all collection and outlet piping, drainage
structures and conveyance features, including curbing, swales, ditches; and
all fences, gates and signage.
§ 644-4. Scope.
Any development, renovation or addition to an existing development within
the City, excluding property in the Central Business District Zones and
properties used for one- and two-family residential purposes, must detain
the stormwater runoff from the improvement on-site.
§ 644-5. Temporary exemption.
A. Developments, renovations or additions less than 0.14 acre or 6,100
square feet in area will not require stormwater detention at the time of
the improvement. For such case, a recordable lien to the City must be
executed by the property owner. The recordable lien shall state that
when the next future improvement occurs on the property which will
§ 644-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 644-5
625:622
§ 644-6. Method used.
The Oakland County Method of Detention Basin Design, as made available
by the Oakland County Drain Commissioner's office, shall be utilized in
determining the volume of detention required. Basins with orifice or
pumped outlets will be required to hold the volume for a ten-year storm
while basins with no outlets will be required to hold two one-hundred-years
storms. Discharge on an orifice or pumped outlet must be throttled to a
restricted rate of 0.2 cfs per acre, or throttled to a restricted flow of 0.3 cfs
if the total property area requiring detention is 1.5 acres or less.
§ 644-7. Submittal procedure.
For City approval of stormwater detention, the applicant shall furnish the
City Engineering Department three sets of detention plans, 24 inches by 36
inches, with detention calculations shown on the plans.
make the accumulated area of the recorded lien(s) and the future
improvement greater than 0.14 acre or 6,100 square feet, the property
owner will make the stormwater detention improvements as specified
in this chapter on the accumulated area.
B. Renovations and additions that do not involve parking lot, private
street, drive or sidewalk removal and replacement will not require
stormwater runoff detention at the time of the improvement, unless
adequate undeveloped land is available for detention on the property. If
stormwater detention is not included as part of the renovation, a
recordable lien to the City must be executed by the property owner. The
recordable lien shall state that when the next future improvement
occurs on the property, the property owner will make the stormwater
detention improvements as specified in this chapter on the accumulated
area.
C. Lien(s) shall be prepared by the property owner using the standard
form available from the City Engineering Department.
A. A professional engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan, shall affix his
or her seal on the plans.
B. The plans shall not be drawn to a scale smaller than one inch equals 30
feet. The City Engineer shall review the plans and calculations for
conformity to the standards set forth in this chapter, and certify that
they are consistent with the overall utility plans of the City, after which
he will return a letter of review with appropriate comments. The
applicant, after making any changes requested, shall resubmit three
sets of the revised plans to the Engineering Department for approval.
The applicant may be required to obtain approval of the City of Royal
Oak Building Department, Oakland County Drain Commissioner, the
Road Commission for Oakland County or the Michigan Department of
Transportation when the outlet discharges to facilities under their
jurisdiction.
§ 644-5 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 644-7
625:623
§ 644-8. General basin construction.
C. The detention plans shall clearly indicate the perimeter of all acreage
contributing to the detention basin. The perimeter of the water surface
for the volume of detention provided shall also be indicated on the plans
including the water surface elevation.
D. The plans shall include the calculation of an overall coefficient of runoff
for the acreage contributing to the detention basin. The range of this
coefficient shall vary from 0.15 for completely grassed areas to 0.90 for
completely paved areas.
E. The detention calculations for each site shall include the number of
total acres calculated to the nearest hundredth contributing to the
detention basin. The total cumulative volume of required detention
shall be calculated using all areas of proposed site improvements and
shall include previous site improvement areas covered by this chapter.
F. The detention calculations shall include the sizing of the restricting
orifice or structure cover. The calculations for the restricting orifice size
or restricted structures cover openings shall be made using a
coefficient for a sharp-edged orifice entrance. Details for the restrictor
are to be clearly indicated on submitted plans. The smallest pipe orifice
size allowed is 2.5 inches in diameter. The orifice size shall be rounded
down to the nearest one-half inch from the actual calculated size.
G. Calculations for the volume of detention provided shall be included on
submitted plans. The volume calculations shall be made using standard
geometric formulas to determine the volume between appropriate
contour elevations. For irregular-shaped basins, the geometric formula
for the volume of a frustum of a cone or pyramid shall be used to
estimate the volume between appropriate contour elevations.
H. Plan approval constitutes conformance with this chapter in regards to
calculations and method used to control runoff and achieve the
required detention. Plan approval does not infer sanction or approval of
construction governed by any other permit or subsequent approvals.
I. After approval of plans, any change to the storm detention system shall
be submitted to the City Engineer for approval prior to its construction.
A. All basin design shall incorporate components that allow for visual
inspection and maintenance by mechanical means of all areas
designated for stormwater storage or restricted outflow.
B. Acceptable means of detention can be achieved through standing water
in parking areas, landscaped ponds, or buried vaults, chambers, pipes
or other approved buried device. Either one or any combination of these
designs may be utilized to achieve the required detention.
C. All components of storm detention systems shall be constructed entirely
on the private property of the proposed development, except for
§ 644-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 644-8
625:624
§ 644-9. Open pond basin construction.
discharge piping and connections to public sewers. No portion of a
basin shall be installed within a publicly owned utility easement.
Connections to public sewers shall be at locations as approved by the
City Engineer.
D. Basins with orifice or pumped outlets must be constructed to drain
entirely unless designed to retain a permanent water level that
conforms to a Plan Commission approved landscape plan.
E. Basins with no outlets must be constructed in soils that have a
saturated hydraulic conductivity of at least 0.004 feet per minute.
F. A minimum of 12 inches of freeboard must be provided above the
retained water surface of all detention basins and below the finished
floor of all adjacent buildings. A minimum of six inches of freeboard
must be provided above the maximum water surface created by the
required positive nonerodable overflow to both adjacent buildings and
adjacent properties.
G. A positive nonerodable overflow capable of handling the capacity of a
one-hundred-year storm must be provided and clearly identified on the
plans, which shall not discharge onto abutting private property.
H. Drainage from a development, renovation and addition shall not be
diverted onto abutting private property. Drainage from a development,
renovation and addition requiring detention shall be directed to the
detention basin. Discharge from the basin and overflow shall not be
diverted onto abutting private property.
I. The City requires a building permit for all piping and drainage
structures for compliance with other codes and ordinances including
the current Michigan Plumbing Code requirements for approved
materials and drainage pipe cleanouts. Section P-708 of the code
requires that manholes be provided as cleanouts at each major change
of direction for underground piping over 10 inches in diameter.
J. All storm detention systems shall be maintained in proper working
order, free of debris, trash or anything else that may adversely affect
the operability of the system, the required volume and outlet capacity.
The storm detention systems shall be kept free of vermin and any
creatures that may cause the system to become inoperable or harm the
public. Maintenance of the storm detention system also requires
treatment to prevent and control insects and microbes.
A. A paved open channel must be provided along the bottom of all
detention basins designed to drain entirely. The open channel shall
begin at the outlet for the basin and shall run the entire length of the
basin with the channel extending to all pipes discharging into the basin.
The channel shall be sized to equal the capacity of the outlet for the
basin when flowing full with no pressure head. The channel shall
§ 644-8 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 644-9
625:625
provide a minimum velocity of two feet per second when the basin
outlet is flowing full with no pressure head.
B. The entire basin must be either sodded, paved, or have some other City
approved method of stabilization. The maintenance of all stabilization
and fencing in and around the detention basin shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
C. All grass and noxious weeds growing in or around the basin shall be
maintained in accordance with Chapter 757, Weeds, as amended, or
other similarly adopted property maintenance code.117 No hydrophilic
plants such as rushes, reeds, water iris, willow or cattails shall be
allowed to grow or thrive within an open basin, or any tree, shrub or
plant not specifically shown and approved on the required plans.
D. Minimum grade on the bottom of the detention basin shall be 1.2%
when sodded. For paved open channels in basins, the minimum grade
shall be 0.5%.
E. All pipes entering a detention basin shall have either a headwall or end
section at the end of the pipe. Bar screens must be installed on all open
ends of pipe 12 inches or larger in diameter. Restricting orifices shall be
located in an accessible structure outside of the basin limits.
F. Fencing.
(1) All open pond detention basins must be fenced if the side slopes
exceed one vertical to six horizontal, or if the basin is designed to
hold water to a depth of more than 18 inches when filled to
capacity. This requirement may be waived by the City Plan
Commission when the design is an integral part of the landscaping
and the location and depth does not present a potential hazard.
(2) A three-foot minimum shoulder shall be provided between the
fence and the side slopes for the basin. The side slopes shall not
exceed one vertical to three horizontal.
(3) Fences shall be a minimum of four feet high chain link or other
fencing material of comparable durability and safety as approved
by the City Plan Commission with a locked access gate, 10 feet
wide with double opening. A key for a City Engineer approved lock
shall be supplied to the City Public Service Department.
(4) Depending upon location in relation to adjoining properties or
rights-of-way, the City Plan Commission may require a landscape
screen in front of the fencing.
(5) All gates constructed directly in front of a paved roadway are to
have an end of roadway marker (ER-1) and a "road ends" sign
(W-14-2-a) securely fastened to the gate in accordance with the
117. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 556, Property Maintenance.
§ 644-9 ROYAL OAK CODE § 644-9
625:626
§ 644-10. Pumped basins.
In cases where the drain outlet for the detention basin is not deep enough
to completely dewater the basin by gravity, pumps must be installed. The
pumps shall be installed in duplicate with each pump capable of handling
the flow. Controls shall be set in the receiving water to regulate the flow.
§ 644-11. Easements.
"Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Safety Control Devices." The
sign material shall be high intensity reflectorized Scotchlite on
0.080 aluminum.
(6) All fencing related shall be maintained to conform to Chapter 323,
Fences, or other similarly adopted ordinance, as amended.
A. The controls may be electrodes placed inside a galvanized pipe stilling
well at a location adequately protected from the backwater curve
during discharge.
B. A bubbler system in a stilling well protected as in Subsection A above.
The operating controls and pumps shall be set in a fully designed pump
house with adequate dimensions for working area. The pump house and
west well must be located inside the fenced area.
C. Pump controls shall be designed in a manner that accounts for the
water level in the receiving sewer.
D. Complete specifications for the pumps and controls and performance
curves for the pumps called for must be submitted to the City Engineer
for approval, including two operation manuals provided from the
manufacturer.
E. The City requires a building permit for all piping, electrical work and
concrete structures for compliance with other codes and ordinances.
F. A manhole with inside diameter of six feet is required between the lift
station and the outlet. The twin discharge lines shall be ductile iron.
They shall enter the manhole and a storm sewer shall be installed from
the manhole to the outlet. The manhole cover shall be East Jordan Iron
Works (EJIW) No. 8247A hinged type or equivalent.
G. The pump house and gate to the detention basin shall be locked at all
times. A key for a City Engineer approved lock to the pump house shall
be supplied to the City Department of Public Service and Recreation.
A. Easement for discharge piping. The property owner of any
development, renovation or addition that contains a detention basin,
excluding surface basins within vehicular parking areas, shall grant the
City an easement for the detention basin discharge piping and all
discharge piping appurtenances. The easement shall be a minimum 12
feet wide, unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer. The grant
§ 644-9 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 644-11
625:627
§ 644-12. As-built plans.
of easement shall provide the City the rights to access, inspect, and to
rectify any City ordinance violation within the easement if the property
owner fails to commence work on compliance within 21 days from the
date of written notification by the City of a violation unless emergency
circumstances dictate immediate compliance. All costs incurred by the
City in rectifying an ordinance violation shall be assessed to the
property owner.
B. Easement for basin. The property owner of any development,
renovation or addition that contains a detention basin, excluding
surface basins within vehicular parking areas, shall grant the City an
easement encompassing the detention basin. The limits of the easement
shall be a minimum three feet outside any fencing, or six feet from the
tip of the side slope for the detention basin and shall include a minimum
twelve-foot width to access the gate for the basin. The grant of
easement shall provide the City the rights to access, inspect, and to
rectify any City ordinance violation within the easement if the property
owner fails to commence work on compliance within 21 days from the
date of written notification by the City of a violation unless emergency
circumstances dictate immediate compliance. All costs incurred by the
City in rectifying an ordinance violation shall be assessed to the
property owner.
C. Easement grants. The property owner shall be responsible for providing
the City Engineering Department with all property and easement
descriptions. All grants of easement shall be executed by the property
owner prior to City issuance of occupancy permits for the development.
A. Prior to formal written acceptance by the City of the storm detention
system, all turf must be established in open basins. In addition, a
licensed professional engineer must furnish the City Engineer two sets
of sealed as-built detention plans. As-built plans shall verify that the
required detention volume has been provided using calculations based
on newly constructed elevations within and surrounding the basin(s).
Newly constructed elevations within and surrounding the basin shall be
shown on the plans in sufficient quantity and interval to verify and
correspond to the calculations. The required outlet, pump or restrictor
installation, grading that conforms to the approved plans, and
freeboard features constructed with overflow provided shall also be
indicated on the as-built plans.
B. All differences and deficiencies shall be noted. Plans to correct
deficiencies in detention volume, outlet, pump or restrictor, freeboard
and overflow features shall be submitted for City Engineer approval and
included with the as-built plans. All deficiencies in detention volume,
outlet, pump or restrictor, freeboard and overflow features shall be
corrected prior to City issuance of occupancy permits for the
development.
§ 644-11 ROYAL OAK CODE § 644-13
625:628
§ 644-13. Permit required for installation of parking lot pavements.
A permit will be required from the City for the installation of all parking
lot pavements as addressed under this chapter. The permit allows for one
post construction site inspection by the City Engineer upon submittal of the
required as-built plans to verify compliance with the permit provisions. The
City Commission shall establish the permit fee by resolution.
§ 644-14. Enforcement; variance. [Amended 8-20-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13; 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-13]
§ 644-15. Violations and penalties.
A. The City Engineer is charged with the enforcement of this chapter. The
City Engineer shall have the authority to grant variances from the
stormwater detention regulations contained in this chapter upon a
showing of practical difficulty by a property owner. A property owner
requesting a variance shall submit a written request specifically stating
which provision a variance is being requested from and describing the
practical difficulty involved in strict compliance.
B. The City Engineer shall have the authority to promulgate rules to allow
for pilot projects that may vary from the stormwater detention
regulations contained in this chapter as long as any development,
renovation or addition to an existing development within the City,
excluding property in the Central Business District Zones and
properties used for one- and two-family residential purposes, detains
stormwater runoff from the improvement on site. The City Commission
shall adopt the rules before they become effective.
A. Any person, permittee, owner, developer or subsequent property owner
who violates any provision of this chapter, including failure to submit
plans, obtain permits, pay any fees, charges or surcharges imposed, or
any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant or who
knowingly makes false statements, representations or certification in
any application, record, report or plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or who tampers
with, alters or fails to maintain, or knowingly renders inoperable any
detention basin, restrictor, fence or freeboard required under this
chapter is guilty of a civil infraction and shall, upon conviction, be
punished by the following:
(1) A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil fine of
not less than $100 for each day of the violation, plus costs.
(2) A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil fine
of not less than $250 for each day of the violation, plus costs.
§ 644-13 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 644-15
625:629
§ 644-16. Ownership and registration.
Ownership of a storm detention system and its subsequent maintenance
and liability fall to the legal ownership of the property. In the case of
condominiums or other development where shared ownership of the storm
detention system is owned by multiple property owners, associations or
entities, the association or joint owners of the detention system shall
register the legal owner's name(s), contact representative, current address
and telephone numbers with the City Clerk office annually before January
30 or 30 days after any change in ownership.
Chapter 650
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and drains — See Ch. 13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hauling dirt — See Ch. 273.
Horse-drawn carriages — See Ch. 388.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 475.
Pull-off parking — See Ch. 498.
Skateboards, roller skates and in-line
skates — See Ch. 612.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 625.
Transportation safety — See Ch. 703.
Trees — See Ch. 710.
Abandoned and inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
716.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
Vehicles transporting flammable
liquids — See Ch. 733.
(3) A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil fine of
not less than $500 for each day of the violation, plus costs.
B. The City Engineer, Royal Oak Building Official and City of Royal Oak
Code Enforcement are hereby authorized to seek, through any
authorized prosecutorial official, prosecution of charges against any
person violating any provision of this chapter.
§ 644-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 644-16
625:630
ARTICLE I
Obstructions
[Adopted 8-2-1926 by Ord. No. 153]
§ 650-1. Deposit of materials on highways, sidewalks and public
places.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Royal Oak, directly
or indirectly, himself or by his agent, clerk, or employe, to obstruct or
encumber any highway, alley, public place, sidewalk or crosswalk, or put,
place, abandon or leave therein any animals, boxes, barrels, posts, fences,
buildings, dirt, mud, stones, signs, coal, bricks, building material, rubbish,
or with any other material or thing whatsoever. It shall also be unlawful
for any such person, as aforesaid, to dump any sand, gravel, or other thing
upon any street or alley or any sidewalk or crosswalk; or to mix any cement,
mortar or other thing, upon any street, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk, except
as hereinafter provided.
§ 650-2. Notice of violation; removal by City upon failure to comply.
§ 650-3. Bicycles and similar devices on sidewalks. [Amended
12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-19]
A. In all cases where § 650-1 of this article is violated, the owner,
occupant, builder or contractor shall remove the obstruction or
encumbrance complained of within 24 hours after receiving written
notice so to do from the City Manager. Where personal service of such
notice cannot be made, such notice shall be securely posted in a
conspicuous place on said premises or abutting building. If the
obstruction or encumbrance complained of is not removed in
compliance with the aforesaid notice, the City Manager shall cause the
same to be removed to a suitable place in the City of Royal Oak. Said
obstruction or encumbrance shall not be returned to the owner,
occupant, builder or contractor until the cost of such removal has first
been paid to the City Treasurer.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar a complaint for any
violation of § 650-1 of this article. For each and every day that § 650-1 of
this article is violated, the owner, occupant, builder, or contractor,
either or all, may be complained of as for an original and distinct
offense.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
BICYCLE — A device propelled by human power upon which a person
may ride, having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle
arrangement, all of which are over 14 inches in diameter.
DOWNTOWN AREA — The area bounded by and including Main Street
north from Seventh Street to Pingree Boulevard, south to Eleven Mile
§ 650-1 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-3
625:631
Road, west to Lafayette Avenue, south to Lincoln Avenue, east to
Washington Avenue, and north to Seventh Street.
ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE — A bicycle equipped with an electric
power device that is only engaged by human power.
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE — A selfbalancing
nontandem two-wheeled device, designed to transport only
one person at a time, having an electrical propulsion system with
average power of 750 watts or one horsepower and a maximum speed
on a paved level surface of not more than 15 miles per hour. Electric
personal assistive mobility devices are not vehicles as defined in this
section.
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — Any vehicle not having a seat or saddle for
the use of the rider, designed to travel on not more than three wheels,
and not capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed greater than 30
miles per hour on level ground.
B. Bicycles, electric-assisted bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility
devices, and motorized scooters on sidewalks.
(1) The operation of a bicycle, electric-assisted bicycle, or motorized
scooter is prohibited on all sidewalks and pedestrian crosswalks in
the Downtown Area, and in any other area designated by the City
Manager or his or her designee, as indicated by a traffic control
device.
(2) A person operating a bicycle, electric-assisted bicycle, electric
personal assistive mobility device, or motorized scooter on a
sidewalk or in a pedestrian crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and slower moving vehicles, and shall give an audible
signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian or slower moving
vehicle.
(3) A person operating a bicycle, electric-assisted bicycle, electric
personal assistive mobility device, or motorized scooter on a
sidewalk or in a pedestrian crosswalk shall have all the rights and
duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances.
(4) This section does not apply to a police officer or any other City
employee in the performance of his or her official duties.
C. Violations and penalties. A person violating this section is responsible
for a civil infraction. The court in its discretion may impose the
following sanctions:
(1) For a first violation: a civil fine of not more than $50.
(2) For a second or subsequent violation: a civil fine of not more than
$100.
§ 650-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-4
625:632
§ 650-4. Damage to sidewalks and crosswalks.
No person shall remove, break or otherwise injure any part of any sidewalk
or crosswalk.
§ 650-5. Sale of merchandise on sidewalks; temporary permit.
[Amended 5-16-1932 by Ord. No. 268]
No person shall use any part of the sidewalk facing his premises for the
purpose of exhibiting goods, wares, or merchandise for sale; provided,
however, that in any part of the City zoned as a business district or
industrial district under the provisions of Chapter 770, Zoning, the Board of
Appeals may issue temporary permits for the use of a portion of the street
or sidewalk between the curb and the property line in connection with the
use of and in front of a permanent building for display of merchandise
where such display will not interfere with public travel; such permits shall
be revocable on 24 hours' written notice, and shall not be issued except in
sparsely settled portions of the City where use of the sidewalk or portion of
the street between the curb and property line by the public is infrequent.
Any use for display purposes after the expiration or revocation of such
permit shall be a violation of this article and subject to the penalty provided.
§ 650-6. Use for business and storage purposes.
No person shall lease, sublease, use or permit to be used for business or
storage purposes any part of the space between the lot line of the property
and the curb.
§ 650-7. Closing of streets.
Whenever it is necessary to repair or improve any public highway or alley
in the City of Royal Oak, or when the same, in the judgment of the City
Manager, shall be unfit or unsafe for public travel, or when traffic conditions
or the public safety, either in the judgment of the Chief of Police or the
Chief of the Fire Service, warrant it, such highway or portion of it may be
closed to traffic for such a period of time as they, or either of them, may
deem advisable. Suitable barriers with proper notices thereon, notifying the
public that such highway or alley is closed, shall be placed at the ends of
such highway or alley, or such portion thereof as is closed to public travel,
by the City Manager. It shall be unlawful for any person, except the proper
authorities, to remove the barriers placed as aforesaid or to travel, drive on
or occupy any portion of the public highway closed as aforesaid.
§ 650-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes all natural persons, firms, copartnerships,
corporations, and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or
unincorporated, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or
§ 650-4 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-8
625:633
employee. All persons who violate any of the provisions of this article,
whether as owner or as agent, servant or employee, shall, except as herein
otherwise provided, be equally liable as principals.
§ 650-9. Permission to store materials on sidewalks and public
places.
It shall be lawful for the City Manager, where he deems such permission
to be necessary, to give builders, contractors, or other persons engaged in
building or other lawful operations near sidewalks, or other public places,
written permission to temporarily place materials upon such sidewalk or
other public place upon such terms and under such conditions and for such
period of time not to exceed 30 days as the City Manager shall deem proper.
§ 650-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment
in the discretion of the court, and when such fine and costs are imposed,
the court may provide that in default of the payment thereof the offender
shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days unless such fine and
costs shall be sooner paid; provided that no person shall be imprisoned for
a single violation of this article for a longer period than 90 days.
§ 650-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-10
625:634
ARTICLE II
Driving on Newly Paved Streets
[Adopted 9-14-1953 by Ord. No. 728]
§ 650-11. Driving on streets during excavations.
No person shall go upon or drive, or cause to be driven, any vehicle or
animal on any street, alley or other public place which is excavated or in the
process of being excavated for the purpose of constructing sewers, water
mains, pavements, sidewalks or other public improvements, or which is
newly paved, or upon which any public improvement of any nature is under
construction, if such street, alley or public place is barricaded by authority
of the City; provided that, where only a portion of a street is barricaded,
any person who resides or keeps a business establishment upon said street,
and has no other means of access to his residence or place of business, may
go upon or drive a vehicle upon the unbarricaded portion of said street at
his own risk, in order to reach said residence or place of business by the
shortest practicable route, but only if the same may be done without injury
to or interference with the improvement under construction.
§ 650-12. Liability.
Any person driving upon any street, alley, or other public place under
process of improvement in violation of the provisions of this article does so
at his own risk and shall be liable to the City for all damage resulting to such
improvement, as well as being subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 650-13. Authority to impound. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-01]
Any vehicle found standing or parked in violation of the provisions of this
article may be impounded in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance
No. 2003-27.118
§ 650-14. Tampering with signs and barricades.
No unauthorized person shall move, alter, deface, injure or destroy any sign
or barricade erected or placed to protect, warn or guide the public.
§ 650-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-01]
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $500 and/or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days in the discretion of the court.
118. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 720, Vehicles and Traffic, Art. I, Uniform Traffic Code.
§ 650-11 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-15
625:635

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 3-22-1954 by Ord. No. 757]
§ 650-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations, or voluntary
associations, as well as individuals.
SIDEWALK — Includes any sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway adjoining any
public street or alley and abutting or adjoining any private property.
§ 650-17. Sidewalk maintenance. [Amended 7-13-1987 by Ord. No.
87-6]
§ 650-18. Public sidewalk construction and replacement. [Amended
5-3-1971 by Ord. No. 71-2; 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-9; 3-18-1996
by Ord. No. 96-5]
No person shall construct or replace any public sidewalk except in
accordance with the line, grade, slope, and specifications established by
the City Engineer, or without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer. A separate permit shall be obtained for each separate installation
by address. A nonrefundable fee for such permit shall be set by a City
Commission resolution that shall be renewed annually. All permits shall
state the location where public sidewalk is to be installed or replaced and
the number of square feet of public sidewalk to be built.
§ 650-19. Public sidewalk building permits. [Amended 5-11-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-9; 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
A permit shall be issued:
A. All sidewalks within the City shall be kept and maintained in good
repair by the owner of the land adjacent to and abutting upon it. If any
owner shall neglect to keep and maintain the sidewalk along the front,
rear, or side of the land owned by him in good repair and safe for the
use of the public, the owner shall be liable to the City for any damages
recovered against the City sustained by any person by reason of such
sidewalk being unsafe and out of repair.
B. All sidewalks and driveway approaches between the lot line and the
street curb, except crosswalks at intersections, shall be repaired and
maintained by the abutting property owner and shall comply with all
requirements set forth in this article.
A. To every licensed public sidewalk builder making proper application,
for construction of new public sidewalks, or for the replacement of old
public sidewalks.
§ 650-16 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-19
625:637
§ 650-20. Public sidewalks ordered by City Engineer. [Amended
5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-9; 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
Whenever the City Engineer shall determine that a public sidewalk is unsafe
for use, or that a new public sidewalk is necessary, he shall give notice
to the owner of the abutting property. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of
said owner to cause said public sidewalk to be placed in a safe condition
or to cause a new public sidewalk to be built as the case may be. Such
notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than 20 days, within which
such work shall be done. In the event the owner fails to comply with said
notice, the City Engineer shall cause said public sidewalk to be replaced
or a new public sidewalk to be built. If the City Engineer determines
that the condition of any existing public sidewalk is such that immediate
replacement is necessary to protect the public, he may dispense with said
notice. The cost hereunder shall be charged against the premises and the
owner thereof and shall be collected by special assessment in the manner
provided by the City Charter.
§ 650-21. Special assessments.
In the event that sidewalks are to be built, rebuilt, or repaired, under
the provisions of this article, and it shall become necessary for the City
to perform such improvement, the Commission may, in lieu of the other
methods provided by the terms hereof, charge and collect the expense
thereof as a special assessment against the abutting property under the
provisions of Chapter 12 of the City Charter.
B. To any property owner making proper application for the construction
of new public sidewalks or for the replacement of any old public
sidewalk in front of or adjacent to any land owned and occupied by him,
provided such owner furnishes evidence satisfactory to the City
Engineer that he is competent to do same and files a sworn statement
that he owns and occupies the property adjacent to the public sidewalk,
that he will be in direct charge of the installation, and that he will be
responsible for replacing any public sidewalk not meeting City
requirements. Further provided, that when the owner wishes to
construct a new public sidewalk upon a site where no public sidewalk
grade has been established, a permit shall be issued and the City
Engineer will cause the correct grade to be established. The applicant
shall pay a nonrefundable penalty fee in an amount to be set by City
Commission resolution for failing to obtain the required public sidewalk
building permit prior to beginning construction or replacement work.
Should any public sidewalk be installed which does not meet City
requirements, it may be ordered replaced under the provisions of
§ 650-20.
§ 650-19 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-22
625:638
§ 650-22. Public sidewalk builders' licenses. [Amended 5-11-1992
by Ord. No. 92-9; 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
No person shall engage in the business of constructing or replacing public
sidewalks in the City of Royal Oak without first having obtained a license
for that purpose. An application for a license shall be made to the City
Engineer and shall set forth all information deemed necessary for the
proper enforcement of this article, and shall contain an agreement signed
by the applicant to comply with all the laws, rules, regulations, and
specifications in force in the City pertaining to the construction or
replacement of public sidewalks. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable
application fee in an amount to be set by a City Commission resolution
that shall be renewed annually. The applicant shall also file a bond in
an amount to be set by a City Commission resolution, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the provisions of all ordinances pertaining to
construction and replacement of public sidewalks, and further conditioned
that the principle executing the same will construct all public sidewalks of
good material and in a workmanlike manner, and in strict accordance with
all the specifications and regulations prescribed by the City Engineer, and
will keep all public sidewalks so constructed in a good condition of repair
and fit for public travel for a period of two years after the date of completion
of construction of the same. All such bonds shall be surety company bonds.
Upon approval of the bond and application, the City Engineer shall issue
the applicant a license as a public sidewalk builder. All such licenses shall
expire on December 31st of each year.
§ 650-23. Revocation of licenses and permits. [Amended 5-11-1992
by Ord. No. 92-9; 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
The City Commission may, for the violation of any of the provisions of
this article, or for any failure, or refusal, or neglect, to strictly comply to
the rules, regulations, and specifications furnished by the City Engineer,
suspend or revoke any license or permit issued hereunder, and the City
Engineer may refuse to issue any further permits to the violator. The City
Manager may, for any of the causes enumerated in this section, suspend any
license or permit until the next regular meeting of the Commission. At the
next regular meeting of the Commission, the licensee may appear before
the Commission and be heard, and the Commission, after such hearing, may
revoke or suspend such license permanently or for a lesser period as it may
deem advisable.
§ 650-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-13-1987 by Ord. No.
87-6; 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-9; 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
Any person who shall be convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment
for 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
§ 650-22 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-24
625:639

ARTICLE IV
Drainage and Appurtenances
[Adopted 2-15-1960 by Ord. No. 60-3]
§ 650-25. Authority of Drainage Board. [Amended 7-17-1961 by
Ord. No. 61-18; 5-14-1962 by Ord. No. 62-9; 2-25-1963 by Ord. No.
63-4]
The City of Royal Oak, Michigan, a municipal corporation, hereinafter
referred to as the "City," does hereby grant to the County of Oakland in the
State of Michigan, acting through the Drainage Board for the Twelve Towns
Relief Drains, under the provisions of Chapter 20 of Act No. 40 of the Public
Acts of 1956, as amended,119 irrevocable permission to construct, use,
maintain, replace and/or repair drains and appurtenances, in the following
highways in said City, to wit:
Thirteen Mile Road Campbell Road to Durham Road
Starr Road Durham Road to a point approximately 200
feet west of Mandalay Avenue
Mandalay Avenue Starr Road to Massoit Road
Normandy Road Mandalay Avenue (to south) to Mandalay
Avenue (to north)
Massoit Road Mandalay Avenue to Olivia Avenue
Olivia Avenue Massoit Road to Nakota Road
Woodward Avenue Ravena Avenue to Normandy Road
Normandy Road Woodward Avenue to Greenfield Road
Marais Avenue Thirteen Mile Road to north City limit
Crooks Road Fourteen Mile Road to Lingeman Boulevard
Lingeman Boulevard Crooks Road to Parmenter Drive
Parmenter Drive Lingeman Boulevard to Fernlee Avenue
Fernlee Avenue Parmenter Drive to 130 feet northwesterly
from Casper Boulevard
Coolidge Highway From approximately 1,100 feet north of
Fourteen Mile Road to north City limit
Stephenson Highway Dallas Avenue to Twelve Mile Road
Dallas Avenue Stephenson Highway to Lenox Avenue
Lenox Avenue Dallas Avenue to Ten Mile Road
4th Street Stephenson Highway to Campbell Road
Ten Mile Road Lenox Avenue to Campbell Road
Forest Avenue Stephenson Highway to Main Street
Main Street Forest Avenue to Austin Avenue
119. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 280.461 et seq.
§ 650-25 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-25
625:641
Austin Avenue Main Street to Marywood Drive
Maple Avenue Farnum Avenue to 4th Street
4th Street Maple Avenue to Woodward Avenue
Farnum Avenue Maple Avenue to the northwesterly line of Lot
276, Maple Grove Subdivision
Washington Drive Oakridge Avenue to the southeasterly line of
Lot 279, Maple Grove Subdivision
Oakridge Avenue Washington Drive to Woodward Avenue
Woodward Avenue Oakridge Avenue to Oxford Road (in the City
of Berkley)
Twelve Mile Road Alexander Avenue to Marywood Drive
Fourteen Mile Road Campbell Road to Vermont Street
Cooper Avenue Samoset Road to Fourteen Mile Road
upon the following terms and conditions, to wit:
A. The Drainage Board before constructing the said drains shall file plans
showing the size and location of said drains and appurtenances with the
City Engineer;
B. The Drainage Board shall do all excavating and other work in
connection with the construction, maintenance and repair of said drains
in a careful and workmanlike manner so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the City and the users of said highways;
C. The Drainage Board after making any excavation in the City shall
restore the surface of all highways and also all sidewalks, pavements
and other improvements, and all property, both public and private, so
that they will be in as good condition as they were previous to such
excavation;
D. The Drainage Board shall not disturb any underground work now
existing, such as water mains, sewers, and other such improvements,
which are owned by the City or other public corporation without first
obtaining the consent of such owner, and in event of such changes the
same shall be made in the manner directed and required by such owner,
and the entire cost and expense thereof shall be borne by the Drainage
Board; provided that, as to changes in such improvements belonging to
the City, the City Engineer may act for the City;
E. The Drainage Board shall hold the City harmless against all damages
resulting from the construction, use, maintenance and repair of said
drains and appurtenances;
F. The Drainage Board shall indemnify the City for any damage to its
pavements, sidewalks or underground structures caused directly by the
settlement of the backfill earth in any excavation made by said
Drainage Board or its contractors under the permission herein granted;
§ 650-25 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-25
625:642
§ 650-26. Permission to extend across highways.
Where a public highway is named above as the terminus for any drain, the
permission herein granted shall be deemed to extend across such part of
the highway as the Drainage Board may deem necessary.
§ 650-27. Compensation.
The advantages accruing to this City from the construction and operation of
said Twelve Towns Relief Drains are hereby declared fair compensation for
the permission herein granted.
§ 650-28. Acceptance of work performed.
The performance of any work under the authority of this permit shall be
deemed an acceptance of the terms hereof.
provided that indemnification shall not be made in respect to any
such public improvement hereafter constructed if the same shall be
constructed within one year from the time of the completion of the
backfilling and the acceptance thereof by the Drainage Board;
G. The City will endeavor to keep other underground utility facilities at
least five feet distant from the said drains.
§ 650-25 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-28
625:643

ARTICLE V
Right-of-Way Management
[Adopted 5-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-9]
§ 650-29. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Royal Oak "Rightof-
Way Management Ordinance."
§ 650-30. Purpose; legislative findings.
A. Pursuant to Section 29 of Article 7 of the Michigan Constitution of
1963, and other applicable state and federal legislation, including but
not limited to MCLA § 247.183, and the City Charter, the City of Royal
Oak has the authority to exercise reasonable control over its highways,
streets, alleys and public places. The City of Royal Oak finds that, in the
furtherance of control and to ensure and protect the public health,
safety and welfare, it is appropriate for the City to monitor, review and
regulate activities and persons that disrupt and/or use a City right-ofway.
B. This article is further intended to minimize disruption, disturbance and
damage to the City's rights-of-way, to exercise reasonable control over
and monitor the use of the same, and to maintain aesthetic, quality, and
property values by requiring those persons who seek to disrupt and/or
use a City right-of-way by constructing, installing, locating, operating,
using and/or maintaining improvements, including utilities and
telecommunications, gas, and/or electric transmission systems therein,
to obtain a disruption permit and/or a use permit and pay fair and
reasonable permit fees.
C. The City further finds that requiring the payment of the application and
permit fees will assist in protecting the City's interests in its rights-ofway,
by allowing the City to cover the fixed and variable costs of
maintaining, monitoring, and ensuring quality control with regard to its
rights-of-way and related records.
D. This article is further intended to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety,
and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-ofway
in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the
Public Acts of 2002)120 ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure
that the City qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the
fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. [Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
120. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
§ 650-29 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-31
625:645
§ 650-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meanings indicated:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time
to time.121[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
APPLIANCE — Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, main, pipe, catch basin,
manhole or any other structure or instrumentality used for the
accumulation or transportation of water, stormwater runoff, sanitary
sewage, liquid or gas.
AUTHORITY — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act.122[Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
CITY — The City of Royal Oak, and when used in this article in connection
with any filing, submittal, delivery or payment to, or review, approval or
other action, refers to the City Engineer as defined herein.
CITY OR CITY'S RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any and
all public rights-of-way, streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys,
thoroughfares, public easements and public places located within the City,
including within any curbs, shoulders, landscaped areas and/or other areas
incidental and/or appurtenant thereto, but not including federal, state or
private rights-of-way.[Amended 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
CONDUIT — Any overhead or underground cable, wire and/or a
combination thereof, for the transmission or distribution of electrical
energy, telephone service, telecommunications services or other utility or
communication services or signals, including service connections and any
other material protecting said cable or wire used in connection therewith.
CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS — The City of Royal Oak Standard
Specifications for Construction, as amended, which include requirements
for excavation, backfill and compacting backfill, pavement removal and
replacement, sidewalk and driveway approach removal and replacement,
restoration of lawn areas and for trimming, protecting and replacing trees
and other vegetation.
DISRUPTION — A physical change, modification, alteration, disturbance,
injury and/or damage to or in a City right-of-way, including but not limited
to construction, installation, location, maintenance, modification, alteration,
replacement or repair of improvements, and the removal or alteration of a
right-of-way surface grade or material, tree, sign, marker, hydrant or other
material or object.
DISRUPTION PERMIT — May also be called or referred to as a
"construction permit"; a nonexclusive limited permit issued by the City to
121. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
122. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3103.
§ 650-31 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-31
625:646
a person pursuant to this article allowing an activity which will result in
disruption to the City's right-of-way.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION — The transmission and/or distribution of
electricity to persons intending to further transmit and/or distribute or who
are end users.
ENGINEER or CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer or the City Engineer's
designee in the Engineering Department.
FRANCHISE — A nonexclusive limited authorization to transact, conduct
and/or operate a use in the City, including but not limited to the operation
or use of improvements in the City's right-of-way, which authorization has
been awarded by the City to the grantee by an ordinance.
GRANTEE — The holder of a valid and effective franchise granted by the
City.
IMPROVEMENT — Any appliance, conduit, facility, pipe, pole, structure,
wire, cable, fiber, building or any other man-made or placed material or
object.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the
term "Commission" in the Act.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
ORDINANCES — All laws, codes and regulations duly enacted and adopted
by the City.
PERMITTEE — A person who has been issued a disruption or use permit
pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article and all employees,
agents, contractors and other persons that direct or perform any activity
covered by the permit.
PERSON — A natural person, company, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, voluntary association, organization or other form of legal entity.
PUBLIC EASEMENT — Any area of land which has been granted or
dedicated to the City or to public use, including but not limited to road or
right-of-way, utility, water main, sewer line, access, drainage, recreation,
conservation and other public areas, whether as easements or in fee.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area owned, under the jurisdiction of, or controlled
by the City.
STREET — The paved area or area designated for vehicular travel within
the right-of-way, and the word "street" shall be synonymous with the words
"highway" and "road."
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The equipment or
personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches,
conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive,
transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals.
Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally
§ 650-31 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-31
625:647
licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part 1
of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064,
47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in
47 CFR 20.3 and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device.[Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in Section
102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA
§ 484.2102. "Telecommunication provider" does not include a person or
an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial
mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332
and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the
purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the
following:[Amended 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Regulated and unregulated
services offered to customers for the transmission of two-way interactive
communication and other associated and similar usages.
Telecommunications services shall not include one-way transmission to
subscribers of video programming or other programming services.
TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEM — Conduit, improvements and other
materials which are designed and/or used to provide telecommunications
services.
USE — The ownership, lease or rental, possession, operation, occupancy or
use of all or part of an improvement.
USE PERMIT or PERMIT — A nonexclusive limited permit issued by the City
to a person pursuant to this article allowing use of the City's right-of-way
for an improvement therein.[Amended 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
§ 650-32. Application. [Amended 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
This article applies to all disruption or use of City right-of-way, regardless
of whether persons are excepted or exempted from the disruption and/or
use permit requirements, with the provisions of Article VIII applying to
telecommunications providers and controlling in the event of any conflict
or inconsistency with the provisions in Articles II, III, IV and V or any
provisions in Article VI that are in conflict with the Act.
§ 650-33. Disruption of City rights-of-way.
A. A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service.
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
B.
C. A person providing broadband Internet transport access service.
§ 650-31 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-33
625:648
A. Disruption permit required.
(1) Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person,
including persons who have a use permit or may be exempt from
the use permit requirements in § 650-34, shall direct or perform
any activity which causes or results in any disruption to any City
right-of-way unless the consent of the City Commission is first
obtained, as evidenced by a disruption permit issued by the City
Engineer pursuant to this article. Activity shall be performed in
accordance with the disruption permit and in the manner provided
for in this article.
(2) Exceptions. A disruption permit is not required for temporary
obstructions which are incidental to the expeditious movement of
articles and things to and from abutting premises, the lawful
operation and parking of vehicles within the part of the City's rightof-
way, or for the lawful and customary use of property by adjoining
property owners for such things as landscaping and lawful repairs,
maintenance and other activities of, for or on a sidewalk, driveway
or other similar improvement in the City's right-of-way, provided
that all other City required permits are first obtained. In the event
of a disruption emergency, including but not limited to natural
disaster, civil disorder, flood, war and/or severe weather condition,
a person and/or a permittee may disrupt the City's right-of-way
without first receiving a disruption permit from the City, provided
that the City Engineer and/or his designee has approved the
emergency disruption before it takes place.
(3) Violations. Failure to obtain a disruption permit under this section
shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the
violating person to the penalties provided for in this article. A
person who violates this section shall pay the required application
fee and disruption permit fee, as well as any additional charge
established by resolution of the City Commission for that period of
time that the person did not have a valid disruption permit
pursuant to this article.
B. Disruption permit application procedures and fees.
(1) A person that wants to direct or perform any activity which will or
may result in any disruption to the City's rights-of-way shall apply
to the City for a disruption permit pursuant to this article and
§ 650-35. Every applicant must complete and file five copies of an
application with the City Engineer's office in a form designated or
provided by the City.
(2) At the time of filing an application, the applicant must pay to the
City Engineer a nonrefundable application fee in an amount
established by resolution of the City Commission. In addition, after
the application has been reviewed by the City, the applicant shall
pay an application review and processing fee in an amount
§ 650-33 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-33
625:649
necessary to reimburse the City for the costs in reviewing,
processing, investigating, granting or denying and issuing the
disruption permit, as estimated by the City Engineer based on rates
and factors established by resolution of the City Commission. If
review and processing costs exceed the City Engineer's estimate,
they shall be paid by the applicant prior to permit issuance.
C. Disruption permit fee. In addition to the nonrefundable application fee,
application review and processing fees, and any other applicable fees
for permits or approvals required by other City ordinances and
applicable laws, the permittee shall pay a disruption permit fee in an
amount which will cover all of the City's administrative, inspection,
consulting, plan review, monitoring and other costs in conjunction with
the permittee's disruption of the City right-of-way. At or prior to the
time the City issues the disruption permit, the permittee shall pay to the
City a disruption permit fee in an amount that the City Engineer has
estimated that the City's costs in conjunction with the disruption are
likely to be. Additional disruption permit fees may be required by the
City Engineer during construction to cover unanticipated inspection
costs, and shall be paid by the permittee within three calendar days of
the City Engineer's notice. If they are not, the permittee shall
immediately restore the work site to a safe condition and suspend
activities authorized under the permit until the additional inspection
fees are paid. Upon completion of the disruption activities, the
permittee shall pay to the City any costs incurred in conjunction with
the disruption activities that are over and above the amount paid to the
City by the permittee as estimated or additional disruption permit fees.
D. Disruption permit term and extension.
(1) The disruption permit granted to the permittee by the City shall be
for a specified time period established by the City Engineer after
taking into consideration the information in the permittee's
disruption permit application.
(2) Prior to the expiration of the term of the disruption permit, a
permittee may apply in writing to the City Engineer for an
extension of the permit, which shall be granted by the City
Engineer if the permittee demonstrates a valid reason and
explanation for why the disruption activities could not be
completed during the term initially established. For purposes of
seeking an extension of its disruption permit, the applicant shall
pay an extension application fee to the City Engineer in an amount
established by resolution of the City Commission. The City
Engineer shall have the right to impose additional conditions on
disruption permit extensions.
E. Disruption permit terms and conditions. In addition to any individual
conditions imposed by the City Engineer on a permit as provided in
§ 650-35, all disruption permits shall include and require compliance
with all terms and conditions set forth in § 650-36 of this article.
§ 650-33 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-33
625:650
§ 650-34. Use and occupancy of City's rights-of-way.
F. Revocation of permit and stop-work orders. All disruption permits shall
be subject to stop-work orders and/or revocation under the standards
and procedures contained in § 650-37.
A. Use permit required.
(1) Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person
shall use a City right-of-way for any improvements therein unless
the consent of the City Commission is first obtained, as evidenced
by a use permit issued by the City pursuant to this article. For
purposes of this article, a person providing local exchange service
or other local telecommunications services shall be considered to
be using the City's right-of-way if such person is the owner of the
improvement or obtains the use of the improvement from another
party under a lease, contract, interconnection or other similar
arrangement.
(2) Exemptions. An exemption described in this section shall not apply
until it has been documented and proven in written form by the
person claiming it to the City's satisfaction. A use permit is not
required for any person that currently has a valid, effective and
unexpired franchise from the City to use the City's rights-of-way for
improvements, and those persons who have continuously used and
occupied City rights-of-way under a claim of entitlement based on
an alleged grant of authority by the state predating the Michigan
Constitution of 1909 and have provided universal services for many
years and/or provided telecommunications services within the City
pursuant to MCLA § 484.4 prior to the enactment of the Michigan
Constitution of 1909; provided, however, this exemption shall not
be applicable if and immediately when a court of competent
jurisdiction in any action in Michigan determines that the City is
not required to exempt a person purportedly granted rights in this
section.
(3) Violations. Failure to obtain a use permit under this section shall
constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the violating
person to the penalties provided for in this article. A person who
violates this section shall pay the required application and use
permit fee, as well as any additional charge established by
resolution of the City Commission for that period of time that the
person did not have a valid permit pursuant to this article.
B. Permit application procedures and fees.
(1) A person that wants to use a City right-of-way shall apply to the City
for a use permit pursuant to this section and § 650-35. Every
applicant must complete and file five copies of an application with
the City Engineer's office in a form designated or provided by the
City.
§ 650-33 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-34
625:651
(2) At the time of filing an application, the applicant must pay to the
City Engineer a nonrefundable application fee in an amount
established by resolution of the City Commission. In addition, after
the application has been reviewed by the City, applicant shall pay
an application review and processing fee in an amount necessary to
reimburse the City for the costs in reviewing, processing,
investigating, granting or denying and issuing the use permit as
estimated by the City Engineer based on rates and factors
established by resolution of the City Commission. If review and
processing costs exceed the City Engineer's estimate, they shall be
paid by the applicant prior to permit issuance.
C. Use permit fee.
(1) In addition to the nonrefundable application fee, application review
and processing fees, and any other applicable fees for permits or
approvals required by other City ordinances and applicable laws,
for each year the use permit is in effect, the permittee shall pay an
annual use permit fee to the City in an amount established from
time to time by resolution of the City Commission. The annual use
permit fee shall be paid prior to use permit issuance, and for each
year thereafter, on or before the last City business day prior to
January 1, said fee being payable in advance of the year it is for.
(2) The amount of the use permit fee shall be fair and reasonable,
competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory and shall not exceed
the fixed and variable costs to the City in connection with the
permit and in maintaining the City's rights-of-way used by the
permittee. Upon the written request of the City Engineer or
applicant, the fees established by the City Commission resolutions
shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis for the purpose of
determining whether the improvements of a permittee create any
more or less impact upon the fixed and variable costs to the City. In
making such determination, the City Commission shall take into
consideration the following factors:
(a) The annual fixed and variable cost to the City in maintaining
the right-of-way in, under or over which the permittee's use
occurs.
(b) The total amount of area that the permittee will be using and
occupying in the City right-of-way, including but not limited to
the length of right-of-way and the number and size of the
improvements to be used.
(c) The frequency and unit cost of monitoring the rights-of-way on
a regular basis to ensure that the use by permittee conforms
with applicable law, ordinance and permit conditions, and that
such use has not created the need for public attention.
(d) The proportionate cost of maintaining and administering
records of right-of-way use, including administration to assist
§ 650-34 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-34
625:652
in the avoidance of conflicts in the use of the rights-of-way by
other users, and auditing of the extent of permittee's use.
(e) Any unique aspects of permittee's use or improvements that
are likely to affect the cost to the City of permittee's use of the
rights-of-way.
D. Use permit term and renewal.
(1) A use permit shall be issued for a term of 10 years, with the first
year ending on December 31 of the year the use permit is issued.
The permittee may apply to the City for ten-year renewals of its use
permit, which renewal periods would run from January 1 to
December 31 of each ten-year term. Unless earlier terminated by
the permittee or the City, a permittee must file an application for
renewal of its use permit with the City Engineer not less than 120
days before the expiration of the current term and pay a renewal
application fee to the City Engineer in an amount established by
resolution of the City Commission. The City Engineer shall review
all renewal applications and, not later than December 1 of each
year, shall approve or deny all renewal applications. The City shall
have the right to impose additional reasonable conditions on those
use permit renewals.
(2) Although permits are to be granted for a ten-year term, the City
may conduct an interim review at the end of the third and sixth
years of a permit. The review shall first determine whether the fee
schedule then in effect should be revised. If the City determines
that it should be revised, a resolution shall be presented to the City
Commission for a new fee which, upon City Commission approval,
shall be established and shall be effective for the balance of the
permit term. The second purpose of the review shall be to require
the permittee to demonstrate all of the following:
(a) The permittee has complied with all use permit terms and
conditions.
(b) The permittee has timely paid to the City the annual use permit
fees, all personal and real property taxes and any other
obligations due and payable to the City.
(3) If at such review the permittee fails to make the demonstrations
specified above, the City Engineer may impose further conditions
upon the continuation of the use permit or, if the failure represents
a material breach of the terms and intent of this article, may
initiate revocation proceedings under § 650-37 for the City
Commission to terminate a use permit.
E. Use permit terms and conditions. In addition to any individual
conditions imposed by the City Engineer on a permit as provided in
§ 650-35, all disruption permits shall include and require compliance
with all terms and conditions set forth in § 650-36 of this article.
§ 650-34 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-34
625:653
§ 650-35. Permit application requirements and process.
F. Revocation of permit and stop-use orders. All use permits shall be
subject to stop-use orders and/or revocation under the standards and
procedures contained in § 650-37.
A. Complete applications required. Permit applications shall not be
considered as complete for any purposes, including the time periods in
Subsection C, until the application fee has been paid and all of the
application information specified in Subsection B has been provided.
B. Application information. At a minimum, applications for disruption and
use permits shall include all of the following information on an
application form or by attachment to the form of applicable documents
and plans, marked and in the order set forth below. With the City
Engineer's approval, an applicant may rely on information submitted in
connection with a specifically identified, previously issued permit, upon
a written certification to the City Engineer that the information has not
changed and remains accurate.
(1) Applicant information.
(a) The name, age if an individual, and address of the applicant,
and if the applicant is not a natural person, the date, state and
form of business organization.
(b) The character of the business the applicant engages in and the
lengths of time and locations where that business has been
conducted.
(c) Copies of certificates, articles, last annual report and other
written documentation of applicant's lawful incorporation,
organization, existence, authorization and good standing to
conduct its business in the State of Michigan.
(d) Copy of a current financial statement for the applicant.
(e) The names, phone numbers, fax numbers, addresses, E-mail
addresses if applicable, and position, relationship or affiliation
with applicant for the following persons:
[1] Applicant's contact person(s).
[2] The person(s) that is authorized to and will sign and agree
to permits that are issued on behalf of applicant.
[3] Applicant's resident agent for service of process.
[4] The person(s) responsible for preparation and revisions of
applicant's maps and plans.
§ 650-34 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-35
625:654
[5] All contractors that will be performing any work in City
right-of-way for the applicant under the permit(s)
requested.
[6] The construction and engineering personnel that will be
responsible for supervision of disruption, maintenance and
repair work in City right-of-way and for communication
with the City regarding such work.
(f) Identification of all other permits the applicant has been issued
by the City and proof of full compliance with them.
(2) Plan, work and schedule information.
(a) On 8 1/2 inch by 11 inch paper, a scaled drawing or map of the
City that shows or contains:
[1] The general route and location of improvements to be
installed and/or used.
[2] The relationship of the improvements to existing and
proposed improvements in adjoining municipalities.
[3] The length or other applicable measurement of City rightof-
way that will be used by applicant, expressed in linear
feet of aerial and underground portions of proposed and
existing improvements.
(b) Detailed plans and a separate list or index of same, at a scale of
no less than one inch equals 100 feet for the improvements
applicant proposes to construct and/or use, with each plan to
clearly show or contain all of the following information:
[1] The name and address of the person that prepared the
plan, the dates of preparation and revisions, a job/work
title and/or number and a drawing/sheet number.
[2] Whether the improvements are existing or proposed.
[3] All City right-of-way lines and property lines if within the
City right-of-way and the location of the improvements in
relation thereto.
[4] The linear feet or other area of City right-of-way occupied
or proposed to be occupied by the improvements shown on
the plan, expressed separately for aerial and underground
portions.
[5] Match lines by which each plan can be related to the
applicant's other plans.
[6] A description of the improvements shown on the plan that
includes the size, components, capacity, ownership and
existing, proposed and potential uses.
§ 650-35 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-35
625:655
[7] For aerial improvements, all existing and new poles or
structures to which the improvements are or will be
attached shall be shown and designated as such together
with the owner of each such pole or structure.
[8] For aerial improvements, elevations shall be depicted on a
drawing that shows applicant's improvements in relation
to all other existing improvements and the poles or
structures to which they are or will be attached.
[9] For underground improvements, in addition to the
applicant's, the plans shall show all other existing
underground appliances, conduits and improvements, it
being the applicant's responsibility to determine the
existence and location of such other improvements. The
plans shall show the applicant and other existing
improvements by reference to the horizontal and vertical
location and separation between improvements that exist
or are proposed.
[10] The locations of rivers, streams, drains, bodies of water
and state- or City-regulated wetlands crossed by
applicant's improvements.
[11] The location of all City rights-of-way that will or may be
disrupted by the installation, use, maintenance or repair of
applicant's improvements.
[12] The location of any aboveground structures or
landscaping, including but not limited to trees, shrubs,
signs, hydrants, mail boxes and driveways within or
adjoining the City right-of-way, that will or may be
disrupted or damaged by the installation, use,
maintenance or repair of the applicant's improvements.
(c) A description of the manner in which the improvements will be
installed, maintained and repaired by reference to the number
and types of vehicles, equipment and personnel involved and
the area of City right-of-way within which disruption activities
will be occurring at any given time.
(d) A description of the time and manner in which applicant will
restore City rights-of-way that may be disrupted or damaged
by applicant's activities.
(e) If the applicant is proposing to construct new aerial poles or
new underground conduit or pipe improvements, a description
of why it is not physically and financially feasible for applicant
to utilize existing poles, pipes, conduits and improvements.
§ 650-35 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-35
625:656
(f) The cost of the improvements to be installed and such other
information as may be required for the City to issue and
establish individual terms and conditions for a permit.
(g) The length of time it will take applicant to complete the
installation and required restoration under a proposed
disruption permit, expressed in terms of the number of weeks
from the date the permit is issued, and noting any changes to
the schedule that may be needed based on the time of year the
permit is issued or any other variable that is not within
applicant's control.
(3) Miscellaneous information and documentation.
(a) Copies of Michigan Department of Transportation, Road
Commission of Oakland County and other governmental
permits that are required for applicant's improvements, or
documentation that such permits have been applied for.
(b) If applicant proposes to locate its improvements on, within or
as part of poles, conduits or improvements of other persons,
copies of applicant's written agreements with those persons,
confirming applicant's rights shall be filed.
(c) A detailed description of the services to be provided by
applicant's improvements, which shall include a description of
the system those improvements will be a part of and the
categories or classifications and locations of existing, intended
and potential customers or persons that are or may be served
by the improvements.
(d) A description of how disputes between persons owning,
operating, using or benefiting from the improvements will be
resolved so as to avoid an interruption in the product or service
provided by the improvements.
C. Application reviews and permit decisions. Except as otherwise provided
in this article, the City Engineer shall approve or deny a permit for
issuance within 90 days from the date the applicant files a complete
application. Approval of a permit for issuance does not authorize any
disruption or use of City right-of-way.
(1) Within 60 days after the date that the applicant files an application,
the City Engineer shall review the application and notify the
applicant of any deficiencies. The applicant shall be entitled to
present any information, evidence or comments in response to the
notice of deficiencies and otherwise in support of its application.
(2) The City Engineer may not approve a permit for issuance to an
applicant that is in violation of or has unsatisfied obligations to the
City under a prior permit.
§ 650-35 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-35
625:657
(3) The City Engineer shall not unreasonably deny an application for a
permit. The City Engineer review and decision on an application
shall be based on this section, which establishes the terms and
conditions under which the City Commission consents to disruption
in and use of the City rights-of way. The City Engineer's review of
an application may include and incorporate reviews by other City
staff or consultants.
(4) The ninety-day time requirement for the City Engineer to make a
decision and the sixty-day time period for City Engineer initial
review may be waived or extended by City Engineer and applicant
in writing.
D. Permit conditions and bonds. The City Engineer may impose conditions
on any permit necessary to ensure and protect the public health, safety
and welfare from the applicant's disruption and/or use of the City's
right-of-way. The City Engineer may require as a condition of any permit
that a bond be posted by the applicant, which shall not exceed the
reasonable costs to ensure the City's rights-of-way are restored to their
original condition after the permitted disruption or use.
E. Permit issuance. Upon approving a permit for issuance, the City
Engineer shall provide the applicant with two copies of a completed
permit form and documents that contain or incorporate all terms and
conditions under § 650-36 of this article and any individual conditions
imposed by the City Engineer. To obtain permit issuance, the applicant
shall accept and agree to the permit by signing both copies of the
permit and applicable permit documents in the form and manner
specified and delivering them to the City Engineer together with any
required fees, bonds, insurance certificates and any other documents
that were specified by the City Engineer as conditions for permit
issuance. When all requirements for permit issuance have been
satisfied, the City Engineer shall issue the permit by dating and signing
each of the permit forms, keeping one for City Clerk records and
mailing or delivering the second to the permittee. Copies shall be
retained by the City Engineer and filed with the Manager and City
Attorney.
F. Permit display. A disruption permit or copy thereof, together with the
approved plans, shall be in the possession of the permittee's employee
or representative at each work location at all times.
G. Permit amendments. Disruption permit amendments are in the
discretion of the City Engineer, who, for more than minor changes or
alterations, may require that a new permit be applied for and obtained.
Use permits may be amended by the City Engineer upon a written
application of the permittee as provided in § 650-35, to include
additional right-of-way, with the rights to use the additional right-of-way
being only for the remainder of the original use permit term. All
application, application review and processing and annual use permit
fees shall be paid in connection with such an amendment.
§ 650-35 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-36
625:658
§ 650-36. Permit terms and conditions.
A. General terms and conditions. The following terms and conditions shall
apply to all persons directing or performing disruption or use of City
right-of-way, as applicable, and be considered a part of every disruption
and use permit issued under this article. The duties, prohibitions and
requirements of, and City authority regarding, permittees in
Subsections A(2), (3), (8), (9), and (11) through (17) apply to all
persons.
(1) Nonexclusive. A permit shall be nonexclusive and does not restrict
the City from at any time issuing additional permits to other
persons to disrupt and/or use the same City right-of-way. The
issuance of a permit does not establish any priority for the
disruption and/or use of a City right-of-way, and permittees shall
coordinate their work to avoid conflicts with the City and all other
persons lawfully working in the right-of-way.
(2) Compliance with permit and laws. A permittee shall strictly comply
with all of the terms and conditions of a permit and with all
applicable laws, codes, restrictions and ordinances, including the
public utility notification provisions of Act 53 of the Public Acts of
1974, as amended,123 and the soil erosion and sedimentation
control requirements of Act 347 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended.124
(3) Other permits and approvals. A permittee shall not disrupt and/or
use any City right-of-way without first obtaining all other required
City or other governmental permits and approvals and paying all
other applicable fees.
(4) Transfer/assignment. A disruption permit is not assignable or
transferable. A use permittee shall not transfer, convey and/or
assign any of the rights/privileges granted to it by the City in its
permit in whole or in part, voluntarily, involuntarily, or by operation
of law, merger, consolidation, substantial change in the ownership
or control or other means, without prior written consent of the City
Engineer, which shall not be withheld for reasons unrelated to the
ability and/or willingness of the proposed transferee/assignee to
comply with the permit and all of its terms and conditions. If a
permit is assigned in whole or in part with the approval of the City,
the terms and conditions of the permit shall be binding upon the
successors or assigns of the permittee.
(5) As-built plans. A permittee shall deliver to the City as-built plans in
a form and at a scale acceptable to the City Engineer for the
permitted improvements which are in the City right-of-way within
123. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 460.701 et seq.
124. Editor's Note: Act 347 of the Public Acts of 1972 was repealed by Act 451 of the Public
Acts of 1994. See now MCLA § 324.9101 et seq.
§ 650-36 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-36
625:659
30 days after completion of installation or commencement of use,
whichever first occurs.
(6) G.I.S. Within 60 days of a request by the City, a permittee shall
provide the City with a Geographical Information System layer in a
media form acceptable to the City Engineer, which accurately
portrays the permittee's as-built improvements and shall be
updated to accurately reflect any changes to the same which are
approved by the City.
(7) Additional and/or future use. The issuance of a permit does not
confer rights to any additional disruption and/or use of the City's
right-of-way, except as specifically granted and described in the
permit.
(8) City modifications and future use. The issuance of a permit does not
prohibit the City from requiring modifications to permittee's
construction activities or from using the City's right-of-way in a
manner which may interfere with, disrupt or prevent the
permittee's disruption and/or use of the same. Permittees
acknowledge and accept this risk and shall not be entitled to
receive any compensation from the City in the event that the City
uses the City right-of-way in that manner. The expense of making
any necessary modifications of its improvements in order to
accommodate a conflict shall be borne by the permittee.
(9) No interference in City rights-of-way. A permittee shall not disrupt
a right-of-way or construct, install, locate, maintain, use or operate
its improvements in the City's rights-of-way in a manner that
interferes with City or other lawful use, existing water mains, gas
lines, sanitary sewer lines, drains or drain pipes, or other
improvements that are existing in the City's right-of-way. Any
portion of the permittee's improvements that so interfere or that
will interfere with a proposed public utility or street improvement
project shall, at the request of the City, be removed or modified by
the permittee at its cost, with permittee not entitled to receive any
compensation from the City. Such removal or modification shall be
made within a reasonable time of request, as stated in a written
notice from the City. If the removal or modification is not made
within such time, the City may remove or modify the interfering
improvement(s) to the extent required, and bill the permittee for
the expenses incurred in doing so. If such a bill is not paid in full
within 30 days of the date of billing, City may recover its expenses
from permittee's bond. With regard to interferences with the use of
the right-of-way for pedestrian, vehicular or other related
purposes, all activities of a permittee shall be undertaken in a
manner to minimize interference, and all due precautions shall be
taken to maximize public safety.
(10) Plan, schedule and permit compliance; costs. The installation of
improvements in and the permittee's disruption and/or use of the
§ 650-36 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-36
625:660
City's rights-of-way shall be in compliance with the plans submitted
to and approved and all permits issued by the City. All costs of
the permittee's improvements in use of the right-of-way shall be
the sole responsibility of the permittee. All construction and
installation of improvements in the City's rights-of-way shall be
performed by the permittee in compliance with the schedule
submitted to and approved by the City Engineer, shall be done
and maintained with all necessary precautions to prevent injury or
damage to persons and property and in a good and workmanlike
fashion in accordance with recognized construction industry and
other applicable standards and shall be subject to inspection and
final approval of the City.
(11) Restoration of property. The permittee shall restore any portion of
the City's right-of-way that is disrupted by the construction,
installation, location, maintenance, use or operation of its
improvements. The disrupted right-of-way shall be restored and
returned to a condition that is as good or better than that which
existed at the time the disruption occurred. The time period and
the manner in which the restoration is to take place shall be
established by the City, and, in the event the permittee does not
complete the restoration in that time and/or does not undertake the
restoration in the manner approved by the City, the City may, upon
written notice to the permittee, complete the repair and restoration
and recover its costs from any bond posted by the permittee. If the
bond does not cover all of the costs incurred by the City, the
permittee shall immediately pay the outstanding balance of the
costs to the City and reinstate the required bond.
(12) Maintenance and repair. During the term of a permit, the permittee
shall maintain and repair its improvements in a good and
workmanlike condition. If permittee fails to do so, the City may
send a written notice to the permittee to correct the defective
condition within a specified time. If the defective condition is not
corrected within the time allowed, the City shall be entitled, at its
sole discretion, to perform said maintenance and repair, correct the
defect and/or remove the improvement, and bill the cost of the
same to the permittee. If such a bill is not paid in full within 30 days
of the date of billing, the City may recover its costs from any bond
posted by permittee. In the event the bond does not cover all of the
costs incurred by the City, the permittee shall immediately pay the
outstanding balance of the costs to the City and reinstate the
required bond.
(13) Removal and/or relocation for or by City. A permittee shall remove,
relocate and/or disconnect any portion of its improvements located
in the City's rights-of-way when the permittee is advised in writing
by the City that the same is necessary for the City to do any
construction, excavation, maintenance, repair or other work in
furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare. The City may
§ 650-36 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-36
625:661
remove, relocate, damage, disrupt and/or disconnect permittee's
improvements in the event of an emergency, including but not
limited to civil disorder, war, disaster, accident, fire, flood or severe
weather occurrence, if the same is determined to be necessary
to protect the public health, safety and welfare, with the City
not being liable to the permittee or any persons receiving the
permittee's services for any damages or injuries caused by the
City's actions.
(14) Vacation/abandonment. If a right-of-way is vacated, discontinued,
abandoned, terminatedand/or released, the permittee's right to use
that area of land shall immediately terminate, and the permittee
shall remove its improvements therefrom.
(15) Removal upon expiration or termination of use permit. Upon the
expiration or termination of a permit, or if the permittee abandons
or ceases operating or using its improvements in the City's rightsof-
way, within three months or a longer time period established by
the City Commission, permittee shall remove all of its
improvements from the City's right-of-way and restore the area to a
condition that is as good or better than that which existed prior to
the installation and use of its improvements in the City right-of-way.
If the permittee and City agree that it would not be in the best
interest of the public health, safety and welfare for permittee to
remove its improvements and the City agrees to accept ownership
of same, at no cost to the City, permittee shall convey the
improvements to the City, who may thereafter use the
improvements. The decisions as to whether a permittee shall
remove its improvements from the City's right-of-way and whether
the City will accept ownership, and if so, any conditions, is in the
sole discretion of the City Commission.
(16) Notice of commencement and completion of permitted activities. At
least 48 hours prior to commencing or performing activities
allowed by a permit, the permittee shall notify the City Engineer to
arrange for inspection of the activities by the City. Within five days
of completing permitted activities, permittee shall notify the City
Engineer so that final inspection may be made.
(17) Personnel and equipment identification. Personnel, including
contractors, of permittee conducting permitted activities shall at
all times wear or have clearly visible identification as a
representative of permittee, and all vehicles and equipment used in
the activities shall be clearly identified with permittee's name.
(18) Prohibited work days. Except for emergencies, no disruption
activities shall be performed on Sundays or legal holidays without
the written authorization of the City Engineer.
(19) Traffic control. The permittee shall furnish, install and maintain all
necessary traffic controls and protection during disruption
§ 650-36 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-36
625:662
activities in accordance with the current edition of the Michigan
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and any special
instructions set forth in the permit.
(20) Private property. A permit does not authorize entry upon private
property or the use of private water supplies.
B. Indemnification.
(1) The City and its officials, officers, employees, agents, volunteers,
representatives and contractors shall not be liable or responsible
for any damages or injuries that occur to or are suffered by any
person or property which are caused by or result from the
permittee's or its contractor's construction, installation, location or
maintenance of improvements in, or from the permittee's use of the
right-of-way. As a condition of every permit, the permittee shall
execute and deliver to the City an indemnification agreement in a
form approved by the City Attorney, in which the permittee agrees
to indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officials, officers,
employees, agents, volunteers, representatives and contractors
from such liability and any resulting costs and expenses, including
attorney fees.
(2) A permittee shall also agree to indemnify and hold the City and its
officials, officers, employees, agents, volunteers, representatives
and contractors harmless from any claims or encumbrances which
may be imposed as a result of any indebtedness by the permittee to
any contractors, subcontractors or any other persons providing
services, labor or materials to the permittee. If the City discovers
that such a claim or encumbrance has been placed on or against a
City right-of-way, the City shall notify the permittee in writing to
remove the same within 30 days from said notice, with failure to
remove such a claim grounds for revocation of permit. If the
permittee fails to remove the claim or encumbrance from the City's
right-of-way within 30 days from the City's written notice, the City
may apply any bond posted by the permittee towards the City's cost
of completely removing the claim or encumbrance. The permittee
shall have the affirmative obligation to inform the City of any claims
or encumbrances that the permittee is aware have been placed on
or against the City's right-of-way.
C. Insurance. The permittee shall, at its own cost, maintain in full force
and effect during the term of each permit the following kinds of
insurance with the limits set forth, with the company providing same to
be licensed and admitted to do business in the State of Michigan and
acceptable to the City:
(1) Comprehensive commercial general liability insurance on an
occurrence basis, with liability limits in an amount established by
resolution of the City Commission, which liability insurance
coverage shall include coverage for operations, products and
§ 650-36 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-36
625:663
§ 650-37. Stop-work or stop-use orders; revocation; violations and
penalties.
completed operations, contractual liability, independent
contractors and for explosion, collapse and underground liabilities,
commonly referred to as "XCU" coverage.
(2) Motor vehicle insurance covering all owned and nonowned vehicles
used in the permitted activities, including Michigan no-fault
coverage, with liability limits in amounts established by resolution
of the City Commission.
(3) Owner's and contractor's protective liability insurance with liability
limits established by resolution of the City Commission.
(4) Workers' compensation insurance, including employer's liability
coverage, in accordance with applicable Michigan statutes.
(5) The City and its officials, officers, employees, agents, contractors
and representatives shall be named as additional insureds on the
comprehensive commercial general liability insurance, owner's and
contractor's protective liability insurance and the motor vehicle
liability insurance to be obtained by permittee.
(6) The permittee shall furnish to the City certificates of insurance and,
upon request, certified copies of each insurance policy that the
permittee is required by this section to obtain. No insurance policy
and coverage that the permittee is required to obtain and keep in
full force and effect by this section shall be cancelled, changed or
subject to cancellation or reduction without at least 30 days' prior
written notice to the City. If any coverage will expire during the
term of a permit, the permittee shall deliver renewal certificates to
the City Engineer at least 10 days prior to the expiration date.
D. Stop-work/stop-use orders and permit revocations. All permits shall be
subject to the issuance of stop-work or stop-use orders by the City
Engineer and revocation as provided in § 650-37 of this article.
A. Stop-work or stop-use orders. In addition to any other rights or
remedies the City may have pursuant to this article or other applicable
law, the City Engineer, upon finding the existence of an imminent threat
to the public health, safety or welfare, may order a stoppage of work
and/or use pending removal or elimination of the threat and/or a
hearing on the order before the City Commission under Subsection C.
B. Revocation of permits. The City Commission may revoke a permit for
any of the following reasons, subject to undertaking the procedure in
Subsection C:
(1) Permittee's violation of and/or noncompliance with this section or a
stop-work or stop-use order of the City Engineer.
§ 650-36 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-37
625:664
(2) Permittee's failure to comply with any of the terms, conditions and/
or requirements of its permit.
(3) Permittee's failure to obtain permits and other approvals and to
timely pay any fees required by this article and/or any other
applicable ordinances, codes, statutes or laws.
(4) Violation of any ordinance, code, state or federal law or any other
applicable law or legal requirement.
(5) A change to or cancellation of an insurance policy or coverage
required by this article without the prior written approval of the
City.
(6) The cessation of operation, termination, dissolution or disbanding
of the permittee.
(7) Causing, allowing and/or maintaining a nuisance as determined by
the City in the City's right-of-way.
(8) Failure to timely pay to the City any real property taxes, personal
property taxes, assessments and/or other obligations.
(9) Failure to remove any liens or encumbrances from the City's rightof-
way.
(10) A material change of circumstance relating to the right-of-way
which results in a material adverse condition in which to permit a
continuation of permittee's use.
C. Hearing procedure. In the event a stop-work or stop-use order is issued
or the City determines that a permit is subject to revocation under this
article, the City shall do the following:
(1) Mail or deliver a written notice of hearing to the permittee at the
last address furnished to the City Engineer by permittee, at least 10
days prior to the hearing and containing the following information:
(a) Notice of the City's proposed action and stop-work or use
order, if applicable.
(b) Reasons for the City's proposed action and stop-work or use
order, if applicable.
(c) Date, time and location of hearing.
(d) A statement that at the hearing the permittee may present
witnesses, evidence, information and arguments on its behalf,
and that the permittee has the right to be represented by
counsel.
(2) Hold a hearing as scheduled. The permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present witnesses,
evidence, information and arguments. Other interested persons
§ 650-37 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-37
625:665
§ 650-38. No waiver of rights; delivery of notices.
shall also be permitted to attend the hearing and may present
evidence, information and comments on the matters addressed at
the hearing.
(3) Following the hearing, the City Commission shall make a decision
to continue, modify or dissolve a stop-work or use order and/or
revoke a permit, as applicable. In the event the City Commission
decides to revoke a permit or to continue or modify a stop-work or
use order, the City Commission shall state the reasons for its
decision on the record and shall mail or deliver written notice of its
decision and reasons to the permittee.
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person determined to be in violation of this article or a permit
issued under it shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
and shall pay a fine in the following amount:
(a) First offense: $1,000.
(b) Second or subsequent offense: $5,000.
(2) Any person in violation of this article or a permit issued under it
shall be responsible for restoration of the right-of-way to the
condition that existed prior to the violation. If such person fails or
refuses to restore the right-of-way after 30 days' notice from the
City, and if the City determines that the civil infraction remedy is
inadequate under the circumstances, the City may initiate
proceedings in the appropriate court to recover the cost estimated
to accomplish the restoration, or recover such costs as have been
actually expended by the City in achieving the restoration, as the
case may be. Such costs shall include finance and reasonable
administrative costs estimated or incurred.
(3) Each occurrence of a violation, and each day a violation exists, shall
constitute a separate violation of this article.
(4) Violations of this article are considered to be a nuisance per se with
such violations and correction of any conditions resulting from
violations subject to abatement by injunctive or other appropriate
order by a court of competent jurisdiction.
E. Election of remedies. Violations of this article and permits or orders
issued under it subject the violator to City enforcement through one or
more of the remedies provided in this article, and the election by the
City to pursue one form of remedy does not waive or restrict the City's
option to pursue other remedies at the same or later time.
A. No waiver. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any
of the rights, remedies and/or authority of the City pursuant to any
§ 650-37 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-38
625:666
§ 650-39. Telecommunications permits. [Added 5-5-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-03]
laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the City, and the City reserves
the right to exercise all authority and take any and all action granted
to it by any constitution, law, City ordinance, code and/or regulation.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit and/or preclude the
City from exercising its right of eminent domain.
B. Notices. Any notices required to be sent to the permittee by this article
may be delivered or may be sent by first class mail to the permittee at
the address listed in the permittee's disruption and/or use permit
application.
A. Conflict. Nothing in this section or article shall be construed in such a
manner as to conflict with the Act125 or other applicable law.
B. Permit required.
(1) Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rightsof-
way in the City for its telecommunications facilities shall apply
for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article.
(2) Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit
on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with
Section 6(1) of the Act.126 A telecommunications provider shall file
one copy of the application with the City Engineer, one copy with
the City Manager, and one copy with the City Attorney. Upon
receipt, the City Engineer shall make and distribute copies of the
application to other City staff and consultants as necessary.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required
by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the
location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in
accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act.127
(3) Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims
that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its
application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential
information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act,
1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5)
of the Act,128 the telecommunications provider shall prominently so
indicate on the face of each map.
125. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(1).
127. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(5).
128. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(5).
§ 650-38 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-39
625:667
(4) Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of $500.
(5) Additional information. The City Engineer may request an
applicant to submit such additional information which the City
Engineer deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant
shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable
deadlines for such additional information established by the City
Engineer. If the City and the applicant cannot agree on the
requirement of additional information requested by the City, the
City or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section
6(2) of the Act.129
(6) Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act,130
authorizations or permits previously issued by the City under
Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
MCLA § 484.2251131 and authorizations or permits issued by the
City to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment
of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after
1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article.
(7) Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act,132 within
180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public
right-of-way in the City as of such date, that has not previously
obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA
§ 484.2251,133 shall submit to the City an application for a permit in
accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to
Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting
an application under this subsection is not required to pay the
application fee of $500 required under Subsection B(4) above. A
provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional
180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the
Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act.134
C. Issuance of permit.
(1) Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application
for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Engineer. Pursuant to
Section 15(3) of the Act,135 the City Engineer shall approve or deny
an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a
129. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(2).
130. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3105(1).
131. Editor's Note: MCLA § 484.2251 was repealed by PA 2002, No. 48.
132. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3105(3).
133. Editor's Note: MCLA § 484.2251 was repealed by PA 2002, No. 48.
134. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3105(4).
135. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3115(3).
§ 650-39 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-39
625:668
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under
Subsection B of this section for access to a public right-of-way
within the City. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act,136 the City
Engineer shall notify the MPSC when the City Engineer has
granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the
date on which the application was filed and the date on which
permit was granted or denied. The City Engineer shall not
unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
(2) Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City
Engineer shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC,
with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance
with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.137
(3) Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act,138 the City
Engineer may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which
conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's
access and usage of the public right-of-way.
(4) Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act,139 and
without limitation on Subsection C(3) above, the City Engineer may
require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider
as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not
exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider's access and use.
D. Disruption permit. A telecommunications provider shall not commence
construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the
City without first obtaining a disruption permit as required under
§ 650-33 of this article, as amended, for construction within the public
rights-of-way. Notwithstanding any provisions of § 650-33 of this article
to the contrary, no fee shall be charged for such a disruption permit.
E. Conduit or utility poles. Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act,140 obtaining
a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article
does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or
utility poles.
F. Route maps. Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act,141 a
telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial
completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the
City, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications
facilities to both the MPSC and to the City. The route maps should be in
136. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(6).
137. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(1), 484.3106(2) and 484.3115.
138. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3115(4).
139. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3115(3).
140. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3104(3).
141. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(7).
§ 650-39 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-39
625:669
electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in
accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.142 In the event the MPSC
makes a determination that the route maps are to be in a format other
than electronic and/or are to meet certain detail requirements, the
format and detail of the route maps submitted to the City under this
section shall be the same as determined by the MPSC.
G. Repair of damage. Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act,143 a
telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or
construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public
right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the City,
as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the
street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the
public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to
its preexisting condition.
H. Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. In addition to the
nonrefundable application fee paid to the City set forth in Subsection
B(4) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the City's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual
maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act.144
I. Modification of existing fees. In compliance with the requirements of
Section 13(1) of the Act,145 the City hereby modifies, to the extent
necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after
November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and
usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the
amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be
paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section
13(4) of the Act,146 the City also hereby approves modification of the
fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-ofway
within the City's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those
fees required under Section 8 of the Act.147 The City shall provide each
telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this
article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act.
To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in
excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise
inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be
contrary to the City's policy and intent, and upon application by a
provider or discovery by the City, shall be promptly refunded as having
been charged in error.
142. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3106(8).
143. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3115(5).
144. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3108.
145. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3113(1).
146. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3113(4).
147. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3108.
§ 650-39 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-39
625:670
J. Savings clause under the Act. Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act,148 if
Section 8 of the Act149 is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the
modification of fees under Subsection I, above, shall be void from the
date the modification was made.
K. Use of funds. Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act,150 all amounts
received by the City from the Authority shall be used by the City solely
for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that
requirement, all funds received by the City from the Authority shall be
deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund
maintained by the City under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951.151
L. Annual report. Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act,152 the City
Engineer shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and
disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority.
M. Cable television operators. Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act,153 the
City shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any
remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after
November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or
similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable
operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services.
N. Existing rights. Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act,154 except as
expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not
affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the City
may have under a permit issued by the City or under a contract
between the City and a telecommunications provider related to the use
of the public rights-of-way.
O. Compliance. The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in
adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act,
and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to
achieve that purpose. The City shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information
Act, 1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in the Act
and in Subsection B(3) of this section;
(2) Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with Subsection B(6) of this
section;
148. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3113(5).
149. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3108.
150. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3110(4).
151. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 247.651 et seq.
152. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3110(5).
153. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3113(6).
154. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3104(2).
§ 650-39 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-39
625:671
(3) Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the
application fee of $500, in accordance with Subsection B(7) of this
section;
(4) Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days
from the date a telecommunications provider files an application
for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within
the City, in accordance with Subsection C(1) of this section;
(5) Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a permit,
in accordance with Subsection C(1) of this section;
(6) Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with Subsection C(1) of this section;
(7) Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in Subsection C(2)
of this section;
(8) Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with Subsection C(3) of this section;
(9) Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which
exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way
is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider's access and use, in accordance with
Subsection C(4) of this section;
(10) Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional
fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with
Subsection D of this section;
(11) Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the City's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with
Subsection I of this section;
(12) Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
Subsection L of this section; and
(13) Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to
pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Subsection M of this
section.
P. Reservation of police powers. Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act,155
this article shall not limit the City's right to review and approve a
telecommunications provider's access to and ongoing use of a public
right-of-way or limit the City's authority to ensure and protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
155. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3115(2).
§ 650-39 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-39
625:672
Q. Violation. A violation of any subsection in this section shall be
punishable and subject the permittee to the procedures, orders and
penalties as provided in § 650-37 of this article. Nothing in this article
shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the City under the
Act or otherwise by law in the event of a violation by a person of this
section or a permit issued hereunder.
§ 650-39 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-39
625:673

ARTICLE VI
Downtown Newsracks
[Adopted 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
§ 650-40. Purpose and intent.
The City of Royal Oak hereby finds and declares:
A. The City of Royal Oak has a substantial interest in promoting the public
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and visitors by ensuring that
public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way are not unreasonably
obstructed by newsracks, that newsracks are properly maintained, and
that newsracks do not create a visual blight in the City, especially within
downtown Royal Oak.
B. In recent years, the proliferation of newsracks on downtown streets,
and particularly poorly maintained or abandoned freestanding
newsracks, has contributed to the congestion of City sidewalks,
impeded the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, interfered with the
use of streets, sidewalks and public rights-of-way, presented hazards to
persons and property, resulted in visual blight, and hindered the ability
of public services such as sidewalk and street cleaning. Certain
newsracks have been placed in inappropriate locations, have been
abandoned, are poorly maintained, and have been used as trash
receptacles, causing unsightly and unsanitary clutter and litter.
C. The City of Royal Oak has a substantial interest in preserving and
protecting its unique visual and aesthetic qualities as identified in the
City of Royal Oak Master Plan. To that end, and consistent with the
Downtown Development Authority's Wayfinding Recommendations
Program Document, and the objectives of the Downtown Development
Authority and Main Street Royal Oak, it is in the best interest of the City
to take steps to solve and reduce the negative effects of this problem.
D. After conducting an extensive study and inquiry into this problem, as
documented in the Downtown Development Authority's Wayfinding
Recommendations Program Document, it has become clear that an
effective way to remedy this problem is to require that all newspapers
and other publications desiring to be sold or provided in newspaper
racks on downtown sidewalks or other public property or rights-of-way
be placed in and sold from modular units which are provided by the City
at locations commensurate with the locations at which newspapers and
other publications are currently being sold or provided.
E. The purpose of this article is therefore to accomplish the following:
(1) Provide for increased pedestrian and vehicular safety and
convenience;
(2) Ensure that there is no unreasonable interference with the free
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into, or
§ 650-40 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-40
625:675
egress from, any residence, place of business or public facility, or
any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
(3) Ensure compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and
improve passage for persons with disabilities by reducing
impediments to passage caused by poorly located newsracks;
(4) Provide reasonable access for the safe and efficient use and
maintenance of sidewalks, street lamps, traffic signs or signals,
hydrants, mailboxes, police or fire call boxes, sidewalk elevators,
delivery areas, loading zones, transit shelters, benches, waste
receptacles, street trees, planters and plant boxes, curb ramps,
parking meters, and locations used for public transportation
services;
(5) Reduce visual blight, clutter and litter problems associated with
poorly maintained, improperly located or abandoned newsracks;
(6) Protect the unique aesthetic and historical attributes of the City
and its downtown;
(7) Advance the economic interests of the City's businesses and
residents, including the interests of those involved in the
publication or distribution of newspapers and news periodicals
through newsracks; and
(8) Prevent newsracks from unduly interfering with City sidewalk and
street cleaners as well as other public services, especially within
the downtown.
F. In adopting this article, the City of Royal Oak is mindful that regulation
of newsracks implicates rights protected by the Constitutions of both
the United States and the State of Michigan. To that end, this article
was drafted and shall be applied and enforced in a manner consistent
with these constitutional rights. The content or viewpoint of the
material to be distributed through modular newsrack units shall not be
considered in administering or enforcing this article.
G. Given the limited space available and the increasing congestion on
certain public sidewalks, streets and rights-of-way within the
downtown, the City has a substantial interest in devising a systematic
approach to newsrack placement in those locales to ensure a fair and
equitable distribution of newspapers. This objective may be achieved by
providing modular newsrack units in certain locations in the City as
identified in the Downtown Development Authority's Wayfinding
Recommendations Program Document. Utilizing newsrack units and
prohibiting freestanding newsracks will promote the City's interest in
promoting public safety, reducing visual blight and clutter, protecting
the unique aesthetic and historical attributes of the City and its
downtown, and advancing the economic interests of the City's
businesses and residents by improving the appearance of the area and
resulting in better use of space and reduced congestion.
§ 650-40 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-40
625:676
§ 650-41. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED NEWSRACK BOX — Any newsrack box, which either remains
empty for more than 30 business days or contains only outdated issues
based on frequency of publication as set forth in the registration
application. In case of a labor strike or a temporary and extraordinary
interruption of distribution of publications of the newspaper or other
periodical sold or dispensed from that newsrack box, the publication shall
notify the Director in writing in order to avoid having the newsrack box
deemed abandoned.
CLUSTER OF MODULAR NEWSRACK UNITS — Two or more modular
newsrack units located such that each unit is within a twenty-five-foot
radius of another unit.
DDA — The City of Royal Oak Downtown Development Authority.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Planning or his or her designee.
FREESTANDING NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box,
container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used for, or maintained
for the display and sale or the distribution without charge of newspapers,
news periodicals or other publications, and which is not a modular
newsrack unit authorized under this article.
MODULAR NEWSRACK UNIT — A newsrack which is provided by the City
for the placement of publications to be sold or distributed in the City on
public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way.
NEWSRACK — A newsrack box, a freestanding newsrack, or a modular
newsrack unit.
NEWSRACK BOX — The individual space within a modular newsrack unit
that dispenses one newspaper or other periodical, including the door, coin
return mechanism and associated hardware, not including any freestanding
newsrack.
PUBLICATION — Any morning, evening, special or other editions of a
publication, as well as any editions published jointly with another publisher.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement,
easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved and dedicated
to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, or pedestrian
walkway purposes, whether or not said land has been improved or accepted
for maintenance by the City.
REGISTERED PUBLICATION — A publication which has registered with the
City to locate its publications in one or more modular newsrack units.
H. A reasonable accommodation of these competing interests can be
achieved by adoption of this article, which reasonably regulates the
placement of newsracks in specified areas.
§ 650-40 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-41
625:677
WAYFINDING RECOMMENDATIONS PROGRAM DOCUMENT — The final
document prepared and published by the DDA containing the goals,
objectives, maps, plans, implementation strategies, and proposed location
plan of the DDA's Signage and Wayfinding Study.
§ 650-42. Scope and applicability.
The requirements of this article shall apply to all newsracks located on
public property or public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way within the
downtown development area as defined in the DDA's Downtown
Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan. The Director is authorized
to establish guidelines for implementation of this article in certain areas
or locations within the downtown development area and to establish dates
by which modular newsrack units will be in place and all freestanding
newsracks must be removed and in compliance with this article, in each
area or location. The deadlines for compliance with this article and the
Director's guidelines shall be mailed by first class mail to each affected
publication at least 30 days prior to the implementation date in each
location. These deadlines shall also be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City at least 30 days prior to the implementation date in
each location.
§ 650-43. Director.
§ 650-44. Prohibitions.
A. The Director shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this
article and for performing the duties described herein.
B. It is the intent of the City Commission that the duties imposed upon the
Director by this article be directory in nature, and that as a result, the
Director's failure to comply with a particular procedural step shall not
invalidate any subsequent action by the Director to which the
procedural requirement relates.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no newsracks other than
modular newsrack units provided by the City may be placed, operated
or maintained on any public street, sidewalk or public right-of-way or
portion thereof.
B. No newsrack box or modular newsrack unit shall be used for
advertising signs or publicity purposes. However, each publication may
attach a decal, no larger than four inches high and 16 inches wide, to a
specified area on the front of its newsrack boxes for the purpose of
displaying the name of the publication contained in the newsrack box.
The publication shall be responsible for ensuring that any such decals
are maintained in a clean and good condition.
C. No person or entity shall violate any other section, subsection,
guideline or provision of this article.
§ 650-41 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-45
625:678
§ 650-45. Registration; fees; removal of newsrack boxes.
A. Requirement. Registration with the City is necessary to facilitate the
regulation and inspection of newsrack boxes and to allocate space for
the purposes set forth in this article. No person may place any
publication in any modular newsrack unit on a public sidewalk, street,
public right-of-way or portion thereof for the purpose of sale or
distribution without having first registered with the City.
B. Duty to register. Each publication seeking access to a modular
newsrack unit shall register with the City for each location and for each
unit at which the publication seeks access. The registered publication
shall be responsible for the payment of all fees or penalties due or
imposed under this article with respect to that registered publication's
modular newsrack unit(s) or newsrack box.
C. Registration. Registration for placement in a modular newsrack unit
shall be made in writing and filed with the Planning Department. The
application package shall inform the applicant to the requirements of
this article and the guidelines provided herein.
D. Approval. Upon receipt of a properly completed application from a
publication, or from the agent for a publication, accompanied by
written authorization from the publication along with the required fee,
the Director shall register the publication for placement in a modular
newsrack unit within 15 working days of receipt of the application,
unless, based on the requirements of this article or the guidelines
provided herein, there are grounds requiring denial of the application.
If an application is disapproved in whole or in part, the Director shall
notify the applicant promptly in writing within 15 working days of
receipt of application, explaining the reasons for the denial.
E. Effect of registration. The City Commission specifically determines that
the approval of an application and registration of a publication by the
City pursuant to this section confers a nontransferable, revocable
privilege on the registered publication. In addition, the City
Commission may at any time in its exclusive legislative discretion elect
to repeal or amend this article and thereby render null and void any
approval and/or registration issued pursuant this section.
F. Fees. There shall be an annual registration fee to be paid by all
publications to the Planning Department for each newsrack box utilized
by the publication for the sale or distribution of its publications. The
amount of this registration fee shall be determined by resolution of the
City Commission. The fee is not for the purpose of generating revenues
or to reimburse the City for its costs in purchasing the modular
newsrack units. The purpose of the fee is to cover the cost incurred in
maintaining the exterior of the modular newsrack units and repairing or
replacing damaged units. The fee shall be reviewed annually by the
Director, who shall propose to the City Commission, if necessary, any
recommended adjustments, along with written justification for the
§ 650-45 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-45
625:679
§ 650-46. Locations.
adjustment and any necessary amendment. If a publication fails to pay
the required fee within 30 days after it becomes due, the Director
shall provide written notice that registration will be revoked and the
newsrack box removed if the fee is not paid within 10 days of this
notice. If the fee is not paid within 10 days, registration shall be
revoked and the newsrack box removed.
A. The precise locations of modular newsrack units in the City shall be
recommended by the Planning Director and presented on a detailed
map of the City for approval by the DDA. The following factors shall be
taken into account:
(1) The "Proposed Sign Location Map" and other goals, objectives, and
implementation strategies of the Wayfinding Recommendations
Program Document;
(2) The locations being utilized prior to the adoption of this article,
including the publications' desire to maintain these locations and
the number of publications present at each location;
(3) Pedestrian and vehicular congestion, traffic and safety
considerations at certain locations, including impediments to
access by individuals with disabilities, and interference with public
services;
(4) Demand for and access to publications at the locations, including
the availability of alternative channels of distribution other than
through newsracks;
(5) Urban blight, litter, aesthetic and historical concerns;
(6) Access to, and use of street furniture and public transit facilities,
including such access and use by individuals with disabilities; and
(7) Sight lines and access to buildings with first-floor retail space.
B. Any interested person may petition the Director to request the addition
of one or more additional modular newsrack unit locations. Such
petition shall be in writing, and shall include written statements from
publications that are willing to register for each proposed location.
Upon receiving such a petition, the Director will present the request to
the DDA within 45 days of receipt thereof to determine whether the
placement of one or more additional modular newsrack units in the
proposed new location would be authorized under the requirements of
this article and its guidelines. The DDA shall consider a request for the
creation of a new location(s) for the installation of one or more modular
newsrack units if the following conditions are met:
(1) All other requirements of this article have been met with regard to
the location;
§ 650-45 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-46
625:680
§ 650-47. Allocation of space in modular newsrack units.
(2) There are no other modular newsrack units within 50 feet of the
proposed location;
(3) The location will not unreasonably impede pedestrian traffic,
prevent the performance of essential public services such as
sidewalk sweeping, and will not create a traffic hazard;
(4) The location is one at which an unsatisfied demand for publications
is not met by existing modular newsrack units;
(5) A minimum of four publications, all published at least once per
week, are seeking to sell or distribute their publications at this
location; and
(6) Newsracks will be oriented for pedestrian use and will face the
interior of the sidewalk.
C. The DDA shall also have the option of requiring the Director to place a
modular newsrack unit at the proposed location on a trial basis for up to
60 days in order to determine the viability of the location. If the location
is determined not to be in contravention of this article and the DDA
feels its addition would be proper, it shall recommend to the Director
that this new location be created. Otherwise, the petition should be
denied.
A. With respect to publications' access to specific modular newsrack units,
space shall be allocated based upon frequency of publication as follows:
(1) First priority shall be given to publications which are distributed at
least five days per a week, inclusive of their Saturday, Sunday or
weekend editions, whether or not published jointly with another
newspaper;
(2) Second priority shall be given to publications published between
one and four times per week;
(3) Third priority shall be given to publications published between two
and four times per month;
(4) Fourth priority shall be given to publications published one time
per month or less.
B. No publication that has selected a space in a modular newsrack unit or
cluster of modular newsrack units may receive a second space in a unit
or cluster of units.
C. In implementing this allocation scheme as to each modular newsrack
unit or cluster of modular newsrack units, the Director shall conduct a
meeting, at which time each category beginning with Category (1),
daily and weekly publications, will be allowed to select a position in a
given location. When each publication in that category that so desires
§ 650-46 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-47
625:681
§ 650-48. Maintenance.
§ 650-49. Appeals.
has chosen a position in that location, each publication in Category
(2) shall select a position and so forth through Category (4). The
publications in each category may agree among themselves as to the
order they will follow in selecting positions. If they are unable to agree,
the Director shall determine the order within each category by drawing
lots.
D. If all available modular newsrack units are filled and a publication
decides to vacate a space in a modular newsrack unit, the Director shall
maintain a list of publications that are interested in additional spaces as
they become available, and shall provide notice to these publications
when spaces become available. The Director shall assign a publication
to the available space in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this section.
E. Where a publication not previously distributed seeks access to a
modular newsrack unit in a location, such publication shall first
endeavor to locate in any vacant spaces of an existing modular
newsrack unit before requesting that the Director provide an additional
modular newsrack unit.
F. In any circumstances where a publication decides to vacate a location
or a newsrack box, the publication shall promptly notify the Director of
the intention to vacate the location.
A. The DDA shall be responsible for maintenance of the exterior of all
modular newsrack units, excluding any decal or sign indicating the
name of the publication. A replacement unit shall be provided by the
DDA while it repairs or refurbishes a modular newsrack unit. The DDA
shall provide a replacement unit within a reasonable period of time
after being notified that a unit is damaged and the DDA determines that
the unit needs immediate repair.
B. The publications shall be responsible for maintenance of the doors and
door mechanisms as well as the interior of the modular newsrack units
or newsrack box, including all mechanical equipment. All coin-operated
newsrack boxes shall be equipped with a coin-return device that is
maintained in good repair and working order to enable persons to
secure full refunds if they are unable to receive the publication paid for.
In the case of coin-operated newsrack boxes, the publication shall be
responsible for maintenance of the coin-operated mechanism, including
the coin return. Any damage to the modular newsrack unit resulting
from maintenance, theft or vandalism to the coin mechanism shall be
repaired by the publication.
A. Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who is aggrieved by a
determination made by the Director or an applicant whose registration
§ 650-47 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-49
625:682
§ 650-50. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
is denied may file a request for review of the decision by the DDA.
Such a request must be filed at the Planning Department not more than
10 business days following the Director's decision or the denial. The
DDA shall consider the request at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
consistent with public meeting law requirements, and shall vote either
to affirm or reverse the Director's decision or the denial. The DDA's
decision shall be provided to the Director within two business days, who
shall immediately notify the person of the decision. The Director shall
act in accordance with the decision of the DDA.
B. In the event that a person is aggrieved by a decision of the DDA with
regard to the denial of a new modular newspaper rack location, the
person may file an appeal to the City Commission.
C. In the event that a person remains aggrieved after an appeal to the DDA
or the City Commission, the person may provide to the Planning
Director, within 10 days of the decision of the DDA or City Commission,
a notice of intent to institute legal proceedings against the City. Once
the Director has received this notice, the Director shall reasonably
accommodate the person's request until the earlier of the time that a
lawsuit is filed against the City or 60 days from the receipt of the notice
of intent by the Director.
A. The Director is authorized to remove without prior notice any newsrack
that poses an immediate danger to persons, vehicles or property or
remove any newsrack interfering with construction activity or public
works. Such removal shall be in accordance with the notice and hearing
procedures set forth below.
B. The Director shall provide advance notice of removal and the reasons
therefor to the publications if possible. Within 48 hours after removal,
the Director shall notify the owner in writing of the removal and the
reasons for removal if no advance notice was provided. The Director
shall attempt to relocate the units to a location as close as possible to
the vacated location considering the guidelines established by this
article.
C. The Director is authorized to remove and impound any unauthorized
newsracks in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) Notice of violation and impoundment. The Director shall post a
notice of violation on the unauthorized newsrack and shall use all
reasonable efforts to immediately contact the owner of the
newsrack or other responsible party by facsimile and telephone
where this information is contained on the newsrack or available
from the Director's records. The notice attached to the newsrack,
and any written notice transmitted to the owner, shall also inform
the owner of the right to request by facsimile, telephone or in
person by the close of business on the first business day following
§ 650-49 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-50
625:683
the date of the notice of violation, a meeting with the Director to
determine whether the newsrack is in violation of this article. If the
newsrack has not been removed, and the owner has not requested
a meeting with the Director by the close of the next business day
following the day that the notice of violation has been affixed, the
Director may remove and impound the offending newsrack. Within
48 hours after the removal, the Director shall notify the owner in
writing of the removal and the reasons for removal. If the owner
did not request a meeting with the Director prior to removal of the
newsrack, the notice shall also inform the owner of the right to
request, either in writing or in person, within five business days of
the date of the postmark of such written notice, a meeting with the
Director to determine whether such removal was proper.
(2) Meeting and decision. Upon timely request, the Director shall
provide such a meeting by the close of the next business day
following receipt of the request, unless the owner agrees to a later
date. The proceeding shall be informal, but oral and written
evidence may be offered. The Director shall give his or her decision
in writing to the owner within three business days after such
meeting. If no meeting has been requested, and/or the Director
finds that the impoundment was proper, the Director shall notify
the owner that the impounded newsrack may be recovered
following payment of a fine as established by resolution of the City
Commission. If the Director finds that the impoundment was
improper and/or that placement of the newsrack was lawful, the
Director shall order the immediate release to the owner and
reinstallation by the City at its expense of the newsrack without
charge.
(3) Disposal of impounded newsracks. Newsracks that are not claimed
within 30 calendar days of impoundment shall be disposed of in a
manner determined by the Director in accordance with state law.
The owner of an unauthorized newsrack shall be responsible for
restoring the sidewalk to its original condition if damaged by the
unauthorized newsrack.
D. A violation of any section or provision of this article is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both.156
156. Editor’s Note: Former Article VII, Sidewalk Cafes, adopted 12-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2010-15, was repealed 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03.
§ 650-50 ROYAL OAK CODE § 650-50
625:684
Chapter 658
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 134.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 351.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 650-50 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 650-50
625:685

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Authority; Definitions
§ 658-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision Regulation Ordinance of
the City of Royal Oak."
§ 658-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are those of providing a guide for the orderly
growth and harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate
traffic circulation by means of coordinated street systems with relation to
major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivision and public facilities; to achieve
individual lots of reasonable utility and livability; to facilitate adequate
provisions for transportation, water supply, drainage, sanitary sewage and
health requirements; to make adequate provisions for recreational areas,
school sites and other public facilities; to facilitate the further subdivision of
larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; and to provide logical procedures
for the achievement of these purposes.
§ 658-3. Legal authority.
The authority to accomplish the purposes of this chapter is contained in the
following legislation:
A. Charter, City of Royal Oak, Michigan, November 8, 1921, as amended,
Chapter II entitled "General Powers," Section 1
B. Municipal Planning Commission Act, Act 285, PA 1931, as amended,
entitled An Act to provide for city, village and municipal planning; the
creation, organization, powers and duties of planning commissions; the
regulation and subdivision of land; and to provide penalties for violation
of the provisions of this act.157
C. Subdivision Control Act of 1967, Act 288, PA 1967, as amended, entitled
An Act to revise the laws relating to the making, approving, filing,
recording of plats on subdivided properties; to provide for reserving
easements for utilities in vacated streets and alleys; to provide
penalties for the violation thereof; and to repeal certain acts.158
D. Mapped Improvements Act, Act 222, PA 1943, as amended, entitled An
Act enabling the Planning Commission of cities and villages, after
adoption of a master plan, to certify plats of precised portions thereof to
the legislative body, and enabling cities and villages by ordinance to
adopt such certified plats showing the future outside lines of streets,
ways, places, parks, playgrounds and other public grounds and to
regulate buildings within such lines.159
157. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.31 et seq.
158. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 658-1 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-4
625:687
§ 658-4. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOCK — That property on a preliminary or recorded plat entirely
surrounded by streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, a park, etc., or a
combination thereof.
CITY or MUNICIPALITY — City of Royal Oak.
CITY COMMISSION — The Royal Oak City Commission.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer for the City of Royal Oak.
CLERK — City Clerk for the City of Royal Oak.
DATE OF FILING —
EASEMENT — A property right granted by the owner of property to
the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific uses and purposes,
and which shall be designated as a "public" or "private" easement
depending on the nature of the usage.
ENGINEERING PLANS — Plans for water supply, sewage disposal,
surface drainage, street improvements and other engineering
requirements under the City of Royal Oak's jurisdiction.
FINAL PLAT — A map of all or part of a subdivision conforming
substantially to the approved preliminary plat of the subdivision
prepared in accordance with requirements of the Subdivision Control
Act (Act 288, PA 1967, as amended)160 and this chapter, and suitable for
recording in the office of the Oakland County Register of Deeds.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The long-range development plan
for the City of Royal Oak, including graphic and written proposals
indicating the general locations recommended for the land uses, parks,
schools, public facilities and all physical developments of the City,
including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any
DATE OF FILING FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF THE
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The date of the initial Planning Commission
meeting that the subdivider presents the preliminary plat for
consideration.
(1)
DATE OF FILING FOR FINAL APPROVAL OF THE PRELIMINARY
PLAT — The date the subdivider files the tentatively approved
preliminary plat and a certified list of all authorities required for
approval with the Clerk.
(2)
DATE OF FILING FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL — The date the
subdivider files the necessary prints of the final plat with the Clerk.
(3)
159. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.51 et seq.
160. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 658-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-4
625:688
amendment to such plan or parts thereof adopted by the Planning
Commission.
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, public walkways, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, and other additions, to the
natural state of the land which increases its values, utility or
habitability.
LOT — A parcel of land separated from other parcels on a preliminary
or recorded plat for purposes of sale, lease, or separate use.
LOT SPLIT — The division of a lot whose boundaries are fixed in a
recorded plat, into more than two but not more than four parts or
parcels.
MASTER THOROUGHFARE PLAN — That part of the City of Royal
Oak's General Development Plan which is used for the location,
alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and
thoroughfares.
PARCEL (OR TRACT) — A continuous area or acreage of land which can
be described as provided for in the Subdivision Act.161
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, including US
government bonds, cash deposits, maintenance bonds and other similar
collateral or security agreements, which may be accepted by the City
Commission in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be
made prior to final plat approval.
PERSON — Individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or association.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A technique of land use
development reflecting a proper mixture of residential dwelling units,
open space, and commercial; and utilization of the best potential of
sites with special topographic or size features for the total community
development, also referred to as a "planning area development."
PLANNING COMMISSION — The City of Royal Oak's Planning
Commission.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The Director of Royal Oak's Planning Division
of the Community Development Department.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A detailed map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision so as to provide an adequate basis for the Planning
Commission's and City Commission's review as outlined in the
preliminary plat stage.
PUBLIC RESERVATION — A portion of a subdivision which is set aside
for public use and made available for public use and acquisition.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person, firm, or corporation, municipal
department, board or commission, duly authorized to furnish, and
161. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 658-4 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-4
625:689
furnishing under governmental regulations to the public, gas, steam,
electricity, sewage disposal, communications, telegraph, transportation
or water.
PUBLIC WALKWAY — A dedicated right-of-way, through residential
areas, used for the purpose of providing pedestrian access from one
street to another or from a street to a public parcel.
REPLAT — The process of changing, or the map or plat which changes,
the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The
legal dividing of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without
changing the exterior boundaries of the outlot is not a replat.
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS — Street grading and paving, curb and
gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary and
storm sewers, utilities and other appropriate items, with appurtenant
construction.
SKETCH PLAN — A map of a proposed subdivision which is drawn with
enough accuracy and at a sufficient scale to satisfy the requirements of
the preapplication state of this chapter.
STREET — Any thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, service drive, alley or other way which is an existing state,
county, or municipal roadway, or a street or way shown in a plat
heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action,
or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office
of the Oakland County Register of Deeds. A street includes the land
between the street right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved
and may be comprised of pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas, lawn areas, and other areas within the street right-ofway
lines.
BOULEVARD — A street developed with two one-way pavements
separated by a median.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which carries traffic from minor
residential streets to major or urban thoroughfares, including
principal entrance streets of a residential development.
(2)
PRIMARY THOROUGHFARE — Arterial street of considerable
continuity which is designed primarily to allow moderate to high
levels of traffic flow for both the City and the region beyond and
is designated on the Master Thoroughfare Plan as a primary
thoroughfare.
(3)
SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE — An arterial street similar in
function to a primary thoroughfare but which is intended to provide
for moderate levels of traffic flow and greater access to abutting
properties and is designated on the Master Thoroughfare Plan as a
secondary thoroughfare.
(4)
§ 658-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-4
625:690
SUBDIVIDER or PROPRIETOR — Any natural person, firm, association,
syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or combination thereof
which may hold any ownership interest in the land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of
land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators,
legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or
lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the act
of division creates five or more parcels of land, each of which is 10
acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land, each of which is 10
acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period
of 10 years.
SUBDIVISION ACT — Subdivision Control Act of 1967, Act 288, PA of
1967, as amended.162
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE — The Subdivision Regulations Ordinance
of the City of Royal Oak, Michigan.
UTILITY PLANS — Plans for electricity, gas, telephone and other
services of a similar nature provided by a public utility other than those
services provided by the City of Royal Oak.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The City of Royal Oak's Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 770 of the City Code, as amended.
MINOR RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street of limited continuity
which is used primarily for providing access to abutting residential
properties.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short minor residential street having one
end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a
permanent vehicular turnaround.
(a)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor residential street
paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
(b)
U OR LOOP STREET — A minor street of short length having
two openings to traffic beginning from the same street and
projecting parallel to each other and connecting at their
termination by a loop.
(c)
(5)
PUBLIC SERVICE DRIVE OR ALLEY — A dedicated public way
used primarily to provide secondary vehicular access to abutting
properties and not intended for general traffic circulation.
(6)
B. Words. Single words shall include the plural, and masculine words shall
include the feminine and neuter.
162. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 658-4 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-4
625:691
C. All terms as defined in the Subdivision Act shall control in this chapter
unless indicated to the contrary in this section.
§ 658-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-4
625:692
ARTICLE II
Subdivision Procedure and Data Required
§ 658-5. Phases.
The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through
four phases: prepreliminary plat investigation, tentative approval of the
preliminary plat, final approval of the preliminary plat, and final approval of
the final plat, all in accordance with the procedure as follows after meeting
the requirements set in the Subdivision Act.163
§ 658-6. Prepreliminary investigations.
Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is suggested that the
subdivider meet informally with the Planning Director to investigate the
procedures and standards of the City of Royal Oak, as they effect the area in
which the proposed development is located. The subdivider should concern
himself with the following:
A. The subdivider should familiarize himself with Chapter 770, Zoning,
Subdivision Ordinance, General Development Plan, engineering
specifications and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the
subdivision and improvement of land, so as to make himself aware of
the requirements of the City.
B. The subdivider should review the existing zoning of the location for the
proposed subdivision to determine if it is zoned for the intended use.
C. The subdivider should review the development options of Chapter 770,
Zoning, to determine the feasibility of utilizing one of these approaches.
D. The subdivider should investigate the standards for sewage disposal,
water supply and drainage of the City and other public utilities.
E. The subdivider should investigate the relationship of the proposed
subdivision with respect to primary thoroughfares and plans for
widening of any said thoroughfares.
F. The subdivider should investigate the adequacy of existing schools and
public open spaces, including parks and playgrounds, to serve the
proposed subdivision.
G. The subdivider should review the Subdivision Act164 and the
requirements of those state and county agencies which are required by
the Subdivision Act to review and approve the plat.
H. Three copies of a sketch plan may be submitted by the subdivider to the
Planning Director. The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide the
subdivider with an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and
163. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
164. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 658-5 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-6
625:693
§ 658-7. Preliminary plat (tentative approval).
assistance of the Planning Director and other City departments
involved in subdividing, before the preparation of a preliminary plat and
its submission for approval, in order to save him time and money and
to make the most of his opportunities. A sketch plan prepared by the
subdivider should include the following:
(1) A site analysis of the area proposed to be subdivided which
illustrates the relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect
to the following:
(a) Primary thoroughfares.
(b) Adjacent land uses.
(c) Topography and other environmental features.
(d) Unusual development problems.
(e) Utility systems available to service the platted area.
(f) Existing schools and open space.
(2) Land utilization concept plan.
(3) The area for the proposed subdivision, including the lot and street
arrangements.
(4) Proposed neighborhood and community facilities.
(5) Proposed nonresidential facilities.
(6) Proposed dwelling unit schedule.
I. Nothing in this section, however, shall be so construed as to require any
preapplication contact and review and at this stage shall not constitute
any approval of the proposed preliminary plat but shall serve primarily
as guidance to the subdivider. Any subdivider may elect to begin
subdividing by submitting a preliminary plat in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations.
A. The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat in accordance with the
specifications of this chapter and in accordance with Section 111 of the
Subdivision Act.165 A preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale no less
than one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the following:
(1) Name of the proposed subdivision.
(2) Name and addresses of the owner, owner subdivider and the
planner, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout.
(3) Date, north arrow and scale (written and graphic).
165. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.111.
§ 658-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-7
625:694
(4) Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision and overall property
dimensions and acreage of the tract to be subdivided.
(5) A key map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet
showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings of
not less than 1/2 mile, such as section lines, major and urban
thoroughfares and collector streets.
(6) Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided
land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision,
including those areas across abutting roads and with landowners of
those unplatted tracts being designated by name.
(7) Street names, right-of-way widths, roadway widths and locations of
all existing or prior platted public or private streets within and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision, including those located
across abutting roads.
(8) All existing structures and other physical features, including
topography drawn as contours with an interval of no more than two
feet based on USGS datum, which would have an influence on the
layout and design of the subdivision.
(9) Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way
widths and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the
widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways.
(10) Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots, including
building setback lines showing dimensions.
(11) Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside
for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision.
(12) An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of
any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary plat. If the
subdivider has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as
excepted, the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property
could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the
existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable
relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat.
(13) In the case where the subdivider wishes to subdivide a given area,
but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the
preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the
entire area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall
be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate
clearly the method of development which the subdivider intends to
follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until
the entire area controlled by the subdivider is subdivided.
B. The subdivider shall prepare preliminary engineering and utility plans
in conjunction with the preliminary plat. Preliminary water supply plans
§ 658-7 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-7
625:695
shall only be required where water supply systems will be on private
property.
C. The subdivider shall submit 12 copies of the preliminary plat, and three
copies of the preliminary engineering and utility plans in addition to
other supporting documents to the City Clerk. This information shall be
submitted under the seal of a registered engineer or registered land
surveyor. This must be done at least 30 days prior to the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting, at which time the preliminary
plat will be considered.
D. The subdivider shall pay a fee of $75 to the City Treasurer for the
services involved in processing his plat.
E. The Planning Director shall review the preliminary plat for compliance
with the General Development Plan and specifications of this chapter
and discuss it with the other City departments asking for either
recommendations and/or comments.
F. The Planning Director shall accept the recommendations and/or
comments from each of the departments.
G. Prior to the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting at
which the preliminary plat will be considered, the Planning Director
shall complete his review of the preliminary plat and send his
recommendations along with those recommendations of other City
departments to the Planning Commission.
H. At the regular meeting at which the preliminary plat is scheduled to be
considered, the Planning Commission shall hear the recommendations
and opinions of the Planning Director and other City departments.
I. The Planning Commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 45
days after the date of filing. The Planning Commission may require
submission of additional related data as it deems necessary prior to
granting tentative approval of the preliminary plat. The time required
for approval by the City Commission and Planning Commission may be
extended if applied for by the subdivider and granted by the City
Commission in writing.
(1) Should the Planning Commission approve the preliminary plat, or
lay down conditions for its approval, it shall record this in its official
minutes and notify the City Commission of this action in a written
report and forward the same, together with all accompanying data,
to the City Commission for its review.
(2) Should the Planning Commission find that the preliminary plat is
not acceptable, it shall record the reason in its official minutes and
forward a written report, together with all accompanying data, to
the City Commission and recommend that the City Commission
disapprove the preliminary plat.
§ 658-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-7
625:696
§ 658-8. Final approval of preliminary plat.
J. The City Commission will not review a preliminary plat until it has
received the review and recommendations of the Planning Commission.
Following the receipt of such recommendations, the City Commission
shall consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is
placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The City Commission shall
take action on the preliminary plat within 90 days of the date of filing of
the preliminary plat for tentative approval.
K. Should the City Commission tentatively approve the preliminary plat, it
shall record its approval on the preliminary plat and return one copy to
the subdivider
L. Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval of the preliminary
plat.
M. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the City Commission shall
be effective for a period of 12 months. Should the preliminary plat in
whole or in part not be submitted for final approval within this time
limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the Planning
Commission and City Commission for tentative approval unless an
extension is applied for in writing by the subdivider, and such request is
granted in writing by the City Commission.
A. The subdivider shall file 12 copies of a valid preliminary plat with the
City Clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required for
approval in Sections 112 to 119 of the Subdivision Act.166 The
subdivider shall also submit all approved copies of the preliminary plats
obtained from each of the required authorities.
(1) The preliminary plat shall conform substantially to the tentatively
approved preliminary plat, and it may constitute only that portion
of the tentatively approved preliminary plat which the subdivider
proposes to record and develop at the time.
(2) If the plat includes parcels to be set aside for the use of the
property owners of the subdivision, written statements shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat indicating the following:
(a) How legal title to the land is to be held.
(b) How said property shall be regulated.
(c) Provisions for the payment of taxes.
(d) Persons or corporations responsible for maintenance.
(e) How maintenance is to be guaranteed.
(f) How maintenance and development are to be financed.
166. Editor's Note: See MCLA §§ 560.112 to 560.119.
§ 658-7 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-8
625:697
(g) Other relevant facts related to the above.
(3) Legal documents providing for the above shall be submitted to the
City Attorney for review, and said documents shall be acceptable to
the City Commission prior to final approval of the preliminary plat.
B. The City Clerk shall place the preliminary plat on the agenda of a
regularly scheduled City Commission meeting to be held within 20 days
after the date of filing of the preliminary plat with the Clerk's office.
(1) The Planning Director shall check the proposed plat for
completeness. Should any of the data required by the Subdivision
Ordinance or the Subdivision Act167 be omitted, the Planning
Director shall inform the subdivider of the data required and that
the recognized date of filing shall be delayed until the required
data is received.
(2) The Planning Director shall review the preliminary plat for
compliance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and all
conditions laid down for tentative approval and discuss it with
other City departments. If, in their opinion, the submitted
preliminary plat conforms to the tentatively approved preliminary
plat and all conditions laid down for tentative approval, the
Planning Director shall so indicate by forwarding the preliminary
plat, comments and recommendations to the City Clerk prior to the
City Commission meeting at which the plat is scheduled to be
considered.
(a) If, in their opinion, the preliminary plat does not conform to the
tentatively approved preliminary plat, the Planning Director
shall return the plat to the subdivider stating the reasons for
the rejection. If, in this case, the subdivider wishes to pursue
platting of the rejected preliminary plat, he shall start at the
tentative approval stage outlined previously.
(b) The City Clerk shall receive and shall retain the copies of the
approved preliminary plat along with corresponding
recommendations and comments which have been transmitted
by the Planning Director.
(c) The City Clerk or Planning Director shall, at the City
Commission meeting, present the preliminary plat along with
corresponding recommendations and comments to the City
Commission.
C. The City Commission shall take action on the preliminary plat within 20
days of the date of filing for final approval.
D. If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively
approved by the City Commission and meets all conditions laid down for
167. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 658-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-8
625:698
§ 658-9. Final plat.
tentative approval, the City Commission shall give final approval to the
preliminary plat.
E. No construction of improvements shall begin until the subdivider has:
(1) Received notice from the City Clerk of final approval of the
preliminary plat by the City Commission.
(2) Engineering and utility plans have been approved by the City
Engineer.
(3) The subdivider has met the performance guarantee requirements
as required by Article VI of this chapter
F. Final approval of the preliminary plat by the City Commission shall be
effective for a period of 24 months. This period may be extended if
applied for in writing by the subdivider and granted by the City
Commission. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the City
Commission to other approving authorities.
A. Preparation and filing. The final plat shall conform substantially to the
approved preliminary plat, may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the subdivider has been previously
approved to record, and shall conform in all respects to the
requirements of the Subdivision Act. Such final plat shall have been
processed in accordance with the Subdivision Act, Sections 162
through 165,168 prior to submission.
(1) The subdivider shall file an application for final approval with the
City Clerk.
(2) The subdivider shall submit all official copies of the final plat to the
City Clerk.
(3) The subdivider shall submit the county plat board filing and
recording fee required by Section 241 of the Subdivision Act.169
(4) The subdivider shall submit an abstract of title, certified to date of
the proprietor's certificate, to establish recorded ownership
interest and other information deemed necessary for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the proper parties have signed the plat; or a
policy of title insurance currently in force covering all the land
included within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. The
City Commission, in lieu of an abstract of title, may accept, on its
own responsibility, an attorney's opinion based on the abstract of
title as to the ownership and marketability of title to the land.
168. Editor's Note: See MCLA §§ 560.162 through 560.165.
169. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.241.
§ 658-8 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-9
625:699
B. The City Clerk shall place the final plat on the agenda of a regularly
scheduled City Commission meeting to be held within 20 days after the
filing of the plat with the Clerk's office.
C. The City Clerk shall forward the final plat to the Planning Director who
shall then coordinate a review with the other City departments.
D. The Planning Director shall transmit the recommendations of the
Planning Division and other City departments along with the final plat
to the City Clerk prior to the City Commission meeting at which the
final plat is scheduled to be considered.
E. The City Commission shall, within 20 days after the date of filing of the
final plat, accept and review all findings from the City Clerk and shall
take either of the following actions:
(1) Approve the final plat if it conforms to all provisions of this chapter
and the Subdivision Act170 and instruct the City Clerk to certify on
the final plat the City Commission's approval and date thereof; the
approval of the Health Department, when required, and the date
thereof as shown on the approved preliminary plat; or
(2) Reject the plat and instruct the City Clerk to advise the subdivider,
in writing, of the reasons for rejection, and return the plat to the
subdivider.
F. Upon approval, the City Clerk shall receive the final plat from the City
Commission and shall transcribe a certificate of approval of the City
Commission on the plat and deliver all official copies to the Clerk of the
County Plat Board, together with the filing and recording fee required
by Section 241 of the Subdivision Act.171
170. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
171. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.241.
§ 658-9 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-9
625:700
ARTICLE III
Division of Land in a Recorded Plat
[Amended 1-7-1991 by Ord. No. 90-21; 6-3-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-09]
§ 658-10. Governing provisions.
The following provisions shall govern the partitioning or dividing of lots,
outlots, or other parcels of land in a recorded plat, subject to the provisions
of the Land Division Act, MCLA § 560.101 et seq., as amended.
§ 658-11. Land detached.
Land may be detached from one such lot, outlot, or parcel and added to
another lot, outlot or parcel upon application to and approval by the City
Assessor. The fact of such a division shall be noted upon the City assessment
roll, and thereafter the enlarged lot, outlot or parcel shall be considered to
be a single lot, outlot, or parcel for tax assessment and all other purposes.
No such division shall be permitted unless the enlarged lot, outlot or parcel
and the remainder of the lot, outlot, or parcel from which the part was
taken meets the minimum requirements of Chapter 770, Zoning, including
requirements as to width, area and open spaces, and unless all fees have
been paid.
§ 658-12. Division of lots.
Such lot, outlot or parcel may be divided into two but not more than four
separate lots, outlots or parcels upon application to and approval by the
City Assessor, based upon review and recommendation from the Director
of Planning, the Building Official, the City Engineer and the City Treasurer,
or their designees. A survey showing such proposed divisions prepared by
a registered civil engineer or land surveyor and including a proper legal
description of each separate lot, outlot or parcel proposed, along with any
other information reasonably required to complete the review, shall be
submitted with the application. All fees shall be paid at the time of filing.
§ 658-13. Fees.
The application for partition or division of any lot, outlot or parcel shall be
accompanied by the payment of a fee in an amount to be set by resolution
of the City Commission.
§ 658-10 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-13
625:701

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 658-14. Compliance with other standards.
All subdivisions shall be so designed to conform to the General Development
Plan, the specification standards of the City Engineer, Chapter 770, Zoning,
the Subdivision Ordinance, and any and all standards and requirements for
the development and improvement of the City of Royal Oak which have been
adopted or approved by the City Commission, and to the Public Acts of the
State of Michigan.
§ 658-15. Streets.
Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general
specifications and typical cross sections as set forth by the City Engineer
and other conditions set forth by the City of Royal Oak.
§ 658-16. Lots.
Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standard:
§ 658-17. Easements.
Easements within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:
A. Street construction and dedication. All streets will be dedicated to the
City of Royal Oak and shall be built to City specifications under direct
City inspection and this chapter. Construction and inspection shall be at
the expense of the developer. Street construction shall include
adequate storm drainage.
A. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines except
where some variation is necessary to preserve natural features. Dogleg
side lot lines shall be prohibited.
A. Recommendations on the proposed layout of all utility easements, such
as telephone and electric company easements, should be sought from
all of the utility companies serving the area. It shall be the
responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plat
to all appropriate public utility agencies.
B. All power and communication facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan
Public Service Commission.
C. Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along
side lot lines so as to provide for streetlight dropouts. Prior to the
approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall
be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that
easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be
made on the final plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots
§ 658-14 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-17
625:703
(indicating lot numbers) are subject to streetlight dropout rights
granted to the (name of utility company)."
D. Easements needed for storm drainage, sanitary sewers and water
mains shall be determined by the City Engineer and shall meet the
requirements of the City Engineer.
§ 658-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-17
625:704
ARTICLE V
Improvements
§ 658-18. Minimum standards.
§ 658-19. Streets.
The subdivider shall provide streets constructed according to plans,
profiles, cross sections and specifications approved by the City Engineer in
accordance with specifications on file in the City Engineer's office.
§ 658-20. Sidewalks.
§ 658-21. Utilities.
A. The improvements set forth in this article are to be considered as the
minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which
standards are not specifically set forth shall have standards set by
resolution of the City Commission. All improvements must meet the
approval of the City Commission.
B. The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project
improvements within the City of Royal Oak, in public streets, public
alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, and/or under the
ultimate jurisdiction of the City of Royal Oak. All subdivision or project
improvements within the City of Royal Oak installed in public streets,
public alleys, public rights-of-way, or public easements, and/or under
the ultimate jurisdiction of the City of Royal Oak shall comply with all of
the provisions and requirements of this chapter, and completed to the
specification standards of the City Engineer.
A. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed in all subdivisions along all
minor residential streets, collectors streets and along all abutting
primary thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares.
B. In those instances where the subdivider can show that no good purpose
would be served, the City Commission may waive this requirement.
(1) Sidewalks shall be continuous in nature and shall be provided on
both sides of all minor residential streets, collector streets, urban
thoroughfares and major thoroughfares.
(2) All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet and shall be
located one foot from the property line.
A. Sanitary sewer system. Design data and construction plans and
specifications shall be furnished to the City Engineer for submittal to
the Michigan Department of Health for its approval. All sanitary sewer
plans shall be approved prior to commencement of construction.
§ 658-18 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-21
625:705
(1) A twenty-foot easement will be required for all sanitary sewer
laterals not located within a public right-of-way. A legal description
shall be furnished to the City of Royal Oak for all easements so
required.
(2) Before the sewer system has been accepted by the City, a lateral
will be required for the connection of more than one building, if no
lateral is available to service each building.
B. Water supply system. Design data and construction plans and
specifications for the water supply system shall be furnished to and
approved by the City Engineer prior to the commencement of
construction.
C. Underground installation of all private and public utilities shall be
required for subdivisions of land involving 10 acres or more. This
requirement may be waived by the City Commission when it determines
that no public purpose could be served by the requirement. This waiver
is to be based upon the extent and character of the proposed
subdivision and the extent and character of existing development and
utility service adjacent to the proposed subdivision. [Added 3-10-1986
by Ord. No. 86-5]
§ 658-21 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-21
625:706
ARTICLE VI
Performance Guarantee
§ 658-22. Deposit requirements.
§ 658-23. Progressive installation.
Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, the City Commission may
release a portion of such cash, certified check, surety bond or equivalent
deposit, equal to the estimated cost of those completed portions of the
required improvements.
§ 658-24. Maintenance guarantee.
In order to guarantee the required improvements against defects or failure
due to any causes for which the subdivider is responsible, a one-year
maintenance bond shall be furnished by the subdivider to the Director
of Finance being either cash, certified check, surety bond or equivalent
approved by the City Commission. Said deposit shall be an amount equal
to 50% of the estimated cost of installation of said improvements as
A. Prior to the construction of any improvements within the subdivision,
the subdivider shall deposit with the Director of Finance either cash,
certified check, surety bond or equivalent approved by the City
Commission to insure the installation of such improvements required by
this chapter and conditioned that such deposit shall be irrevocable and
set aside for the improvements required under this chapter in the
subdivision for which the plat has been prepared. The subdivider
making such deposits as above provided shall enter into an agreement
with the City of Royal Oak covering such improvements, and such
agreement shall provide the time of installation, the method of paying
for the cost of said improvements and any other provision necessary to
the protection of the City of Royal Oak.
B. The only claim the subdivider shall have to the deposit under this
agreement shall be after the installation of all required improvements
and on certification by the City Manager, and upon approval of the City
Commission, that all required improvements in said subdivision have
been completed, or when partial installation is complete in accordance
with the progressive installation clause of this chapter. In the event the
deposit is not sufficient to pay the total cost for said improvements, the
subdivider shall be liable for the difference between said deposit and
total improvements costs. The above agreement shall provide that the
deposit shall be the unconditional and irrevocable guarantee for the
installation of said improvements and on the condition that in the event
the subdivider fails to install said improvements in accordance with
said agreement, such deposit shall be forthwith surrendered, delivered,
transferred and assigned to the City of Royal Oak for the express
purpose of paying the cost of installation of such improvements in said
subdivision.
§ 658-22 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-24
625:707
determined by the City Engineer. Said deposit shall be refunded to the
subdivider upon certification by the City Engineer that the required
improvements have performed satisfactorily for a period of one year after
the installation of all improvements.
§ 658-25. Suits, claims and legal actions.
Until such time that any property is dedicated to the public, the subdivider
shall fully identify and save harmless the City of Royal Oak and defend
it in all suits, claims and legal actions, for damages of every kind and
description, brought or claimed against it for or on account of any party or
parties, by or from any act or omissions or through the negligence of this
person, his servants, agents, employees or independent contractors in the
prosecution of the work required in this chapter.
§ 658-26. Inspection of improvements.
All of the work required by this chapter shall be done under the inspection
of the City of Royal Oak. Such inspection shall not relieve the subdivider
of his responsibility to perform or have performed the necessary work as
specified. The cost of such inspection and any engineering or legal work in
connection with the approval of the required improvements or of the final
plat shall be paid for or caused to be paid for by the subdivider. Payment of
the cost of said inspection or legal work shall be in the form of an agreement
stating that a cash deposit be held in escrow by the Director of Finance.
Said cash deposit shall be of an amount equal to 10% of the estimated cost
of installation of said required improvements as determined by the City
Engineer. Upon completion of all improvements, and upon the approval of
the City Commission, all remaining cash held in escrow shall be refunded
to the subdivider. However, in the event that the cost of said inspection
or legal work shall total to more than the amount of cash held in escrow,
the subdivider shall be required to reimburse the City of Royal Oak for the
amount in balance.
§ 658-24 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-26
625:708
ARTICLE VII
Compliance Standards
§ 658-27. Approvals to be obtained prior to installation of
improvements; compliance required.
The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements
within the City of Royal Oak, in public streets, public alleys, public rightsof-
way and public easements, or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the City.
All subdivision or project improvements within the City installed in public
streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, or under the
ultimate jurisdiction of the City, shall comply with all of the provisions and
requirements of this chapter.
§ 658-27 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-27
625:709

ARTICLE VIII
Interpretation
§ 658-28. Minimum requirements; impact on other regulations;
greater restrictions to prevail.
The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and general welfare of the City of Royal Oak. These regulations are
not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with
existing regulations or laws of the City, nor to conflict with any statutes of
the State of Michigan or Oakland County, except that these regulations shall
prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater restriction than
is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations.
§ 658-28 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-28
625:711

ARTICLE IX
Variances
§ 658-29. Conditions for granting variances.
The City Commission may authorize a variance from these regulations
when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance and
provided the variance does not pertain to requirements of Chatper 770,
Zoning. In granting any variance, the City Commission shall prescribe only
conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest.
In making its findings, as required herein below, the City Commission shall
take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision
upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless
the City Commission finds:
A. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
B. That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
C. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which said
property is situated.
§ 658-29 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 658-29
625:713
Chapter 671
TAXATION
§ 658-29 ROYAL OAK CODE § 658-29
625:714
ARTICLE I
Tax Payment Deferment for Senior Citizens
[Adopted 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 90-14172]
§ 671-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as "An ordinance to defer tax payment for lowincome
senior citizens."
§ 671-2. Statement of purpose.
It having been determined that property taxes may become a burden on
senior citizens with moderate, fixed incomes to the extent of maintaining
the ownership interests in their homes, this article proposes to defer
payment of municipal taxes in order to lessen those burdens and to protect
the homestead and property values of those so impacted.
§ 671-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Royal Oak.
HOMESTEAD — A dwelling or a unit in a multiple-unit dwelling, owned
and occupied as a home by the owner thereof, including all contiguous
unoccupied real property owned by that person. Homestead includes a
dwelling and an outbuilding used in connection with a dwelling, situated on
the lands of another.
OWNER — Includes a person eligible for the exemption specified in this act,
who owns a homestead, or is purchasing a homestead under a mortgage
or land contract or who owns a dwelling situated on the leased lands
of another; among others, it does not include a tenant-stockholder of a
cooperative housing corporation.
PROPERTY TAX — A tax against real property by the City for any millage,
except debt levies. Property tax does not include charges for current
service, taxes for debt levies or any tax levied by a government agency other
than the City, even if the City collects it.
§ 671-4. Deferment.
The payment of property taxes that are due and payable on a homestead
in any year in which the owner meets all of the terms and conditions of
this act shall be deferred until one year after the owner's death, subject to
further order by the probate court or until the homestead or any part of
the homestead is conveyed or transferred to another or a contract to sell
172. Editor's Note: Section 20, Sunset provision, of this ordinance, provided that this ordinance
shall be reviewed by the City Commission prior to the passage of one year; and that it
shall not remain in effect beyond one year unless it is again passed by the City
Commission.
§ 671-1 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 671-4
625:715
is entered into. The death of a spouse shall not terminate the deferment
of property taxes for a homestead owned by husband and wife under
tenancy by the entireties as long as the surviving spouse does not remarry.
The inclusion of another person as a part owner, for example a son or a
daughter, shall terminate the deferment of property taxes for a homestead.
Property taxes deferred under this act may be paid in full at any time.
§ 671-5. Interest.
If the collecting officer of the City determines that legal or equitable title
to a homestead or any part of a homestead for which property taxes are
deferred under this article is conveyed or transferred or a contract to sell
the homestead or part of a homestead is entered into, and the deferment
is not terminated, the owner or owner's estate shall be subject to an
interest rate of 1% per month or fraction of a month, on the amount
deferred, computed from the date of conveyance, transfer, or contractual
agreement. The amount of interest shall be payable to the collecting officer
and transmitted by that officer pursuant to § 671-10.
§ 671-6. Transfer of title.
The City Assessor shall notify each owner whose property taxes are
authorized to be deferred under this act that if legal or equitable title to the
homestead or any part of the homestead is conveyed or transferred, or a
contract to sell the homestead or part of the homestead is entered into, the
deferment is terminated and the amount deferred is immediately due and
payable, plus interest as provided in § 671-5.
§ 671-7. Eligibility.
An owner of a homestead who is 65 years of age or older, a citizen of
the United States, a resident of this state for five or more years, and the
owner of the homestead for five or more years is eligible for the deferment
of property taxes on that homestead pursuant to this act. The owner and
the owner's spouse shall not have received during the last calendar year
household income as defined in Section 508 of Act No. 281 of the Public
Acts of 1967, as amended, being MCLA § 206.508 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws, in excess of 1.3 times the "very low income limit" established by
HUD for the Oakland County area under Sec. 8 Existing Housing Assistance
Program. Further, the owner and the owner's spouse shall not have assets
in excess of $200,000.
§ 671-8. Income.
The maximum dollar amount of household income and assets required by
§ 671-7 to be eligible for the deferment of property taxes under this act shall
be adjusted each year beginning on January 1, 1991, pursuant to § 671-7.
The resultant product shall be rounded off to the nearest whole dollar,
which shall be the new household income and asset requirements for the
current year.
§ 671-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 671-9
625:716
§ 671-9. Application.
An owner may apply to the local assessing officer for deferment of the
payment of property taxes on the owner's homestead. The application shall
be made upon an affidavit form to be furnished and made available by the
City Assessor at convenient locations. The affidavit form shall contain the
following statement in ten-point boldface type located immediately above
the applicant's signature: "If this deferment is authorized the City Treasurer
will place a lien on your property." A person making a false affidavit for the
purpose of obtaining deferment of property taxes under this act is guilty
of perjury. If the homestead is owned jointly by husband and wife, each
spouse shall sign and file the affidavit. If the homestead is encumbered by a
mortgage or an unpaid balance on a land contract, a deferment of property
taxes shall not be made without the written consent of the mortgagee or
the land contract vendor, which shall be filed with the affidavit. The affidavit
shall contain proof of insurance for the following year. A new affidavit shall
be filed each year with the local assessing officer at least 60 days prior to
the due date of a property tax bill or installment of the property tax for
which deferment is requested.
§ 671-10. Processing.
§ 671-11. Lien.
The City Treasurer shall cause the recording of a lien in favor of the City
with the register of deeds and notify the County Treasurer of the property
taxes deferred, indicating the amount deferred for each property tax and
identifying the homestead. The collecting officer shall enter on the current
tax roll opposite each homestead for which deferment is allowed a notation
that payment is deferred pursuant to this article.
A. Upon receipt of the affidavit, the local assessing officer shall promptly
examine it to determine if the applicant meets the requirements of this
article and may make an inspection of the property and property
records and conduct an investigation and survey as it deems necessary.
An applicant shall not be compelled to supply information not
reasonably essential to a proper determination of the eligibility of the
owner and the homestead for the relief provided under this article. The
local assessing officer shall promptly make its decision with respect to
an application under this section and shall notify the applicant of its
decision not later than the due date for the property taxes involved in
the application. A decision of the local assessing officer shall be final
except for appeal by right to the City Commission or as otherwise
provided pursuant to the Constitution.
B. The local assessing officer shall report the total number and amounts of
such deferments to the City Commission prior to the due date of any
property taxes.
§ 671-9 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 671-12
625:717
§ 671-12. Delinquent taxes.
The City Treasurer, if required by Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, as
amended, being MCLA §§ 211.1 to 211.157 of the Michigan Compiled Laws,
to make a return of delinquent taxes to the County Treasurer, shall include
in the delinquent tax roll all homesteads for which deferment of property
tax assessments are approved, and shall enter on the delinquent tax roll
opposite each such item a notation that payment is deferred pursuant to
this article. If the City is collecting its own delinquent taxes, the Treasurer
similarly shall note on the City tax record of each such property that
payment is deferred pursuant to this article. The collection of property
taxes deferred for all such homesteads shall be made thereafter only in
accordance with this article, any law, ordinance, or charter to the contrary
notwithstanding.
§ 671-13. Termination.
Upon termination of the deferment of property taxes under this article,
the collection procedures of Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, as
amended,173 and any provisions of any law, ordinance, or charter applicable
to the collection of delinquent taxes in a City collecting its own delinquent
taxes, suspended by the terms of this article during the period of deferment,
shall again apply to the deferred property taxes the same as they would
have applied had no deferment been authorized and all of the property taxes
had been levied initially in the third year preceding the calendar year in
which the deferment was terminated, except that the provisions of those
laws, ordinances, and charters with respect to collection fees, interest,
penalties, and other charges shall not be applicable to the collection of, or
foreclosure of the lien for property taxes deferred hereunder. The lien for
deferred property taxes shall be for the amount of the property tax only
and shall not have any additional fee, penalty, or interest added except as
provided in this act.
§ 671-14. Interest. [Amended 10-14-1991 by Ord. No. 91-19]
A. The payment of property tax deferred under this article made by the
owner or owner's estate shall include interest computed at a rate of 1/
2% per month or fraction of a month.
B. The City Assessor shall notify each owner whose property taxes are
authorized to be deferred under this article of the interest rate provided
in this section.
C. The lien created in § 671-10 for property taxes deferred under this
article shall include an amount of interest as provided in this section.
173. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 211.1 et seq.
§ 671-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 671-15
625:718
§ 671-15. Collection.
Upon receipt of payment of property taxes deferred under this act, the
collecting officer shall forthwith transmit the amount received to the City
as reimbursement for the sums theretofore advanced, to indemnify the local
property tax funds.
§ 671-15 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 671-15
625:719

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Elderly in The Village of Royal Oak
[Adopted 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
§ 671-16. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and cited as the "City of Royal Oak Tax
Exemption Ordinance for The Village of Royal Oak."
§ 671-17. Findings.
The City Commission of Royal Oak, Oakland County, Michigan, hereby
makes the following legislative findings:
A. That it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its
political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly citizens and to
encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service
charge or payment in lieu of property taxes (hereinafter "PILOT") in
accordance with the provisions of Public Act 346 of 1966,174 as
amended.
B. That such housing for elderly persons is a public necessity, and, as the
City of Royal Oak will be benefited and improved by such housing, the
encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax
exemptions therefor is a valid public purpose.
C. That the City of Royal Oak is authorized by said Act to establish or
change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes
of housing exempt from taxation under this article at any amount it
chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act.
D. That the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service
charge in lieu of taxes during the periods hereinafter contemplated are
essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing
developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereto.
E. The City of Royal Oak acknowledges that The Damone Group, L.L.C.
(the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from
the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to erect, own and
operate a housing development identified as "The Village of Royal Oak"
on certain property consisting of a site of approximately 7.53 acres in
the City of Royal Oak at 3412 Devon Road, located on the north side of
West Thirteen Mile Road between Crooks Road and Durham Road to
partially serve elderly persons of low to moderate income. (See
attached Exhibit A for legal description of the housing development175).
The sponsor has offered to pay the City on account of this housing
development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of
taxes pursuant to Ordinance No. 2006-11, Emergency Service Cost
174. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.
175. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 671-16 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 671-17
625:721
§ 671-18. Definitions. [Amended 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ACT — The State Housing Development Authority Act, being PA 346 of 1966
of the State of Michigan,177 as amended.
ANNUAL SHELTER RENTS — The total collections during an agreed annual
period from all occupants of a housing development representing rents or
occupancy charges exclusive of all charges for natural gas, electricity, heat
or other utilities furnished to the occupants.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
ELDERLY — A single person who is 55 years of age or older or a household
in which at least one member is 55 years of age or older and all other
members are 50 years of age or older.
ELIGIBILITY OF OCCUPANTS — Such persons as shall be determined
pursuant to the Regulations Establishing Admissions and Continued
Occupancy Policies, as may have been or will be developed by the Authority.
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development which contains a significant
element of housing for elderly persons and such elements of other housing,
commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities
as the Authority determines improve the quality of the development as it
relates to housing for persons of low to moderate income.
MORTGAGE LOAN — A loan to be made by the Authority to the sponsor for
the construction and permanent financing of the housing development.
SPONSOR — Persons or entities that have applied to the Authority for a
mortgage loan to finance a housing development.
UTILITIES — Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
that are paid by the housing development for and on behalf of its eligible
occupants.
§ 671-19. Class of housing developments eligible for exemption.
It is hereby determined that the class of housing developments to and for
which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be
paid in lieu of such real property taxes shall be elderly units only, which are
financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that The
Village of Royal Oak is of this class of housing.
§ 671-20. Establishment of annual service charge.
Recovery Ordinance,176 and to absorb all costs for solid waste collection
and disposal.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 306, Emergency Service Cost Recovery.
177. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.
§ 671-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 671-20
625:722
§ 671-21. Contractual effect of article.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act179 to the
contrary, a contract between the City and future sponsors, with the
Authority as a third-party beneficiary thereunder, to provide tax exemption
and accept payments in lieu thereof as previously described is effected by
enactment of this article. The Mayor and City Clerk shall be and hereby are
authorized to execute any and all such contracts which may be required by
the Authority for the purpose of effectuating and executing the provisions
of this section.
§ 671-22. Payment of service charge; interest on unpaid charges.
The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall
be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to
the City except that the annual payment shall be paid between July 1 and
July 15 of each year, beginning in the year following the year in which the
certificate of occupancy is issued to the housing development. Payments in
lieu of taxes or portions thereof remaining unpaid after August 1 of the year
in which they are due shall accrue at an interest rate of 4% per month.
A. The housing development identified as "The Village of Royal Oak" and
the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all
property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The
City, acknowledging that the sponsor and the Authority have
established the economic feasibility of The Village of Royal Oak in
reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and
the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all
property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established herein, and
in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage
loan from the Authority to construct, own and operate said housing
development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for
public services in lieu of all property taxes.
B. The annual service charge for the Village of Royal Oak shall be equal to
4% of the annual shelter rents actually collected. However, the service
charge shall not exceed taxes which would be paid absent this tax
exemption; provided, however, that the subject development will not be
entitled to solid waste collection and disposal service, including yard
waste collection, and all emergency service costs shall be reimbursed to
the City of Royal Oak in accordance with Chapter 306, Emergency
Service Recovery Ordinance No. 2006-11.178 [Amended 4-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 306, Emergency Service Cost Recovery.
179. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
§ 671-20 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 671-23
625:723
§ 671-23. Duration of exemption. [Amended 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-08]
The tax exemption granted by this article shall remain in full force and
effect until the happening of one or more of the following:
A. The repayment of all Authority loans made in connection with the
housing development or the real property associated therewith.
B. The expiration of 50 years from and after the first year that a sponsor
avails itself of the tax exemption benefits provided by this article.
C. The cessation of the housing development as housing for the elderly.
D. Failure to begin construction of the housing development within one
year from the effective date of this amendment.
§ 671-23 ROYAL OAK CODE § 671-23
625:724
Chapter 679
(RESERVED)
Chapter 684
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 278.
§ 684-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tobacco Products
Ordinance."
§ 684-2. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit sales of tobacco products to
minors.
§ 684-3. Definitions. [Amended 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
The following definitions apply in this chapter:
NICOTINE PRODUCT — The highly toxic alkaloid found in tobacco,
presented in tobacco, or in some other form for ingestion, including, but
not limited to, water-soluble nicotine containing substances, and devices
which deliver nicotine through vapor or other means for ingestion, such as
electronic cigarettes, hookah pens, or other similar devices.
SMOKING (or SMOKE) — The possession by a person of a lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device, or activated device which
delivers nicotine through vapor or other means, or ingestion electronically
such as electronic cigarettes, hookah pens, or other similar devices.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the
purpose of ingestion by any means, including, but not limited to, cigars,
cigarettes, chewing tobacco, electronic cigarettes, pipe tobacco, snuff and
vape.
TOBACCO PRODUCT OR NICOTINE PRODUCT VENDING MACHINE —
Any automated, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens
or any other form of payment, dispenses any type of tobacco product or
nicotine product.
USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCT and/or NICOTINE PRODUCT — The
possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking
device; the possession of an activated device which delivers nicotine
through vapor, or other means for ingestion, including but not limited to,
§ 671-23 SNOW EMERGENCIES § 684-3
625:725
electronic cigarettes, hookah pens, or other similar devices; or the ingestion
of a tobacco product by any means.
§ 684-4. Tobacco or nicotine product sales to or possession by
minors. [Amended 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
§ 684-5. Restrictions on tobacco and nicotine product vending
machines. [Amended 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
§ 684-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-4; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-11]
Chapter 692
A. No person shall furnish, give, or sell any tobacco product or nicotine
product in any form to a person under the age of 18 years of age, either
personally or through a vending machine.
B. No person under the age of 18 years of age shall possess or purchase
any tobacco product or nicotine product.
A. It shall be unlawful to sell or cause to be sold any tobacco product or
nicotine product through a tobacco product or nicotine product vending
machine, except in the following specified locations:
(1) A tobacco product or nicotine product vending machine may be
placed or located wholly within premises, or portions thereof, to
which access by minors is expressly prohibited either by law or by
policy of the owner of the premises.
(2) A tobacco product vending or nicotine product vending machine
may be placed or located wholly within a commercial building or
industrial plant, or a portion thereof, where the general public is
expressly prohibited from entering, where the tobacco product or
nicotine product vending machine is intended strictly for the use of
employees, and where minor employees are not usually admitted.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A(1) and A(2) above, no tobacco product or
nicotine product vending machine shall be located closer than 20 feet to
any entrance or exit, or within a restroom, coat room, outer waiting
area, unmonitored hallway or any other area which is not constantly
supervised or monitored during the hours the vending machine is
available for use, nor shall a tobacco product or nicotine product
vending machine be located in an area where it may be accessible to
the public when the premises where it is located is closed.
A. A person violating § 684-4B is responsible for a civil infraction, with a
fine of not less than $25.
B. A person violating any other section of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, with a maximum penalty of up to 90 days in jail and/or a
fine of up to $500.
§ 684-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 684-6
692:726
TRAILER COACHES
§ 692-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Extends and applies to firms, corporations or voluntary
associations as well as to individuals.
TRAILER COACH — Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its
being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly
licensable as such, and shall include self-propelled and non-self-propelled
vehicles so designed, constructed, reconstructed, or added to by means of
an enclosed addition or room in such a manner as will permit the occupancy
thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, and having
no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirting.
§ 692-2. Parking and use restrictions; appeals.
A. No person shall park or cause to be parked any trailer coach overnight
on any street, alley, highway or other place; provided that, where there
are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of this provision, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify this provision, so
that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured
and substantial justice done. All appeals taken pursuant to this
provision shall be treated in exactly the same manner as appeals to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for variances from Chapter 770, Zoning. The
Zoning Board shall not grant a variance permitting the parking or
storage of a trailer coach upon public street right-of-way unless the
following minimum conditions are met: [Amended 10-25-1971 by
Ord. No. 71-12]
(1) The right-of-way between curb and sidewalk must be of sufficient
width so that the trailer coach may be parked parallel to the
sidewalk and be at least 10 feet from the curbline, and not infringe
upon the sidewalk or any other pedestrian area.
(2) The parked trailer coach shall be no closer than 25 feet to any
street intersection, and at least 10 feet away from any driveway on
adjacent property.
(3) The area upon which the trailer coach is parked or stored must be
hard surfaced.
B. In all residential districts, no trailer coach shall be parked between the
established front setback line and the front property line on any lot;
provided, however, that a trailer coach may be parked on a driveway
between the front setback line and the front property line for a period
not to exceed 24 hours upon obtaining permission from the Building
Inspection Division and only for the purpose of loading and unloading
§ 684-6 TRAILER COACHES § 692-2
692:727
§ 692-3. Permit required.
No person shall use or permit the use of any trailer coach as a residence on
any site, lot, field or tract of land not specifically licensed as a trailer coach
park, except by written permit as hereinafter provided. All applications for
a permit shall be made to the City Clerk. The application shall contain:
§ 692-4. Investigation by Health Officer; inspection; approval of
permit.
Upon the filing of such application, the Health Officer shall cause an
inspection to be made of such premises and trailer coach, and if he finds
that adequate facilities are afforded on the premises for the disposal of
waste and excreta and it appears that the parking, use and occupancy of
such trailer coach complies with the statutes of the State of Michigan and
ordinances of the City, he shall approve such application.
where it is physically impossible to accomplish loading and unloading
behind the front setback line. [Amended 7-31-1978 by Ord. No.
78-16]
C. No trailer coach shall be used or occupied unless there is a clear
unoccupied space of at least 10 feet on all sides thereof.
D. No person shall park or permit the parking of any occupied trailer
coach or use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of, any trailer
coach on any site, lot, field or tract of land not specifically licensed as a
trailer coach park, except only as provided in this chapter.
A. The name of the owner of the trailer coach and the names of all
occupants, including the ages of all children.
B. The location of the proposed parking site as to street or road and street
number or by legal property description where no street number is
available.
C. The make and length of the trailer coach and its vehicle license number
if any.
D. The date of application.
E. The signature of the property owner, accepting his responsibilities
under the permit.
F. The signature of the Health Officer in evidence that waste disposal
facilities and sanitation of the premises are in compliance with all
applicable statutes and local regulations.
G. The signature of the applicant.
§ 692-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 692-5
692:728
§ 692-5. Registration fee. [Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-20]
A registration fee set by resolution of the City Commission shall accompany
the application to the City Clerk for the purpose of defraying the cost of
sanitary inspection and administrative costs.
§ 692-6. Wastewater.
No person shall spill or drain any wastewater or liquid waste of any kind
upon the ground or upon any paved areas.
§ 692-7. Removal of wheels or tires; occupancy limit.
§ 692-8. Inspections.
The Health Officer or his authorized representative, or any member of the
Inspection Department, or any member of the Police Department of the
City, shall have the authority to enter and inspect at any reasonable time
any premises upon which a trailer coach is parked, used or occupied for
the purpose of ascertaining that the owner, operator or occupant thereof is
complying with all statutes, ordinances and rules and regulations governing
the same.
§ 692-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-6]
A. No person shall remove or cause to be removed the wheels or tires from
any trailer coach except for the purpose of repair, nor shall any person
elevate, block or stabilize any trailer coach other than with jacks
designed, provided and intended for that purpose.
B. No parked trailer coach shall be occupied for sleeping purposes by a
greater number of persons than said vehicle is designed and arranged
to accommodate.
A. A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $50, plus costs.
B. A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $100, plus costs.
C. A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $150, plus costs.
D. A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 692-5 TRAILER COACHES § 692-9
692:729
Chapter 698
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 698, Trampoline Facilities, adopted 9-6-1960 by Ord. No.
60-7, was repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 703
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor carrier safety — See Ch. 469.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
Vehicles transporting flammable
liquids — See Ch. 733.
§ 703-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Transportation Safety
Act."
§ 703-2. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the safe transportation of
persons and property with the intent of following the policies and
procedures of the United States Department of Transportation's Federal
Highway Administration as they relate to Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and the North American Standard Uniform Out of Service
Criteria and Inspection Procedures.
§ 703-3. Adoption of regulations.
§ 703-4. References in regulations.
References to the following terms in Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations shall be construed to have the following meanings:
A. The following provisions of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations
as of February 28, 1990, are hereby adopted by reference:
(1) Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, being 49 CFR Part 387, Parts
390 through 393, Parts 395 through 397, and 399 including
appendices C, D, E, and G.
(2) Part numbers as used in this chapter shall refer to the like part
number in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations as of
February 28, 1990.
A. The terms "United States Department of Transportation," "Federal
Highway Administration," "Federal Highway Administrator," "Director,"
§ 692-9 ROYAL OAK CODE § 703-4
703:730
§ 703-5. Notice to be published.
The City Clerk shall publish this chapter in the manner required by the
Charter and at the same time shall publish a supplementary notice that
complete copies of the relevant provisions of Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations as of February 28, 1990, are available at the office of the Clerk
for inspection by the public at all times.
§ 703-6. Violations and penalties.
Any driver or operator who violates a rule, or any owner or user of any
truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or any officer or agent of any individual
partnership, corporation, or association who requires or permits the driver
or operator to operate or drive any truck, truck tractor, or trailer in violation
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 710
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 244. Moving of buildings — See Ch. 475.
or "Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety" shall be construed to refer to the
Royal Oak Police Department.
B. The term "interstate" shall mean intrastate or interstate, or both, as
applicable.
C. The terms "Special Agent of the Federal Highway Administration" or
"Administrative Personnel" shall be construed to mean a peace officer
or an enforcement member or a vehicle inspector of the Royal Oak
Police Department.
§ 703-4 TREES § 703-6
710:731

ARTICLE I
Tree, Shrub and Plant Protection; Planting in Public Areas
[Adopted 9-20-1937 by Ord. No. 320]
§ 710-1. Control of trees by Department of Public Works.
The Department of Public Works shall have power and control over all trees,
shrubs and plants planted or to be planted in the public highways, parks
or other public places of the City of Royal Oak, and the power to plant,
prune, spray and otherwise maintain such trees, plants and shrubs. The
Department of Public Works shall have the power to determine the type
or kind of trees to be planted on any particular street to conform to the
landscaping plan for that street, and when such determination has been
made all trees thereafter planted shall be in conformity thereto.
§ 710-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Includes all of the land lying between property lines
on either side of all public streets, boulevards and alleys.
§ 710-3. Permit required to remove trees and plants from public
areas; exception.
No person, firm or corporation shall cut down, deface, destroy or damage or
injure any tree, shrub or plant upon the public highways or parks or other
public places of the City of Royal Oak without first obtaining permission
from the Department of Public Works; provided that this section shall not be
construed to prevent the removal or destruction of a tree, shrub or plant by
the Department of Public Works when such removal or destruction shall be
necessary for the construction of any sidewalk, sewer, water main or other
public improvement.
§ 710-4. Regulation of fires.
No person, firm or corporation shall kindle a fire or cause or permit a fire
to be kindled or start a so-called "grass fire" on any of the streets, alleys
or public places of the City of Royal Oak, or on private property within
10 feet of a tree located on such streets or public places, without first
obtaining permission from the Director of Public Works and without taking
proper precaution to prevent damage to trees and shrubs. No person, firm
or corporation shall start or cause or permit a fire to destroy or damage or
injure any such trees.
§ 710-5. Replacement of removed trees, shrubs and plants.
Whenever a tree, shrub or plant is removed by the Department of Public
Works in order to permit the construction of any public improvement, the
§ 710-1 TREES § 710-5
710:733
City, whenever practicable, shall at its own expense plant another tree,
shrub or plant to take the place of the one removed.
§ 710-6. Permit required to attach ropes, animals or signs.
No person, firm or corporation shall fasten any wire, rope, chain or cable
to any tree or shrub for the purpose of anchorage, without a written
permit from the Department of Public Works, nor shall any person, firm or
corporation tether live stock or other animals to any such tree or shrub. No
person, firm or corporation shall nail, tie, or in any other manner fasten any
cards, signs, posters, boards, or other articles to any tree, shrub or plant
growing upon any public highway, park or other public building in the City
of Royal Oak.
§ 710-7. Excavations near trees; deposit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or
trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of five feet from any tree now
growing upon any public highway or other public place within the City
of Royal Oak without first obtaining a written permit from the Director
of Public Works. Any person, firm or corporation making such excavation
or construction shall guard any tree within five feet thereof with a good
substantial frame box to be approved by the Department of Public Works,
and all building material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from
any tree. All persons desiring to make such excavation or construction shall
deposit a sum sufficient to cover the cost of inspection and damage that may
result therefrom.
§ 710-8. Overhanging branches and damaged limbs to be trimmed
by owner.
Every owner of any tree, shrub or plant overhanging the streets or highways
within the City of Royal Oak shall turn the branches so that such branches
shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of
any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight
feet above the surface of the street or highway. Said owner or owners shall
remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
§ 710-9. Corner lot planting; order to comply; costs. [Amended
2-8-1960 by Ord. No. 60-2]
A. On any corner lot, no bush or shrub planting shall rise over three feet in
height above the established crown level of the roadway within the
triangle formed by the two property lines which meet at the street
intersection and a line drawn between points located on said property
lines and 20 feet away from the point of intersection, in order that the
view of a driver of a vehicle approaching said street intersection shall
not be obstructed. No bush or shrub planting on any lot that is located
within 10 feet of the intersection of any driveway with a public sidewalk
§ 710-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 710-9
710:734
§ 710-10. Moving buildings.180
Every person, firm or corporation moving any building or other structure
or machinery over eight feet six inches in width and 12 feet in height from
the surface of the roadway along any street or highway or across any public
place within the City of Royal Oak shall file written notice of such intention
with the City Clerk and shall deposit a sum sufficient to cover the cost of
inspection and damage that may result therefrom.
§ 710-11. Gas leaks near trees, shrubs or plants.
No person, firm or corporation owning, maintaining or operating any gas
pipes or mains laid beneath the surface of any street, alley or public place
of the City of Royal Oak shall permit any leak to occur within a radius of 40
feet from any tree, shrub or plant now or hereafter growing in any street or
public place in said City; and in the event that a leak exists or occurs in such
pipe or main, it shall be the duty of such person, firm or corporation owning
or operating such defective pipe or main to repair the same immediately
and stop such leak in a manner as to prevent a recurrence thereof; and
if such person, firm or corporation fails within three days after receipt
of written notice from the Department of Public Works to stop such leak
in such manner as to prevent a recurrence thereof, such person, firm or
corporation shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 710-12. Spacing of shade trees.
In all future planting of shade and ornamental trees in the highways, parks
and public places of the City of Royal Oak, the following rules as to spacing
shall be observed: elm trees shall be spaced not less than 40 feet, oak trees
not less than 35 feet, and other shade and ornamental trees not less than 30
feet; provided, however, any owner of a single lot may, in order to provide a
shade or ornamental tree in front of his lot, secure special permission from
the Department of Public Works to plant a shade or ornamental tree within
a less distance from an existing tree than the spacing above mentioned, but
shall rise over three feet in height above said sidewalk, in order that the
view of a driver of a vehicle using said driveway shall not be obstructed.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief Inspector, in all cases of any violation of
the provisions of this section, to order the owner of any such bush,
shrub or plant to cut the same to the lawful height within 10 days. In
case such owner shall fall to comply with such order, said Chief
Inspector shall report such matter to the City Commission, which may
then order said bush, shrub or plant cut to the lawful height by the City,
and the cost of such work shall be levied against the property
concerned and collected by special assessment in the manner provided
in the City Charter.
180. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 474, Moving Contractors; Moving of Buildings.
§ 710-9 TREES § 710-12
710:735
shall in no case make special planting within 20 feet of any existing shade
or ornamental tree located on the public highway or other public place.
§ 710-13. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
No trees shall be planted in parkways between the curb and sidewalk less
than 3 1/2 feet from the curbline, nor less than three feet from the sidewalk;
provided, however, where the parkways are less than six feet six inches in
width, any trees planted therein shall be located not less than two feet six
inches from the curb and as near midway between the curb and sidewalk as
possible.
§ 710-14. Planting at street intersections.
No tree shall be planted nearer to the intersection of two or more streets
than 15 feet from the nearest street line bounding such intersection.
§ 710-15. Prohibited trees in public areas.
No poplar (populus), soft maples (acer), willows (Salix), or box elders (acer)
shall hereafter be planted in the public highways, parks or other public
places of the City of Royal Oak.
§ 710-16. Removal of harmful trees.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to remove or cause to
be removed all trees, shrubs or plants, planted upon the public highways,
parks or other places within the City of Royal Oak which constitute a public
nuisance, or when in his opinion such removal shall be beneficial to the
peace, health and safety of the public.
§ 710-17. Deposit for removal of trees.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to remove a living tree from the
public highways, parks or other public places of the City of Royal Oak for
the construction of walks, drives, buildings or other structures for his own
private purposes shall make a deposit equal to the replacement value of the
tree or trees, as determined by the Director of Public Works. Such deposits
shall be paid into the City Treasury and shall be used, first, for the replacing
of a tree in front of the lot from which it is removed if such replacement
is considered advisable or desirable; otherwise, to be used for planting on
public highways in some other location where needed.
§ 710-18. Interference with City workers prohibited.
No person shall hinder, prevent or interfere with the agents or employees
of the Department of Public Works while engaged in carrying out the
provisions of this article.
§ 710-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 710-19
710:736
§ 710-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 or
by imprisonment in the Oakland County Jail or the Royal Oak City Prison for
a period not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
§ 710-19 TREES § 710-19
710:737

ARTICLE II
Protection of Elm Trees
[Adopted 8-15-1955 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 710-20. Eradication of elm trees infected with Dutch elm disease.
[Amended 10-5-1981 by Ord. No. 81-10]
Trees of all species and varieties of elm infected with a fungus
Ceratostomella ulmi (Dutch elm disease) are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and must be eradicated and burned within a thirty-day period
following the discovery of such infection.
§ 710-21. Selling or transporting infected trees.
It shall be unlawful to sell, give away or transport all or any parts of trees
infected with the aforementioned fungus, provided wood, branches and
roots of such trees may be transported to a safe place for burning.
§ 710-22. Possession of dying or dead elm trees.
Trees or parts thereof of elm in a dead or dying condition, whether standing
or cut wood, that may serve as breeding places for any carrier of the fungus
are hereby declared public nuisances, and it shall be unlawful for a property
owner to possess the same.
§ 710-23. Enforcement; investigation; infected trees on public
property.
The City Manager and the Superintendent of Parks and Grounds are
charged with the duty of making reasonable periodic investigations to
determine whether or not trees of all species and varieties of elm, located
upon any private or public property of the City, have become infected
with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi (Dutch elm disease). Wherever such
infection is found upon trees located upon public property, the City shall
forthwith cause such public nuisance to be abated, by destroying such tree
or wood.
§ 710-24. Inspection of private property; notice to owner of infected
trees; removal of trees; assessment of costs. [Amended 9-9-1968 by
Ord. No. 68-12; 10-5-1981 by Ord. No. 81-10]
A. The City Manager and the Director of Parks and Recreation, or their
duly authorized agents, may enter upon private property at all
reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, and may
remove such specimens as are required for analysis to determine
whether the same are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent any such agent from entering on private property for purposes
of carrying out his duties hereunder, or to interfere with any agent in
the lawful performance of his duties hereunder.
§ 710-20 TREES § 710-24
710:739
B. Whenever any tree on private property is found to be infected, the City
Manager or Director of Parks and Recreation may cause notice to be
sent to the owner and any other parties in interest in the premises
where such tree is situated concerning the existence of such disease,
and requiring the removal and burning within a period of 30 days
following such notice. Such notice shall also notify the owner of said
premises that, unless such tree is removed and burned within such
thirty-day period, the City will proceed with such removal and burning
and assess the cost thereof against the property. Service of such notice
shall be made upon each owner of property or party in interest in the
property in question, whose name appears upon the last local tax
assessment records, by mailing by first class mail, addressed to such
owner or party at the address shown on the last local tax assessment
roll for ad valorem tax purposes which has been reviewed by the local
Board of Review, as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the
names or addresses of such owners or parties listed thereon.
C. If the owner fails to remove said tree, the Superintendent of Parks and
Forestry shall file a report of his findings and a copy of his notice of
removal with the City Commission and request that the necessary
action be taken to have the tree removed. A copy of the findings and
order shall be served on the owner or party in interest in the premises
in the same manner as the notice.
D. The City Commission shall fix a date for hearing, reviewing the findings
and order of the Superintendent of Parks and Forestry and shall give
notice to the owner in the manner prescribed above of the time and
place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner or party in interest shall
be given the opportunity to show cause why the tree should not be
removed, and the City Commission shall either approve, disapprove or
modify the order for the removal of the tree, set a time for its removal, a
time for payment of the costs thereof and a reasonable interest rate if
the City must incur the expense of the removal of the tree.
E. The cost of the removal of the tree shall be a lien against the real
property and shall be reported to the City Assessor who shall assess the
cost against the property on which the tree is located as provided
below.
F. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears
upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the
amount of the cost of the removal of the tree by first class mail within a
time certain set by the City Commission. After the mailing of an invoice
for the amount of the cost of the removal, and nonpayment within the
specified time, the Assessor shall add the same to the next City tax roll
and the same shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as
provided by law for the collection of taxes by the City.
§ 710-24 ROYAL OAK CODE § 710-25
710:740
§ 710-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not to exceed $100 or imprisonment in the Oakland County Jail for a
period not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or by
one in lieu of the other, in the discretion of the court.
§ 710-25 TREES § 710-25
710:741
Chapter 716
VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Lost and unclaimed property — See Ch. 552.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 625.
§ 716-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled.[Added
7-25-1966 by Ord. No. 66-16]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the City which is not a street or alley.
STREET or ALLEY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every
public way, whether open for travel or not.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 716-2. Abandonment of vehicles.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the City, and no person shall
leave any vehicle at any place within the City for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been
abandoned. Any vehicle left unattended on a public street, alley, or other
public property, or on private property without the permission of the owner
of such property, for a period of 48 hours or more shall be deemed an
abandoned vehicle.
§ 716-3. Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating or unlicensed vehicle on
street.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked,
unlicensed, or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the City.
§ 716-4. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles.
No person in charge or control of any property within the City, whether
as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain
on such property longer than 48 hours; and no person shall leave any
§ 710-25 ROYAL OAK CODE § 716-4
716:742
such vehicle on any property within the City for a longer time than 48
hours; except that this chapter shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in
an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of
such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the City.
§ 716-5. Storage of unlicensed vehicles. [Added 7-25-1966 by Ord.
No. 66-16]
No person in charge or control of any property within the City, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any motor vehicle
that does not display a valid motor vehicle license issued by the Michigan
Secretary of State to remain on such property for a longer time than 48
hours; except that this section shall not apply with regard to:
§ 716-6. Impounding.
The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by him is
hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the City which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter
or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan
Vehicle Code, Act 300, Public Acts of 1949, as amended.181
§ 716-7. Storage of wrecked vehicles; fencing; Board of Appeals;
variances. [Amended 5-8-1967 by Ord. No. 67-15]
A. A motor vehicle stored within an enclosed building.
B. A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise.
C. A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the City.
D. Temporary storage on residential property of not more than one such
motor vehicle for not more than 30 days while the owner is actively
engaged in attempting to sell such motor vehicle.
A. No person shall store wrecked, discarded, dismantled or partially
dismantled vehicles on any property within the City, except in a storage
area completely enclosed by a solid fence six feet in height. Such fence
may be of masonry construction, wood, aluminum, or other rustresistant
material, and shall be painted or otherwise maintained at all
times in such a manner as to prevent it from becoming unattractive in
appearance. Vehicles shall be stored within such storage area in such
manner as not to be visible from off the premises of the storage area.
181. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.1 et seq.
§ 716-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE § 716-7
716:743
§ 716-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-10]
B. There is hereby created a Board of Appeals for this section which shall
consist of the members of the Board of Appeals for the Official Building
Code of the City of Royal Oak, plus four electors of the City who shall
hold no other official position with the City and who shall be appointed
by the City Commission. Such Board shall have the power to vary the
provisions of this section upon application in writing by the owner or
lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the requirements of this section, so that the spirit of this
section shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such variance, when granted or allowed, and
the decision of the Board of Appeals thereon shall be entered in the
record of the Board and a copy thereof shall be furnished the applicant.
The applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Commission
from any decision of the Board of Appeals, and in such case the City
Commission shall have the same powers as such Board and may affirm,
reverse or modify the action of the Board.
A. A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of civil fine of not
less than $50, plus costs.
B. A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $100, plus costs.
C. A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $150, plus costs.
D. A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 716-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 716-8
716:744
Chapter 720
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Committee — See Ch. 39, Art. VI.
Parking citations — See Ch. 115.
Chauffeurs and taxicabs — See Ch. 236.
Horse-drawn carriages — See Ch. 388.
Motor buses — See Ch. 463.
Motor carrier safety — See Ch. 469.
Pull-off parking — See Ch. 498.
Traffic in parks — See Ch. 515.
Skateboards, roller skates and in-line
skates — See Ch. 612.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 625.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 650.
Trailer coaches — See Ch. 692.
Transportation safety — See Ch. 703.
Abandoned and inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
716.
Vehicle dealers — See Ch. 727, Art. I.
Vehicles transporting flammable
liquids — See Ch. 733.
§ 716-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE § 716-8
716:745

ARTICLE I
Uniform Traffic Code
[Adopted 9-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-11182]
§ 720-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "2008 Uniform Traffic
Code Ordinance."
§ 720-2. Purpose.
This is an article to adopt by reference the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships and Villages, as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan
Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act
of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCLA §§ 24.201 to 24.328, and made effective
October 30, 2002, as amended, and all future amendments and revisions to
the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and become effective
in the State of Michigan.
§ 720-3. Adoption of Code by reference.
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, as
promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police
pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCLA
§§ 24.201 to 24.328, and made effective October 30, 2002, as amended, is
adopted by reference.
§ 720-4. Amendments and revisions of Code.
All future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships and Villages, as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan
Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act
of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCLA §§ 24.201 to 24.328, and made effective
October 30, 2002, as amended, when they become effective in the State of
Michigan, are incorporated and adopted by reference.
§ 720-5. References in Code.
References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to
a "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Royal Oak.
§ 720-6. Violations and penalties.
The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships
and Villages are adopted by reference.
182. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Uniform Traffic Code, adopted
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-28.
§ 720-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE § 720-6
716:747

ARTICLE II
Michigan Vehicle Code
[Adopted 9-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12183]
§ 720-7. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "2008 Motor Vehicle
Code Ordinance."
§ 720-8. Purpose.
This is an article to adopt by reference the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA
300, MCLA §§ 257.1 to 257.923, as amended, and all future amendments
and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they become effective in
the State of Michigan.
§ 720-9. Adoption of Code by reference. [Amended 3-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-02]
The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA §§ 257.1 to 257.923, as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference. MCLA § 257.625(1)(c) of the
Vehicle Code is specifically adopted by reference, pursuant to Public Act 7
of 2012.
§ 720-10. Amendments and revisions of Code.
All future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA
300, MCLA §§ 257.1 to 257.923, as amended, when they become effective in
the State of Michigan, are incorporated and adopted by reference.
§ 720-11. References in Code.
References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean
the City of Royal Oak.
§ 720-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-19-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-02]
The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by
reference. The City may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle
Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93
days; provided, however, that a violation of MCLA § 257.625(1)(c) is
punishable by one or more of the following:
A. Community service of not more than 360 hours.
B. Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.
C. A fine of not less than $200 or more than $700.
183. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Michigan Vehicle Code,
adopted 9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-28.
§ 720-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE § 720-12
716:749

ARTICLE III
Commercial Quadricycles
[Adopted 9-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-18184]
§ 720-13. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Quadricycle
Ordinance."
§ 720-14. Findings.
To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, the City of Royal
Oak finds that, due to the volume of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the
City, it is necessary to regulate the operation of commercial quadricycles
on sidewalks, highways or streets, or crosswalks. Reference: MCLA
257.660(10).
§ 720-15. Commercial quadricycle licensing requirements.
A. In addition to the commercial quadricycle requirements in Act No. 126,
Public Acts of 2015,185 adopted by reference in the Code of the City of
Royal Oak, Chapter 720, Vehicles and Traffic, Article II, Michigan
Vehicle Code, before a commercial quadricycle may operate in the City
of Royal Oak, the owner or operator of the commercial quadricycle shall
obtain a license from the City for each quadricycle it proposes to
operate and shall provide all of the following information to the City of
Royal Oak Police Department in support of its license application:
(1) A copy of a certificate of insurance that complies with MCLA
§ 257.518a;
(2) Quadricycle documentation required.
(a) Documentation that the quadricycle complies with MCLA
§ 257.7b;
(b) Documentation of the manufacturer, make and model of the
quadricycle, and identification number if available; and
(c) Documentation showing information whether the quadricycle
propulsion is powered solely by human power, by motor or
both.
(3) Proof that the operators of the quadricycle satisfy all operator
licensing requirements required by the Michigan Motor Vehicle
Code, MCLA § 257.660(7), and § 720-16 of this article.
184. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall take effect 10 days after the final
passage thereof.
185. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.624a et seq.
§ 720-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE § 720-15
716:751
§ 720-16. Operator qualifications.
An operator of a quadricycle, whether the quadricycle is motorized or not,
shall be not less than 18 years old and comply with the provisions of Chapter
III of the Michigan motor vehicle code, Act 300 of 1949,186 as amended, for
operator and chauffeur licenses.
§ 720-17. License application review.
§ 720-18. Transportation or possession of alcoholic liquor.
(4) A plan of operation. A plan of operation shall contain an operational
statement outlining the proposed manner in which the commercial
quadricycle will be operated, including, but not limited to, schedule
of the hours of operation, planned route, parking provisions,
customer staging, waiting, quadricycle storage provisions and any
other pertinent information as requested by the City of Royal Oak.
B. An owner of a quadricycle shall comply with an approved plan of
operation that is part of its license.
A. The Police Department shall review the application for compliance with
this article. The Police Department may also limit the license to any
period of time or route to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens, and may prohibit operation of the quadricycles in areas of the
City hosting festivals or special events. The Police Department may also
deny an application for a license to operate a quadricycle based on
potential traffic congestion and its impact of the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens. The City may assess a fee for its incremental
costs associated with its review of the application.
B. Violations and penalties. A person who owns or operates a commercial
quadricycle that is operating without a license approved by the Police
Department is responsible for a civil infraction. The court in its
discretion may impose the following sanctions:
(1) For a first violation: a civil fine of not more than $50.
(2) For a second or subsequent violation: a civil fine of not more than
$100.
C. Additional sanctions. The owner of a quadricycle who does not comply
with provisions of this article, or where the operator of the quadricycle
violates provisions of Chapter 720 of this Code may have the license to
operate a quadricycle revoked by the Police Department. The owner
can appeal the decision of the Police Department to the City
commission. The commission shall give the owner an opportunity to be
heard at a public hearing before ruling on the appeal.
186. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.1 et seq.
§ 720-15 ROYAL OAK CODE § 720-18
716:752
A. A person who is an operator or occupant of a commercial quadricycle
shall not transport, consume or possess alcoholic liquor within any area
of a commercial quadricycle upon a highway, or in any place open to the
general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking of vehicles, in the City of Royal Oak.
B. Violations and penalties. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor. As part of the sentence, the person may be ordered to
perform community service and undergo substance abuse screening
and assessment at his or her own expense as described in section
703(1) of the Michigan liquor control code of 1998, 1998 PA 58, MCLA
§ 436.1703. A court shall not accept a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
for a violation of this section from a person charged solely with a
violation of section Michigan Compiled Laws § 257.625(6).
C. This section does not apply to a passenger in a chartered vehicle
authorized to operate by the state transportation department.
§ 720-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE § 720-18
716:753
Chapter 727
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 727, Vehicles, Sale of, comprised of Art. I, Vehicle
Dealers, adopted 11-21-1966 by Ord. No. 66-27, as amended, was
repealed 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10.]
Chapter 733
VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor carrier safety — See Ch. 469.
Transportation safety — See Ch. 703.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 720.
§ 733-1. Vehicles transporting flammable liquids, combustible
liquids or liquefied petroleum gas, in bulk, prohibited in certain
areas.
No vehicle transporting flammable liquids, combustible liquids, or liquefied
petroleum gas, in bulk, may use Washington Avenue in the City of Royal
Oak, from Fourth Street north to Crooks Road.
§ 733-2. Exceptions.
§ 733-3. Signs posted.
The City shall post signs to notify motor vehicle traffic of the prohibition in
§ 733-1.
§ 733-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not
more than $100, plus costs, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 740
A. Vehicles transporting heating oil in bulk and making a delivery of
heating oil to Washington Avenue in the City of Royal Oak, from Fourth
Street north to Crooks Road, are excepted from the prohibition in
§ 733-1.
B. Vehicles transporting flammable liquids, combustible liquids, or
liquefied petroleum gas, in bulk, traveling on Eleven Mile Road and
making deliveries to property on Eleven Mile Road may use Washington
Avenue, but only to the extent needed to return to Eleven Mile Road.
§ 720-18 ROYAL OAK CODE § 733-4
733:754
WASTEWATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Southeastern Oakland County Water
Authority — See Ch. 160.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 351.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 600.
Stormwater detention — See Ch. 644.
Water — See Ch. 745.
Waterworks — See Ch. 752.
Zoning — See Ch. 770.
§ 733-4 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 733-4
733:755

ARTICLE I
Wastewater Discharge
[Adopted 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-06; amended in its entirety
11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
§ 740-1. Delegation of authority.
The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department,
as the state-approved control authority, is authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this article on behalf of the City of Royal Oak.
The City of Royal Oak has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation
agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated
authority, consistent with this article, and shall allow the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control
authority pursuant to state and federal law.
§ 740-2. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is the protection of the environment and of
public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through
the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes
admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment
system under the jurisdiction of the City of Royal Oak and enabling the
City of Royal Oak to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251, et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations, being 40
CFR Part 403.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the
health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will pass inadequately treated through the system
into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or
sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous
manner; and
(4) To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the
wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to
administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the
operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the
system.
§ 740-1 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-2
733:757
§ 740-3. Authority.
By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the City of Royal Oak
by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water
Act," as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq; the 1963 Constitution of
the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being MCLA
§ 323.1187 et seq; M.S.A. 3.521 et seq; the 1997 City of Detroit Charter;
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for
the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent
Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the
Eastern District of Michigan Case No.77-1100, as amended; and existing or
future contracts between the Board of Water Commissioners and suburban
communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of
common law usage of the system, this article shall apply to every user
contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or
wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City
of Detroit POTW.
§ 740-4. Definitions.
C. This article provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit
and City of Royal Oak wastewater collection and treatment system
through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users
and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users,
authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and
penalties.
A. For purposes of this article and unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by this section:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting
the reports required by this article is a corporation, who is either
a) the president, vice president, secretary, or treasurer of a
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for
the corporation; or b) the manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
$25,000,000 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to
execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said
manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or
(1)
187. Editor's Note: MCLA § 323.1 et seq. was repealed by PA 1994, Act No. 451. See now MCLA
§ 324.3101 et seq.
§ 740-2 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-4
733:758
AVAILABLE CYANIDE — The quantity of cyanide that consists of
cyanide ion (CN?) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyanocomplexes
of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury, nickel and silver,
determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a
standard method or approved under 40 CFR 136.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Programs, practices,
procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the
user which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or
minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem,
including, but not limited to, the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include,
but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process
or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products,
substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping,
maintenance, training, or inventory control and may include technical
and economic considerations.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quality of dissolved
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure five days at 20° C., expressed in terms
of mass and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)] as measured by
standard methods.
BOARD — The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of a waste stream from any portion
of an industrial user's treatment facility. (See 40 C.F.R. § 403.17.)
CENTRALIZED WASTE TREATMENT (CWT) FACILITY — Any facility
that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received
from off site by tanker truck, trailer roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any
other forms of shipment including:
CITY — The City of Royal Oak, Michigan.
COMPATIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Wastewater that is
produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or
characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and
which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with
domestic wastewater.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Pollutants which can be effectively
removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels
for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream.
A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this article is a partnership or
sole proprietorship respectively.
(2)
A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off
site; and
(1)
A facility that treats industrial waste generated on site as well as
industrial waste received from off site.
(2)
§ 740-4 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-4
733:759
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A collection of individual samples which are
obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or
flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides
a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling
period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the
sample is manually collected. (See 40 CFR 403, Appendix E.)
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — The information which would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department which has been officially designated as such by the State
of Michigan under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12. [See 40 CFR
403.12(a).]
COOLING WATER — The noncontact water discharged from any use
such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only
function is the exchange of heat.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a
period of time prescribed or allowed by this article.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department,
and authorized employees of the Department.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Michigan.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department, or the Director's designee.
DISCHARGER — A person who, directly or indirectly, contributes,
causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a
treatment works.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or ADMINISTRATOR OR
EPA ADMINISTRATOR — The United States Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or
employees of the EPA.
FACILITY — A location which contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited
to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether
public or private, commercial or charitable.
FATS, OILS OR GREASE (FOG) — Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps,
fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal,
vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance
with standard methods.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE — A composite sample taken with
regard to the flow rate of the waste stream.
§ 740-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-4
733:760
GRAB SAMPLE — An individual sample collected over a period of time
not exceeding 15 minutes which reasonably reflects the characteristics
of the stream at the time of sampling.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The discharge or the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A person who contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited
to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether
public or private, commercial or charitable, but excludes single-family
and multifamily residential dwellings with discharges consistent with
domestic waste characteristics.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form
of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of
industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
MAY — Permissive.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c) which applies to a
specific class or category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
NEW SOURCE —
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(1)
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent
State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act,
as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), and State regulations contained in any State
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the
SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(2)
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to
(1)
§ 740-4 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-4
733:761
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations, which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided, that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site where no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source should be considered; or
(c)
Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction
does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this definition
but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment; or
(2)
Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or
operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this section.
(b)
(3)
§ 740-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-4
733:762
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns.
pH — The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution,
calculated by taking the negative Base ten logarithm of the hydrogen
ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per
liter.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste which is discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in
combination with any other substance, can or does result in the
degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or
radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation
of wastewater.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means,
except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. [See 40 CFR
403.3(r).]
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 CFR
403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 CFR 403.5(b), and
the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c),
including the specified discharge prohibitions.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental
entity.
PUBLICALY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or
municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including:
Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling,
or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid
nature;
(1)
§ 740-4 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-4
733:763
QUANITIFICATION LEVEL — The measurement of the concentration
of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure
calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is
considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant
can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure
for monitoring of the contaminant.
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE — Any sample of wastewater, which
accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and
condition of one or more pollutants in the waste stream being sampled.
Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance
with 40 CFR Part 136.
SANITARY WASTEWATER — The portion of wastewater that is not
attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from
domestic sources, including, but not limited to, discharges from
sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for
on-site noncommercial consumption.
SHALL — Mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS — Any user of the POTW who:
Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or
(2)
The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from
such a treatment works.
(3)
Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more
of process wastewater, excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and
noncontact cooling water; or
(1)
Has discharges subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards; or
(2)
Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant
limitations of this article; or
(3)
Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33
U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or
regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are
subject to regulation under this article as determined by the
Department; or
(4)
Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal
of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or
adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended
by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as
amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater
into the POTW, including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or
(5)
§ 740-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-4
733:764
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any violation which meets one or
more of the following criteria:
SLUG — Any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature, including, but
not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Is found by the City of Detroit or City of Royal Oak to have a
reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW
operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air
emissions generated by the POTW.
(6)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same parameter;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer term average) that the Department determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment,
or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority;
(4)
Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date;
(5)
Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring
reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules
within 30 days after the due date;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations which the Department
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
(8)
§ 740-4 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-4
733:765
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1987, as amended.
STANDARD METHODS — Methods set forth in 40 CFR Part 136,
Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants
or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the
time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136,
Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants.
Where these two references are in disagreement regarding procedures
for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR Part
136 shall be followed.
STATE — The State of Michigan.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting there from.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL) — The total suspended matter which
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other
liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by
standard methods.
TOTAL PCB — The sum of the individual analytical results for each
of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260
during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the
quantification level being treated as zero.
TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS — The sum of the individual
analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol,
4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol,
2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during
any single sampling event expressed in mg/1.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical
Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or
regulations.
TRADE SECRET — The whole, or any portion or phase, of any
proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is
secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial
value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to
prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected
by the owner to have access for limited purposes but excludes any
information regarding the quantum or character of waste products
or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the
Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system
tributary thereto.
§ 740-4 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-4
733:766
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this article or with
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards due to factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user, but excludes noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER — Any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or
permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS — Permits issued by the
Department in accordance with this Code.
WASTEWATER or WASTE STREAM — The liquid and water-carried
industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW, including
infiltration and inflow waters, stormwater, and cooling water.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all
other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well
as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes.
B. For purposes of this article, the following acronyms shall have the
meanings designated by this section:
BMR — Baseline monitoring report.
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
FOG — Fats, oil or grease.
L — Liter.
MDEQ — Michigan Department of Environment Quality.
MG — Milligrams.
MG/L — Milligrams per liter.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C.
§ 6901 et seq.
SIC — Standard industrial classification.
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
U.S.C. — United States Code.
§ 740-4 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-5
733:767
§ 740-5. Discharge prohibitions.
A. General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through. These
general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to
discharge into the POTW:
(1) Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is
sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to
create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way
to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW.
Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW
include, but are not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flash point of less than 140° F or 60° C using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21; or
(2) Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities
which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but
not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or
fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent
hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; or
(3) Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than
11.5 units; or
(4) Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in
sufficient concentration or quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to cause interference, or pass-through, or
constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(5) Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy which, either singly or by
interaction with other waste, is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor,
or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or
hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for
their maintenance and repair; or
(6) Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or
any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum, to
be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is
pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a
substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
§ 740-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-5
733:768
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or
regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria,
guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic
Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used; or
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the
Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal
District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No.
77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit; or
(8) Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater
being discharged; or
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a
public sewer which exceeds 150° F or which will cause the influent
at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104° F (40° C); or
(10) Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; or
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in
compliance with applicable federal or state regulations; or
(12) Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause
interference with or pass-through the POTW; or
(13) Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a
cross-section dimension of 1/2 inch or greater which are sufficient
to cause interference with the POTW.
B. Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following limitations:
(1) Compatible pollutants: See Appendix C.188
(2) Noncompatible pollutants.
(a) No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
Pollutant mg/1
Arsenic (As) 1.0
Cadmium (Cd) See Appendix C.189
Chromium (Cr) 25.0
188. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
189. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 740-5 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-5
733:769
Pollutant mg/1
Copper (Cu) 2.5
Cyanide (CN)
(available)
1.0
Iron (Fe) 1000.0
Lead (Pb) 1.0
Nickel (Ni) 5.0
Silver (Ag) 1.0
Zinc (Zn) 7.3
Total phenolic
compounds
1.0 or see Appendix B.190
(b) All limitations are based on samples collected over an
operating period representative of an industrial user's
discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136.
(c) Nondetectable level requirements.
[1] The limitation for total PCB is nondetect. Total PCB shall
not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S.
EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall not
exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate
because of demonstrated sample matrix interference.
Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of
Total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate
compliance. For purposes of this section, this
demonstration may be made using analytical data showing
that the Total PCB concentration is below the detection
level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with this
Code.
[2] The limitation of mercury (Hg) is nondetect. Mercury (Hg)
shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon
U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall
not exceed 0.2 ugm/1, unless a higher level is appropriate
because of demonstrated sample matrix interference.
Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of
mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate
compliance. For the purposes of this section, this
demonstration may be made using analytical data showing
that the mercury concentration is below the detection
level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with this
Code.
190. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 740-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-5
733:770
[3] All limitations are based on samples collected over an
operating period representative of an industrial user's
discharge, and in accordance 40 CFR Part 136.
(3) Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this
article, the Department shall notify all industrial users operating
under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement
to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective
date of this article. The compliance report shall demonstrate the
user's compliance or noncompliance with these limitations, and, in
the event of noncompliance, include the submission of a plan and
schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no
event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the
effective date of this chapter. An industrial user who does not
demonstrate compliance may petition the Department for a second
extension as part of an administrative consent order. The
Department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and
penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a
second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon
a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to
achieve compliance with this provision.
C. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. All users shall comply
with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and
requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 CFR
Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby
incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and
requirements, provided that where a more stringent standard or
requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this
article, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be
controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR Part 403 and as established by the
Department. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards which
have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are
delineated in Appendix A.191
(1) Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to reflect the
presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the
requirements of 40 CFR 403.15. Upon notification of approval by
the Department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the
permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until
incorporated into an industrial user's permit.
(2) Modification of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The
Department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality,
whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal
credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40
191. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 740-5 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-5
733:771
CFR 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the
POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each
pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided that
any limitation of such pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither
is being exceeded nor poses the prospect of being exceeded as
a result of the removal credit being granted. Where such
authorization is given to the Department, any industrial user
desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the
Department, consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7 and of
this article. Any credits which may be granted under this section
may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40
CFR 403.7, or as determined by the Department. A requisite to the
granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay
a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed
by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which
the Board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time
to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit
granted pursuant to this section.
(3) New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria
shall install, maintain in operating condition, and start-up all
pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the
shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must
meet all applicable pretreatment standards.
(4) Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical
pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of
pollutant per unit of production, the Department may convert the
limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes
of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial
users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with
40 CFR 403.6(c)(3) and/or 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed
pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 1317(d) and
of this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the
equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical
standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
(5) Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of
categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180
days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made
upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to
such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging
into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit
to the Department a report containing the information listed in 40
CFR 403.12(b)(1) through (7). Where reports containing this
information have already been submitted to the Director or
§ 740-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-5
733:772
regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40
CFR 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to
resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement
of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that
become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the Department
a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR
403.12(b)(1) through (5). In such report, new sources shall include
information concerning the method of pretreatment the source
intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New
sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40
CFR 403.12(b)(4) and (5).
D. Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall
increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant
specific limitation or requirement imposed by the City of Royal Oak, the
City of Detroit or by the State of Michigan.
E. Hauled-in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is
hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is
subject to the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to,
permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or
solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW,
with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the
person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a
permit from the department for unloading such waste in accordance
with the Board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be
subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as
established by the Board. Hauled-in wastewater shall only be
discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or
approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified
in this Code. The Department may establish specific limitations for
sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants
which are different than the specific limitations in this article.
F. Centralized waste treatment.
(1) It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to
discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW
without a wastewater discharge permit from the Department. Any
authorization granted or permit issued by the Department to a
centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of
wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge
approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or
wastewater is determined by the Department to require further
authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has
submitted an application to, and received previous approval from,
§ 740-5 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-5
733:773
the Department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain
further authorization from the Department before discharging such
wastewater. An industrial user that provides centralized waste
treatment services and files an application for the treatment and
discharge of such types of wastewater to the POTW shall provide
the following minimum information in support thereof:
(a) The general nature, source and process(es) generating the
type of wastewater. Any wastewater which is generated from
those processes and is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards as delineated in Appendix A,192 shall
be so designated;
(b) The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be
present in the wastewater;
(c) At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis
for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for
which application is made in Subsection F(1) of this section;
(d) A statement that is certified by a professional engineer which
addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater
received or collected by the facility's treatment process(es);
(e) The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport
or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any
other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized
waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its
permit and/or license to the Department; and
(f) Other information requested by the Department, including, but
not limited to, information required by this Code, or by rules
adopted by the Board.
(2) The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility
will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater
delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in
accordance with the procedures contained in this Code, will be
deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized
waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable
provisions contained in this Code regarding permits. In furtherance
of its obligations as control authority, the Department may include
in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the
information mandated in Subsection F(1)(a) through (f) of this
section.
(3) All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records
which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and
constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and
192. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 740-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-5
733:774
disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the
Department.
G. Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the
Department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is
prohibited. The Department may authorize the discharge of
groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas,
steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject
to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall
authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit.
Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its
enactment. If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater
resulting from purge, response activity or UST projects has applied for
and received a permit from the Department, the Department may
authorize the discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued in
accordance with the procedures contained in this Code, or in
accordance with any rules adopted by the Board.
H. City of Royal Oak right of revision. The City of Detroit and the City of
Royal Oak reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by
the Board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the POTW. Ninety days after adoption by the Board,
industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations.
I. Accidental discharges.
(1) Each industrial user that does not currently have an approved spill
prevention plan or slug control plan shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this article, and all significant industrial users shall
submit to the Department detailed plans which show facilities and
operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection
against such accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to
prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented,
provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or
expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved
spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant
industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within 60
days of the effective date of this article (November 19, 1986). New
significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the
time they commence discharging.
(a) For purposes of this section, the information provided shall
include the approximate average and maximum quantities of
such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises
in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom
and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that
are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and
constitute a concentration of 5% or greater in the raw material,
chemical solution or waste material, are required to be
reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent
§ 740-5 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-5
733:775
thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could
cause pass-through or cause interference with the POTW.
(b) The industrial user shall promptly notify the Department of any
significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but
not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance
inventory.
(2) At least once every two years, the Department shall evaluate
whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug
discharges, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise
provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and
submit such a plan within 30 days of notification by the
Department.
J. Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this
article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a
discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with
federal, state or City of Royal Oak laws, rules, regulations or permit
requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which
has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan
prepared in accordance with Subsection I of this section, the industrial
user shall telephone the Department at its control center and notify the
Department of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of
the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater,
the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and
estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the
discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the discharge,
the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the
Department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be
modified to include additional measures to prevent such future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of
any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which
may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any
other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or
property.
K. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising
employees who to contact in the Department in the event of an actual or
excessive or prohibited discharge.
L. Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or
causes damage to or impairs the Department's POTW, or causes the
Department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the
Department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by
the Department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to
assessing such costs, the Department shall notify the user of its
§ 740-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-5
733:776
§ 740-6. Fees.
determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of
such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the City's NPDES
permit and the Department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any
such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates
the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost
estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation
of this article. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
penalties or remedies provided under this article, or this Code, or other
statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity.
M. Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into
the City of Royal Oak collection system, shall notify the Department in
writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261. Such
notification must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(p).
N. Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined in
this Code, may designate a duly authorized representative of the
individual designated in this Code where:
(1) The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in
this Code;
(2) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant
manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a
position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility
for environmental matters for the company; and
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the Department.
O. Pollution prevention. The Department shall encourage and support
industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention
programs that are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant
contributions beyond the levels required by this article. The
Department may require an industrial user to implement pollution
prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as
necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the
Board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation,
maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as
provided by law or by Board action.
B. The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be
limited to:
§ 740-5 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-6
733:777
§ 740-7. Discharge permits.
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating,
maintaining, or improving the Department's industrial waste
control and pretreatment programs; and
(2) User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or
quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment
costs, including sludge handling and disposal; and
(3) Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings, including,
but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court
reporters, and transcriptions; and
(4) Other fees which the Board may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law.
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any
wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through or otherwise
not comply with the discharge prohibitions of this Code. It shall be
unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW
without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
Department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge
must be in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1) All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the
effective date of this article, shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days of the effective date of this article.
Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a
valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision.
These applications are to include all information specified in this
Code and, where applicable, any additional information which may
be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report
requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(2) All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The
application must include all information specified in this Code and,
where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to
satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). Until a
permit is issued and finalized by the Department, no discharge
shall be made into the POTW.
(3) Any user who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than
sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW shall request
approval from the Department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days
prior to the commencement of the discharge.
B. Permit application or reapplication. The Department may require any
user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to
submit the same to the Department for determining whether the
§ 740-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-7
733:778
industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the
wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of being
so notified, a user shall comply with the Department's request in the
manner and form prescribed by the Department. Failure of the
Department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to
obtain a permit as required by this article.
(1) A user which becomes subject to a new or revised National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, unless an
earlier date is specified or required by 40 CFR 403.12(b). The
existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all
the information specified in this Code.
(2) A separate permit application shall be required for each separate
facility.
(3) Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of
90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form
prescribed by the Department.
C. Application or reapplication information. In support of an application or
reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user
shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
(1) Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal
employer identification number, address, and location of the
discharging facility.
(2) Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial
user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user
financially and legally.
(3) All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as
amended.
(4) Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for
each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such
parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having
numeric limitations as enumerated in this Code, those pollutants
limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants
known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the
previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or
experienced maximum and average concentrations during a oneyear
period shall be provided. For industries subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements, the data
§ 740-7 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-7
733:779
requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical
process waste stream. Combined waste streams proposed to be
regulated by the combined waste stream formula shall also be
identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C.
§ 1314(g) and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended. Where
40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed using validated analytical methods approved by the
administrator.
(5) A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes
on the premises. Those processes which are subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements shall be so
designated. As pertains to Subsection C(4) of this section, identify
which pollutants are associated with each process.
(6) Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in Subsection C(4),
of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are
either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the
pollutants referred to in Subsection C(4). Any user claiming
immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of
national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity.
(7) A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each
process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven
days of the week.
(8) Denote:
(a) The average and maximum twenty-four-hour wastewater flow
rates, including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations;
(b) Each national categorical process waste stream flow rate and
the cooling water, sanitary water and stormwater flow rates
separately for each connection to the POTW; and
(c) Each combined waste stream.
(9) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes
by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges
into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections
receive each national categorical process waste stream and which
connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water;
also show which lines handle each combined waste stream. This
schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information furnished in
Subsection C(8) of this section.
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production as pertains to processes subject to productionbased
limits under the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or requirements only.
§ 740-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-7
733:780
(11) A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this
article and of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional
construction is required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be
reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as
appropriate, certified by a qualified professional.
(12) Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental
discharges in accordance with the requirements of this Code.
(13) Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system
for each production process.
(14) A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which
identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or
continuous process type.
(15) If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable
water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the
types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the
estimated wastewater volumes from each source.
(16) If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance
procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this article
and the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
construction and/or implement the required operation and
maintenance procedures.
(17) Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization
assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible
source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to
reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at
the facility.
(18) Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare
and process a wastewater discharge permit.
D. Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the Department shall
review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in
writing regarding any of the following:
(1) The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant
industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge
permit.
(2) The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant
industrial user but is found by the Department to have no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not
§ 740-7 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-7
733:781
required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The Department
shall make such determination in accordance with the
requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6).
(3) The application is incomplete or the information only partially
satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12 or by
the Department, and that additional information and data are
required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate,
the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is
missing, or that the application is unacceptable.
(4) The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge
permit. The Department shall notify the industrial user of its
determination and the basis of the determination. The Department
may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user which has
not submitted an adequate or timely report or permit application to
the Department as the control authority in accordance with the
reporting requirements of 40 CFR 403.12, or whose discharge is in
violation of this article. If the Department determines that an
industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit
and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial
user will be notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification
shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the
industrial user's review. An industrial user has 30 days from the
date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in
accordance with the procedures contained in this Code, 20 days
from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued
as final. Upon disposition by the Department of any contested
terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one
facility location shall be included in each permit.
E. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all
requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to
incorporate all provisions of this article, other applicable laws, rules,
regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of
Detroit or City of Royal Oak without repetition therein. In addition,
permits may contain the following:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or
characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or
supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in this Code, or the
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(2) Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(3) Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the
industrial user.
§ 740-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-7
733:782
(4) Restrictions on which of the user's discharge waste streams are to
be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the
POTW.
(5) Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules.
(6) Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the
containment of spills or slug discharges.
(7) Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application.
(8) Additional reporting requirements:
(a) All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by
the Department, or on an alternative form approved by the
Department, indicating the status of compliance with all
conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater
discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this
article. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be
submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be
established by the Department. Analytical data generated by
the Department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's
own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge
permit.
(b) Permittees not subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance
with the requirements of this Code. The report shall show the
concentration of each substance for which there is a specific
limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the
Department in accordance with this Code.
(c) Permittees subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at
the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by
the Department. A compliance report shall be submitted to the
Department no later than 90 days following the final
compliance date for a standard or, in the case of a new source,
no later than 90 days following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall
be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule
established by the Department and incorporated into the
industrial user's discharge permit and in accordance with this
Code. The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the
Department or on an alternate form approved by the
Department and shall indicate the nature and concentration of
all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process
which are limited by National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or for which there is a specific limitation in the
§ 740-7 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-7
733:783
permit, or which may be identified by the Department in
accordance with this Code. The report shall include a record
of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows
for the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the
permit. The combined waste stream formula may be used for
reporting purposes after the initial information has been
furnished to the Department, provided that there have been
no changes to the elements composing the combined waste
stream.
(d) Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling
performed during the period covered by the report and of the
discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for
significant industrial users subject to production-based
standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related flow or
production and mass as required to determine compliance with
the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general
pretreatment regulations, being 40 CFR Part 403, or by the
Department, but no less than is necessary to assess and assure
compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
applicable regulations contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and
amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using
validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. If
an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than
required by the Department using the procedures as
prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in such report. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system
improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial
user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards.
(e) This report, and those required under this Code, shall include
the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of
law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly
gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my
inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or
those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false
§ 740-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-7
733:784
information, including the possibility of a fine and/or
imprisonment for knowing violations." Said certification shall
be signed by the facility's authorized representative, as defined
in this Code. If an authorization is no longer accurate because
a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative
definition must be submitted to the Department prior to, or
together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
(f) If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the
user shall notify the Department within 24 hours of the time
said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the
violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and
analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
Department within 30 days after said user becomes, or should
have become, aware of the violation.
(9) In the event the Director determines that an industrial user is
discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which
may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the
Department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits
applicable to the user. To the extent the Department seeks to
impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than
established in this article, the Department shall provide written
documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection
against pass-through, interference, or violation of the NPDES
permit.
(10) Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives.
(11) Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance
with this article.
F. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period.
Except as deemed necessary by the Department, or as otherwise
provided for under this article, permits shall be issued for a specified
period of not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing
permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application
for permit reissuance to the Department, shall be automatically
extended until a permit is issued as final.
G. Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be
subject to modification by the Department during the term of the permit
as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in
this Code are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a
permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or
operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's
§ 740-7 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-7
733:785
effluent. It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an
application form and apply for a modification of the permit within
30 calendar days of the change.
(2) Change(s) in the Department's NPDES permit.
(3) Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court
order.
(4) Any changes necessary to fulfill the Department's role as control
authority.
(5) An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing
permit.
(6) A change of conditions within the POTW.
(7) A finding of interference or pass-through attributable to the
industrial user.
(8) Amendments to, or promulgation of, National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or requirements including 40 CFR Part
403 and those delineated in Appendix A193 of this article.
Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the
Department for a modified permit within 90 days after the
promulgation of a new or revised National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard to which the industrial user shall be
subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be
confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or
amended National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or
requirement. However, information previously submitted need not
be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information
continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the Department
may initiate this action.
(9) Changes in the monitoring location.
(10) Typographical errors or omissions in permits.
(11) The Department may modify the permit on its own initiative based
on its findings or reasonable belief of the above or the user may
request a modification of the permit. When initiated by the
Department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed
change in its permit. The Department will issue a draft permit and
an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft
modified permit. Thereafter, the Department will issue a final
permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures
contained in this Code, the permit will become effective 20 days
after issuance.
193. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 740-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-7
733:786
§ 740-8. Monitoring facilities.
H. Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued
to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or
sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written
approval of the Department, and providing a copy of the existing permit
to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to
notify the Department of any such change at least 30 days before the
date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive
the written approval of the Department prior to the change, shall be
null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has
occurred, the Department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place,
the Department may require the application for a new or modified
permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and
conditions of any existing permit which the Department allows to be
retained.
I. Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly
notify the Department in advance of any substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed
or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40
CFR 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and
apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to
the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered
a violation of this article.
A. Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their
own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate
monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their
discharge by the Department and the industrial user, and to enable the
Department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required
for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and
standards as provided for in this article. In the event the Department
determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit
application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified,
or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample
of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise
determined at the discretion of the Department, said facility shall be
provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the Department.
The industrial user shall provide the Department with:
(1) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes
by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges
into the POTW;
(2) A flow schematic showing: which connections receive each national
categorical process waste stream, which connections receive
stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water, and which lines
handle each combined waste stream. This report shall be certified
§ 740-7 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-8
733:787
§ 740-9. Inspection, sampling and recordkeeping.
by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to
install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits,
then the Department may install such structure or device and
the significant user shall reimburse the Department for any costs
incurred therein.
B. The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's
premises in a location readily accessible to the Department. When such
a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the
industrial user, the Department may allow the facility to be constructed
in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the
location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It
shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary
approvals which may be required from other government agencies for
the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be
ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether
constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Department's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications.
A. For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any other
applicable provisions of this Code or applicable state or federal laws
and regulations, the Department may inspect the establishment, facility
or other premises of the industrial user. The Department's employees or
authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's
premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring
and/or metering activities.
B. Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and
completed at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. Upon
arrival at the industrial user's premises, the Department shall inform
the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling
and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's authorized
representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling.
The Department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed
from, carrying out its inspection or sampling duties due to the
unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe
or participate in the inspection or sampling activity.
C. While performing work on private property, employees or authorized
representatives of the Department shall observe all reasonable safety,
security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as
established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or
representatives of the Department shall bear proper credentials and
§ 740-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-9
733:788
identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied
by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly
authorized Department representatives shall not be restricted from
viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or
representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this article
which shall be maintained by the Department as confidential in
accordance with this Code.
D. Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial
user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security
personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials,
personnel from the Department will be permitted to enter for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
E. Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in
accordance with the provisions of their permit. The Department may
require such samples to be split with the Department for the
Department's independent analysis.
F. Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from
monitoring activities required by this article, or by 40 CFR 403.12(n).
Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years.
This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of
any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the
industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's industrial waste
program, or when requested by the Department, by the state, or by the
EPA.
G. Upon the request of the Department, industrial users shall furnish
information and records relating to discharges into the POTW.
Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the
Department at all reasonable times, and allow the Department to copy
such records.
H. In the event the Department obtains samples, and analyses are made of
such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly
furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized
representative. When requested by the industrial user, the Department
employee or representative shall leave with the user a portion of any
sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or
adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of
disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed
by the Department shall be controlling unless proven invalid.
I. In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described
herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's
discharge is obtained by the Department, and then analyzed in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, and found to contain concentrations
of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric
limitations as listed in this Code, or as contained in the facility's
wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its
§ 740-9 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-9
733:789
§ 740-10. Confidential information.
slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the Department
within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater concentration
and provides a description of the means by which future discharge
concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the
limitation in the future.
A. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Department that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the industrial user.
(1) When submitted to the Department, all information claimed to be
confidential must be clearly marked "confidential." When
requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a
report determined by the Department to disclose trade secrets or
trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as
confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this article, to the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the state
disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs;
provided, however, that information shall be treated as confidential
by the governmental agency until such time as the information has
been determined to be nonconfidential by the governmental
agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the
Department releases pursuant to a request of another
governmental agency, should be handled by the other
governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality
procedures. The Department cannot control how another
governmental agency handles such confidential information, and
assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information
released to the governmental agency. The Department will use
sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the
existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim.
(2) The Department shall determine whether the information
requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the
requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The
decision of the Department shall be made in writing.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized
as confidential information.
B. Except as otherwise determined by the Department or provided for by
applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file
§ 740-9 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-10
733:790
§ 740-11. Adoption by reference of codes, statutes, laws and
regulations.
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards defined in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, shall be and are
incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise
provided, any reference in this article to a code, standard, rule, regulation,
or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private
organization, or by any element or organization of government other than
the City of Royal Oak shall be construed to apply to such code, standard,
rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the
date of enactment of this article.
§ 740-12. Enforcement; upsets; bypass; violations and penalties.
with the City shall be made available upon request by such user or the
user's authorized representative during normal business hours.
A. Violations. It shall be a violation of this article for any user to:
(1) Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater
constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's
discharge.
(2) Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations
or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time
frames provided in this Code.
(3) Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste
discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring.
(4) Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any
monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The
locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a
violation pursuant to this subsection, provided that, upon request,
reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the
Department.
(5) Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the
Department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to,
samplers.
(6) Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial
user's wastewater discharge permit.
(7) Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of
this article, including any rule, regulation, or order issued
hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with
wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of
this article shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
requirements of this article, and such permits shall remain in effect
§ 740-10 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-12
733:791
and be enforceable under this article until a superseding permit
is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements on the date
specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance
schedules.
B. Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards where the requirements of Subsection B(1) of this section
are met.
(1) An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset.
(b) At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures.
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the Department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the upset and, where this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days:
[1] A description of the discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(2) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(3) The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things,
the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost or fails.
C. Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a
violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for
essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment
§ 740-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-12
733:792
system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of Subsection
C(1) and (2) of this section.
(1) Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass
shall submit notice to the Department at least 10 days in advance.
(2) Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral
notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the
industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of
the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of
the bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue,
and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass.
(3) Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and
the Department may take enforcement action against a user for a
bypass, unless:
(a) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventative maintenance; and
(c) The industrial user properly notified the Department as
described in Subsection C(2) of this section.
(4) Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in Subsection C(3)
of this section, the Department may approve an anticipated bypass.
D. Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant
defined in this Code during a six-month period exceed by any
magnitude the daily maximum nondetect limit for the same parameter,
the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention
initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response. The Department may, as
part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as a
part of the Department's enforcement response. Upon approval of the
Department, these pollution prevention initiatives, or BMPs, shall be
made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit.
Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results
and certifications in support of its implementation of an approved
pollution prevention initiative or BMPs. Upon demonstration of
§ 740-12 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-12
733:793
compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this
implementation requirement.
E. Emergency suspensions and orders. The Department may order
suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the Department,
such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the
health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may
interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to
violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a
suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the
wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event the Department provides informal
notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall
be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to
comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the
Department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or
the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the Director shall
notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and
order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the Department
shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing
before the Director, or his designated representative, within 10 days of
such action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement to the Department within 15 days of the occurrence
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of
the noncomplying discharge, the Department shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater
treatment service.
F. Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened
discharge as specified in Subsection E of this section, whenever the
Department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated
or is violating this article, the Department shall serve a written notice
stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where
applicable, the Department shall pursue appropriate escalating
enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement
response plan. The failure of the Department to issue a notice of
violation shall not preclude the Department from escalating its
enforcement response.
G. Administrative actions. Whenever the Department has reasonable
grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of
its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or
requirement or any prohibition of this article, the Department, may
initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action, except in the
case of emergency or flagrant violation, in order to compel the
§ 740-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-12
733:794
industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as
possible.
(1) Conferences; compliance schedule; administrative orders.
(a) Conferences. The Department may order any person who
violates this article to attend a conference wherein the
Department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or
remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable
compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at
least 10 days before the scheduled conference and shall set
forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be
conducted by a representative of the Department. The
industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving
compliance with this article. Nothing contained herein shall
require the Department to accept or agree to any proposed
plan or schedule, or to prevent the Department from
proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in
Subsection G(2) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a
compliance schedule, the user and the Department's duly
authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a
compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth
the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit
good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this article
and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder.
(b) Compliance schedules. The user and the Department may
agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and
conditions and time periods or schedules for completion of
actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These
schedules may be developed as part of a compliance
agreement or an administrative consent order. Schedules
developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following
conditions:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the
implementation of additional operation and maintenance
procedures required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable pretreatment requirements and standards
including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, and completing construction;
[2] No single increment referred to in Subsection G(1)(a) of
this section shall exceed nine months;
§ 740-12 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-12
733:795
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the Department, including, at
a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which
it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return to the established schedule; and
[4] Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in
the industrial user being found in violation of this article.
(c) Administrative orders. The Department may order any
industrial user who violates or continues to violate this article
or a duly issued permit to install and to properly operate
devices, treatment facilities or other related appurtenances. In
addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might
reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the
violation, including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring and management practices,
implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify
and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling
practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at
the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent
order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral
administrative order.
(2) Show cause hearing. The Department may order any industrial
user who violates this article or allows such violation to occur to
show cause before the Department why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the
industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the
Department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why the action is
to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the
industrial user to show cause before the Department why any
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail
with return receipt requested, at least 10 days before the hearing.
Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or
its authorized representative.
(a) Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures adopted by the Board. A
hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take
the evidence, and may:
[1] In the name of the Board, issue notices of hearing
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved
in such hearing.
§ 740-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-12
733:796
[2] Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Director for action thereon.
(b) Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this
article, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter.
(3) Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the
hearing officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing
any of the following actions:
(a) Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition,
restriction or requirement of this article, or applicable local,
state or federal law or regulation;
(b) Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment
equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing
treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time
period;
(c) Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and
quantity as determined by self- monitoring and analysis during
a specified time period;
(d) Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity
determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final
period set by a compliance date;
(e) Control of discharge quantities;
(f) Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection,
monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's
activities by the Department during compliance efforts; and/or
(g) Any such other orders as are appropriate, including, but not
limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater
treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge
permit, or orders directing that following a specified time
period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or
operation and maintenance practices have been employed.
(h) A finding that the user has demonstrated by a preponderance
of the evidence that a violation, either of this article or of a duly
issued permit, did not occur.
(4) Public notification of significant noncompliance. The Department
shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of
Detroit a list of all industrial users that were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any
time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified
in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the
§ 740-12 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-12
733:797
§ 740-13. Reconsideration and appeal.
Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest
actions, determinations, or decisions of the Department which result from
its construction, application and enforcement of this article. The procedures
contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with
respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this article.
proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and be allowed
an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy.
H. Legal actions.
(1) Criminal action: Any user who violates any provision of this article,
including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges
imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued
pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required
under this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation per
day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The
Department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek
prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any
provision of this article.
(2) Civil action: Whenever the Department has reasonable grounds to
believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its
wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or
requirement or any requirement of this article, the Director may
commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and/or
to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The
Department or Board may also seek additional legal and/or
equitable relief. The commencement of suit neither constitutes an
exclusive election of remedies nor prohibits the Department,
Director, Board, or City of Detroit from commencing action in
federal court for discharges believed to be in violation of this
article, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean
Water Act, the City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable
laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit may recover
the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and
other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or
litigation against the person found to have violated this article, or
the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
(3) All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of
competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water
and Sewerage Department.
§ 740-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-13
733:798
A. Selection of reconsideration or of appeal.
(1) Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are
expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may
be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized
industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is
adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is
made by, or on behalf of, the Department by the Director, or an
authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or
enforces the provisions of this article.
(2) An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee,
authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger,
who is adversely affected by a permit issued as final by the
Department, or by an administrative order entered after a show
cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration.
(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article, a request
for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized
representative, and received at the Department's general offices
within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action,
determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration
shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement
of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request.
(4) A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by
hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the
Department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either
is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or
is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the
Director, or the Department's authorized representative, is final,
and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed waived.
B. Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper
request for reconsideration, the Department shall notify the applicant
of the time and place for a hearing.
(1) A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings
officer who is designated by the Director and may be an employee
of the Department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in
the form of a recommendation to the Director and embodied in an
administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order
that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an
administrative order is appealable in accordance with Subsection C
of this section.
(2) Where improperly or untimely submitted, the Department may
reject a request for reconsideration. The Department shall notify
the requester in writing that the request has been rejected.
(3) Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing
shall be conducted neither less than 10 days nor more than 30 days
§ 740-13 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-13
733:799
after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the
hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable
time.
(4) The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation
and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall
present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection
with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound
by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be
transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing
transcript, as appropriate, from the Department or from the court
reporter.
(5) Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer
shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation
to the Director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the
requester by certified mail.
(6) Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the
waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in
accordance with this section shall stay the action by the
Department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration.
C. Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for
an appeal, the Department shall notify the applicant in writing
regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with procedures set by the Board until rules
are promulgated pursuant to the Detroit City Charter. In addition:
(1) Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the
Department's action, determination or decision regarding the
request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance
with this article.
(2) Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained
in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination
or decision of the Director, or the Department's authorized
representative, is final, and any right to appeal may be deemed
waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the Department
may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester
in writing that such request has been rejected.
(3) The Department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings
officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close
of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold,
modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the
Department.
(4) The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be
submitted to the Board which shall render a final decision within 30
days of its next regularly scheduled meeting.
§ 740-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-13
733:800
(5) In accordance with applicable law, the user or the Department may
appeal any final decision of the Board to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(6) Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the
waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance
with this section shall stay the action by the Department that is the
subject of the appeal.
§ 740-13 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-13
733:801

ARTICLE II
Wastewater Collection System Fee
[Adopted 2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-05]
§ 740-14. Title.
This article is also known as the "Wastewater Collection System Fee
Ordinance."
§ 740-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — Any addition to an existing building, excluding an addition to
a detached single-family residence.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
DEVELOPMENT — Any new building.
PREMISES — Any lot or parcel of land and any building related to it.
RENOVATION — Any existing building converted to other use or
structurally altered and which requires a site plan for the City Plan
Commission review and approval as described in Article III, § 770-12, Site
plan review, adopted with Ordinance No. 2001-09 and as subsequently
amended.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to
enter the publicly owned treatment works. Wastewater may also contain
infiltration, inflow and cooling waters.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION DISTRICT or DISTRICT — Any premises
within the boundaries of Exhibit A, B or C, or any premises that delivers
sewage or wastewater to the wastewater collection system within the
boundaries of Exhibit A, B or C.[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-13]
WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM — Either a sanitary sewer or
combined sewer either existing or proposed to be constructed.
§ 740-16. Applicability.
A. This article applies to any development, renovation or addition, which
proposes to generate additional wastewater flow to the existing
wastewater collection system operated and maintained by the City
within the wastewater collection district on or after the effective date of
this article.
§ 740-14 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-16
733:803
§ 740-17. Wastewater collection system fee.
B. Developments, renovations or additions that propose to generate
additional wastewater flow directly connected to a sanitary sewer or
combined sewer operated and maintained by the Oakland County Drain
Commissioner are exempt from this article.
C. Developments, renovations or additions that have existing agreements
with the City before the effective date of this article, concerning the
payment of fees for the additional generation of sewage, are also
exempt from this article.
A. There shall be paid on behalf of each premises capable of connection to
the existing wastewater collection system operated and maintained by
the City of Royal Oak, for the privilege of utilizing the existing system
within the wastewater collection district, a wastewater collection
system fee, collected by the Engineering Department, in the amount
adopted by a resolution of the City Commission times the number of
sanitary use factor units assigned to such premises, in accordance with
the following schedule:
Use
Sanitary Use Factor
(units)
Single-family residence 1.00 per residence
Auto dealer 0.30 per thousand square feet
Banquet hall (See fraternal
organizations)
Bar (See restaurant)
Barbershop 0.50 per thousand square feet
Beauty shop 1.00 per thousand square feet
Boardinghouse 0.20 per bed
Boarding school 0.20 per bed
Bowling alley 0.20 per thousand square feet
(bars, restaurants, etc., at their
respective factors)
Car wash, do-it-yourself (coinoperated,
10 gallons or less per
car)
1.00 per stall
Car wash, mechanical (without
conveyor, over 10 gallons per car)
10.00 per stall
Car wash, conventional (with
conveyor)
10.00 per 20 feet of conveyor
Church 0.25 per thousand square feet
Cleaner 1.00 per thousand square feet plus
1.50 per press
§ 740-16 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-17
733:804
Use
Sanitary Use Factor
(units)
Convalescent home 0.25 per bed
Convent 0.20 per bed
Country club 1.50 per thousand square feet plus
restaurant, bar, swimming pool
areas, etc., at their respective unit
factors
Drugstore 0.35 per thousand square feet
Factory (exclusive of industrial
waste)
0.75 per thousand square feet;
industrial wastes will be assigned
such sanitary use factor units as
shall be appropriate in each
individual instance, upon petition
to the City for such assignment
and subject to the approval of the
assignment by the county
Fitness center (without showers
and/or pool)
0.25 per thousand square feet
Fitness center (with showers and/
or pool)
2.30 per thousand square feet
Fraternal organization 0.50 per thousand square feet
Funeral home 0.50 per thousand square feet
Grocery store and supermarket 0.80 per thousand square feet
Hospital 1.10 per bed
Hotel and motel 0.35 per bedroom plus restaurant,
bar, swimming pool areas, etc., at
their respective unit factors
Laundry (self-service) 0.50 per washer
Multiple-family residence 0.75 per unit
Office building (general use, not
clinical)
0.40 per thousand square feet
Office building (clinical use,
including medical, dental and
veterinary)
0.75 per thousand square feet
Public institution other than
hospital
0.75 per thousand square feet
Restaurant or bar (without liquor
license)
1.50 per thousand square feet
Restaurant or bar (with liquor
license)
2.50 per thousand square feet
§ 740-17 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-17
733:805
§ 740-18. Sanitary use factor computation.
Use
Sanitary Use Factor
(units)
Restaurant or bar (with liquor
license serving after 12:00
midnight)
4.00 per thousand square feet
School (without shower and/or
pool)
0.60 per classroom
School (with shower and/or pool) 1.50 per classroom
Service station 0.25 per pump
Snack bar, dairy bar, pizzeria, etc.
(without indoor seating)
4.00 per thousand square feet
Store (other than specifically
listed)
0.35 per thousand square feet
Swimming pool (single-family
residential excluded)
3.00 per thousand square feet of
pool area
Theater 0.01 per seat
Theater, drive-in 0.02 per space
Trailer park 0.40 per trailer space
Warehouse 0.15 per thousand square feet
Unspecified uses The sanitary use factor for
unspecified uses is equal to the
sanitary use factor most similar in
nature as determined by the City
Engineer.
B. Wastewater collection system fees shall be paid in cash upon
application for a building permit or a sewer tap permit, unless
previously such charge has been paid. For developments, renovations
or additions that will generate additional wastewater flow into the
City's existing wastewater collection system, cash payment shall be
made upon issuance of the building permit or upon application for a
building permit or a sewer tap permit. The payment is for the privilege
of utilizing the finite capacity of the existing system.
A. The total unit assignment to each premises proposing to generate
additional wastewater flow shall be based on a unit factor system of
computation, where single-family residences are classified as one unit
and other uses are computed as multiples of units pursuant to the
sanitary use factor schedule in § 740-17.
B. The total unit assignment computed for each premises shall be rounded
off to the nearest 1/100th of a whole number. When the sanitary use
§ 740-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-18
733:806
§ 740-19. Wastewater collection system fee adjustments.
§ 740-20. Availability of refunds.
Wastewater collection system fees collected on behalf of each premises
shall not be refunded after the issuance of the building permit or sewer tap
permit.
§ 740-21. Use review.
The City Engineer, or designee, may periodically review usage of any
premises to determine that the actual use conforms to its unit assignment
previously determined and paid for. Any use in excess of the previous unit
assignment paid for shall be computed at the current unit rate and added to
the next water bill for the premises.
§ 740-22. Appeal.
The Appeals Board of the City of Royal Oak shall hear and decide appeals
from and review any order, requirements, decisions or determination made
by the City Engineer who is charged with the enforcement of this article;
if the appellant alleges that this article does not apply to the proposed
project, this article has been improperly interpreted by the City Engineer
or the appellant desires to offer an equal or better solution to relieving or
increasing sewer capacity.
§ 740-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity that fails to pay the wastewater collection system fee
is guilty of a civil infraction punishable by fine of $500 for each day the
premises is connected to the City sewer system.
factor in the schedule refers to "square feet," it means the gross floor
area measured from the outside of wall to the outside of wall.
C. The gross square footage of each level of existing and proposed
building on a project development, or premises, shall be shown on the
dated cover sheet of the project plans submitted to the City of Royal
Oak Building Official for building construction permits.
A. The wastewater collection system fee shall be adjusted annually at the
end of each fiscal year in an amount equal to the most recent consumer
price index published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The adjusted wastewater collection system fee shall become effective
for the following fiscal year upon adoption of a resolution by the City
Commission.
B. The City Engineer has the discretion to review the wastewater
collection system fee and adjust the rate as necessary with the adoption
of a resolution by the City Commission.
§ 740-18 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE § 740-23
733:807
Chapter 745
WATER
CHARTER REFERENCES
Water supply — See Ch. 13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Southeastern Oakland County Water
Authority — See Ch. 160.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 351.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 600.
Stormwater detention — See Ch. 644.
Wastewater — See Ch. 740.
Waterworks — See Ch. 752.
§ 740-23 ROYAL OAK CODE § 740-23
745:808
ARTICLE I
Installation of Water Services
[Adopted 3-26-1928 by Ord. No. 198]
§ 745-1. Applications to be made to Water Department.
All applications for the use of water through a service pipe, all applications
for the introduction of service pipes, and all applications for meters shall be
made at the office of the Water Department.
§ 745-2. Contents of application.
All applications shall state in full detail the purposes for which the supply is
required, with correct street address, lot number and any other information
required on printed forms supplied by the Water Department.
§ 745-3. Expenses incurred for incorrect information on
applications.
All expenses incurred by reason of incorrect information given in an
application shall be charged to and paid by the plumber taking out the
application.
§ 745-4. Installation of service pipes from main to curb stop.
[Amended 3-16-1942 by Ord. No. 405; 3-30-1942 by Ord. No. 406]
Installation of service pipes from main to curb stop shall consist of tapping
the main, inserting corporation stop with proper couplings, laying pipe from
main to curb stop, providing a stop with improved type of stop box and a
cover marked "Water." The curb stop shall be located between the curbline
and the property line and shall normally be in the street seven feet from
the property line. The City shall not be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of any service pipe beyond the curb stop.
§ 745-5. Permission required to deviate from rules.
In all cases where any unusual circumstances make it necessary to deviate
from the regular rules, special permission must first be received from the
office of the Water Department.
§ 745-6. Responsibility for installations; costs. [Amended 3-16-1942
by Ord. No. 405]
All service connections and service pipes from the City's mains to the curb
stop shall be put in only by authorized employees of the Water Department
under direction of the Superintendent. The amount required by the City to
cover cost of installing service connection must be paid before a permit is
issued.
§ 745-1 WATER § 745-7
745:809
§ 745-7. Size and material of water service pipes. [Amended
3-30-1942 by Ord. No. 406; 10-2-1944 by Ord. No. 452; 8-24-1970 by
Ord. No. 70-11; 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
All new water service pipes shall be of copper or cast iron material, and
shall have a minimum inside diameter of one inch. In the case of
replacement of existing water service pipes, such replacement pipes shall
also have a minimum inside diameter of one inch, except that the Building
Official shall have the power to authorize the use of replacement pipes
having a minimum inside diameter of not less than 3/4 inch upon a
satisfactory showing by the applicant that such smaller diameter water
service pipe will provide adequate water supply for ordinary domestic use
for the building to be served by such water service.
§ 745-8. Pipe specifications.
A. The lead pipe used for service connections, either in the ground or
within buildings, shall weigh per linear foot not less than three pounds
for three-fourths-inch; four pounds for one-inch; six pounds four ounces
for one-and-one-half-inch; and eight pounds for two-inch pipe. All
connections between lead and copper pipes and lead, copper and brass
pipes made by means of wiped, soldered joints shall be not less than
two inches in length, prepared, tinned and fused. All joints shall be
uniform and of the size known to the plumbing trade as "Heavy."
Soldering nipples shall be of extra heavy cast brass or thoroughly
annealed, seamless drawn extra heavy brass or copper pipe tubing of
standard iron pipe gauge.
B. Copper service pipe shall be a seamless copper tubing cold drawn to
size and furnished with the proper bending temper. It shall be made
from phosphorized copper completely deoxidized and have a purity of at
least 99.90% copper as determined by electrolytic assay, silver being
counted as copper.
Standard Weights and Dimensions for Copper Service Pipe
Diameter
(inches)
Equivalent
Iron Pipe
Size
Actual
Outside
Actual
Inside
Thickness
(inches)
Thickness
BWG
Equivalent
Nominal
Weight
Per Foot
(pounds)
1/2 5/8 0.527 0.049 18 0.343
3/4 7/8 0.745 0.065 16 0.640
1 1 1/8 0.995 0.065 16 0.838
1 1/4 1 3/8 1.245 0.065 16 1.036
1 1/2 1 5/8 1.495 0.072 15 1.360
§ 745-7 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-8
745:810
§ 745-9. Joints for cast iron service pipes.
The caulked joints for cast iron service pipe shall be made as follows: The
inner portion of the annular space between the hub and spigot shall be first
packed with clean, sound jute packing yarn. The remaining space in the hub
shall then be run full of lead at one pouring and the joints shall be well
caulked with proper tools and made watertight. In pouring joints, sufficient
metal shall be provided so that when the joint is caulked the lead shall be
flush with the face of the hub. The lead used shall be of the best quality pure
soft lead practically free from all impurities. No cold lead shall be used for
caulking or filling in. The depth of lead joints up to eight inches pipe shall
be 2 3/8 inches and for larger pipe it shall be three inches
§ 745-10. Valves in service pipes.
All valves in service pipes shall be of the left-hand-gate type nonrising stem
with a two-inch square head and may be constructed with iron body or all
brass. Inverted key type, round way, tee handled stop cocks must be used as
curb valves up to and including two inches on lead or copper connections.
§ 745-11. Depth of service pipes.
The top of all service pipes must be at least five feet below pavement or
grade, and in unpaved streets or areas where final grades are not known
six feet below the surface of the earth. A service pipe can only be laid in
a sewer ditch when laid on a shelf at least 15 inches from the side of the
sewer.
§ 745-12. Extension of service pipes in basements and cellars.
When premises have a cellar or basement, service pipes must be extended
into same before any branches are taken therefrom for any purpose
whatever. This restriction includes connections for hose and all
outbuildings.
Standard Weights and Dimensions for Copper Service Pipe
Diameter
(inches)
Equivalent
Iron Pipe
Size
Actual
Outside
Actual
Inside
Thickness
(inches)
Thickness
BWG
Equivalent
Nominal
Weight
Per Foot
(pounds)
2 2 1/8 1.959 0.083 14 2.062
C. The pipe shall be round and of uniform thickness throughout. It shall be
free from cracks, seams, slivers, scales, grooves, scratches, and other
inner and outer surface defects.
§ 745-8 WATER § 745-13
745:811
§ 745-13. Precautions to prevent freezing. [Amended 1-20-1947 by
Ord. No. 511]
It is expressly forbidden for any plumber to lay inside of premises a service
pipe along the outside wall or in any position where there is danger of frost;
also to make new connections or to install any new attachments of fixtures
to old connections that shall require a running stream to prevent freezing.
Every service pipe, when directed by an officer of the City Inspection
Department, must be furnished with a valve with waste below the action of
frost, so situated that the water can be completely shut off and drained from
the pipe to prevent freezing. When such valve with waste is placed under
sink, the rod for operating the valve shall extend above the floor, and be so
arranged that when the valve is open, the handle of the rod shall be parallel
to the back of sink.
§ 745-14. Separate service connections for houses; manifolds.
Each and every single house must have a separate service connection with
the street main, except where two buildings are on the same lot, one in
rear of the other. All buildings divided into separate business places may be
supplied by a manifold job or separate connections, but in case of a manifold
there must be a master stop, also a stop for each branch taken therefrom.
All manifold jobs must be installed within three feet of property line. In
cases where a new service pipe is required, the owner of said premises must
disconnect all old service pipes at the street main. Plumbers will therefore
inform themselves as to the condition in all old premises before taking out
a permit.
§ 745-15. Discontinuance of service; fee. [Amended 6-2-1970 by
Ord. No. 70-9]
Discontinuance of a water service shall be accomplished only by City Water
Department personnel. The fee for every such discontinuance shall be paid
to the City by the property owner or tenant. Such fee shall be established
by resolution of the City Commission from time to time and shall represent
the cost to the City for making such discontinuance.
§ 745-16. Connections between City mains and other supplies
prohibited.
In no case shall there be any connection between water pipes receiving
their supply from the City mains, and pipes, pumps or tanks receiving their
supply from any other service. The use of such a connection is prohibited
whether or not it is provided with one or more check valves.
§ 745-17. Connections to be made by licensed plumbers.
No person shall make any attachment or connection with the pipes of the
Water Department, nor make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any
fixtures connected with service pipes, unless licensed as a plumber by the
City of Royal Oak.
§ 745-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-18
745:812
§ 745-18. Suspension or revocation of plumber's license; plumber's
license requirements.
The license of any plumber may at any time be suspended by the City
Manager and revoked by the City Commission for violation of any of its rules
or regulations. Plumbers, to obtain such licenses, must comply with such
regulations as the Inspection Department, with the approval of the City
Manager, may adopt from time to time. No plumber shall allow his name to
be used by any other party, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of doing
work or obtaining permits under his license.
§ 745-19. Inspection of work performed by plumbers; authority to
order compliance.
All work performed by plumbers shall be subject to inspection by the
Building or Plumbing Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector shall have
authority to order any part of such work to be discontinued or changed in
order that the same shall comply with the regulations and requirements of
the City.
§ 745-20. Suspension of plumber's license; fine.
The failure to perform work in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the City shall subject the plumber to a temporary or permanent suspension
of his license. A fine of not to exceed $25 may also be imposed by the City
upon charges being preferred and a hearing given the accused, and until
such fine is paid license shall be suspended.
§ 745-21. Withholding and disconnection of water supply.
The supply of water may be withheld from premises when the ordinances
of the City of Royal Oak and rules and regulations of the City have in any
manner been violated. If any person shall, after the water has been shut
off from any premises, cause or suffer such premises to be supplied with
water without permission from the Water Department, such premises shall
be disconnected from the distribution pipe of the Water Department.
§ 745-22. Connections to be made by authorized persons only.
No person shall tap or connect any water main or insert a service cock
therein excepting employees of the Royal Oak Water Department duly
authorized to do so.
§ 745-23. Tampering with valves.
No person other than an employee of the Water Department shall open or
close any valve in the public main, nor molest nor interfere with any valve
or valve box cover.
§ 745-18 WATER § 745-24
745:813
§ 745-24. Temporary taps.
Temporary taps must be followed within 30 days by an order to kill same. If
the tap is to be used more than 30 days, permission must be obtained from
the Water Department to continue use of same.
§ 745-25. Meters to be purchased from City.
All connections with the water mains must be prepared for the use of water
through a meter purchased from the City by the owner or occupant of the
premises.
§ 745-26. Meters for terraces and apartment houses.
Meters for terraces and apartment houses may have a single connection
with meter for all connecting houses, or separate connections to each.
§ 745-27. Multiple meters for business property; agreement
required.
More than one meter may be used for business property occupied by more
than one tenant. In case more than one meter is used, an agreement must
be signed by the owner protecting the City in treating this property in its
entirety should it necessitate a shutoff to enforce payment of rates.
§ 745-28. Type of meter.
Meters 1 1/2 inches or larger in size must be of the compound type except
in special cases where in the judgment of the Water Department other types
of meters would be satisfactory.
§ 745-29. Coupling for meter; violations and penalties.
Coupling for meter will be furnished on receipt, at the City office, of
application blank properly filled out by a licensed plumber. The coupling
must be set before the property becomes occupied. Failure to comply with
this rule will entail a penalty of $1.
§ 745-30. Additional trips to set meters; fee.
When, due to faulty work, it is necessary to make more than one trip to set
a meter, a charge of $1 will be made for each additional trip.
§ 745-31. Tampering with water meters.
All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a water meter from
any service connection without first receiving permission from the City.
§ 745-24 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-32
745:814
§ 745-32. Responsibility of property owners for meters.
The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held
responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot
water and from injury or interference by any person or persons.
§ 745-33. Access to meters.
Meters and their valves will not be allowed in closets or compartments that
are kept locked, in coal bins, in or under toilet room floors, under buildings,
porches, show windows, show boards, or where they are difficult of access.
§ 745-34. Installation of meters.
All meters shall be set horizontally in dry, clean, sanitary places, perfectly
accessible, with valves on both sides, and where a small leak or the spilling
of water will do no damage.
§ 745-35. Pipes entering buildings through coal bins.
A pipe entering a building through a coal bin shall be run exposed to the
meter and shall be provided with a valve where it enters the building and
with two valves at the meter. No connections shall be taken off service line
ahead of meter.
§ 745-36. Meters 1 1/2 inches or larger.
All services 1 1/2 inches or larger must have a tee between the meter and
outlet valve, to be used for testing the meter without its removal. The size
of the side opening of this tee shall be 1 1/2 inches for one-and-one-halfinch
service pipes, two inches for all service pipes up to four-inch and three
inches for larger service pipes, according to blueprint which can be had on
application. The side opening of such tee shall be plugged. All meters 1 1/
2 inches or larger must be set by the plumber after the settings have been
inspected and approved by the Building or Plumbing Inspector.
§ 745-37. Setting of meters.
Meters must be set below grade line, in a brick or cement well, or in a
cellar or basement. A meter can only be set in a cellar or basement when its
nearest wall is 100 feet or less from the lot line nearest the main and then
on the service pipe at its entrance to the basement or cellar.
§ 745-38. Remote registers for water meters. [Added 10-14-1968 by
Ord. No. 68-13; amended 8-6-1973 by Ord. No. 73-7]
A. Outside meter reading devices shall be installed in the following
instances:
(1) In the case of all new water services with meter sizes of two inches
and under.
§ 745-32 WATER § 745-38
745:815
§ 745-39. Swing checks.
On all premises where there are two or more meters on separate service
pipes, where they are connected, there shall be a swing check on each pipe
at the outlet of meter, with waste cock on the bottom of pipe each side of
check, as to drain pipes and meters.
§ 745-40. Use of check valves in residential buildings.
In private houses or buildings used for residence purposes only, it shall be
at the option and risk of the owner whether he shall use check valves or not
on feed pipes entering range boilers. A safety valve must be used whenever
a check valve is set.
§ 745-41. Plugged tees and other accessible outlets.
A plugged tee, or any other accessible outlet, between the meter and the
main will not be allowed.
§ 745-42. Size of spring.
All pipes shall be arranged so as to allow one-half inch spring.
§ 745-43. Clearance distances.
All clearance distances from wall or any other object to center of service
pipe shall be not less than five inches for five-eighths-inch, three-fourthsinch,
one-inch and one-and-one-fourth-inch pipes; 12 inches for one-andone-
half-inch; 14 inches for two-inch; 18 inches for three-inch; 22 inches for
four-inch; and 30 inches for six-inch pipes. Meters shall be less than four
feet above the cellar floor. All pipes shall be so arranged as to allow onehalf-
inch spring for setting or removing meter.
(2) In all cases on existing services in accordance with a master
installation plan, adopted by the City Commission and developed
for the purpose of minimizing the costs of such installations.
(3) In every case where the water customer requests such an
installation, which will result in a deviation from the master
installation plan, and pays the required charge for early
installation.
B. A charge, established by resolution of the City Commission, shall be
made for every such installation. Such charge shall be in addition to the
service connection charge. All such devices shall remain the property of
the Water Department and may not be removed from location. In the
event the water customer requests the installation as provided by
Subsection A(3) above, said charge shall be payable upon completion of
the installation; provided that, if payment is not made at such time, the
cost shall be prorated over the next three water billing periods and
shall constitute a lien upon the property.
§ 745-38 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-44
745:816
§ 745-44. Meter wells.
All meter wells must be of brick or concrete with cover openings directly
over meters, according to drawings furnished by the City. Devices designed
to take the place of wells may be used if approved by the City. The plumber
will be held responsible for the condition of all wells in which he installs
meter fittings at time of installation.
§ 745-45. Outside wells.
Outside wells shall have iron covers. No part of iron cover shall weigh more
than 100 pounds, and the clear entrance opening shall be at least 24 inches
in diameter, except with meters six inches in diameter or larger, when wells
shall be provided with double square iron covers with openings 24 inches by
44 inches. The manhole shaft from cover to well shall not exceed one foot in
length, and wells must be provided with iron steps and other proper means
of access.
§ 745-46. Construction of inside meter wells.
Inside meter wells shall be constructed of brick or concrete, and shall be
built up full size to the floor with cover of iron or wood not less than 24
inches by 50 inches with ring or handle attached and weighing not over 100
pounds.
§ 745-47. Size and depth of wells.
All three-fourths-inch and one-inch connections shall have wells at least
three feet square and five feet deep, with iron covers, and shall have at
least three feet from floor to ceiling; one-and-one-half-inch and two-inch
connections shall have wells at least three feet square by 5 1/2 feet deep
with not less than 3 1/2 feet from floor to ceiling; three-inch connections
shall have wells at least three feet square and 6 1/2 feet deep with not less
than 3 1/2 feet from floor to ceiling; four-inch connections shall have wells
at least four feet square and 6 1/2 feet deep with not less than four feet from
floor to ceiling; and six-inch connections shall have wells at least five feet
square and 6 1/2 feet deep, with not less than four feet from floor to ceiling.
§ 745-48. Draining or pumping wells.
All wells shall be drained to sewer if within 100 feet of sewer and must, in
such case, have trap next to well. If not drained, they must have sump for
pumping out.
§ 745-49. Duty to pump out wells.
If impossible to drain a meter well, the owner or occupant must, under
penalty of having the water shut off, pump out said well whenever required
by the City.
§ 745-44 WATER § 745-50
745:817
§ 745-50. Wells under buildings with outside entrance.
A well under a building with outside entrance shall have a door at least two
feet wide by four feet high and cellar steps leading to same, according to
blueprint furnished by the City.
§ 745-51. Use of risers.
No risers will be allowed inside or taken through top of well. Wells shall be
used for no other purpose than the reception of water meter and valves.
§ 745-52. Bypasses.
Bypasses of the same size as meters are required on one-and-one-half-inch
to six-inch connections. Bypasses will not be allowed by one-inch meters
or smaller. The bypasses shall be constructed according to blueprints
furnished by the City.
§ 745-53. Meters required for private fire lines and sprinkler
systems.
The City requires all private fire lines and sprinkler systems to be metered.
The owner shall purchase the meter and deliver it to the City for testing,
and the meter must meet the requirements of the City.
§ 745-54. Use of reciprocating pumps.
No reciprocating pump, unless the same shall be used exclusively for fire
purposes, shall be attached directly to the City mains.
§ 745-55. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $100 or may be
imprisoned not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment in
the discretion of the court.
§ 745-50 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-55
745:818
ARTICLE II
Cash Deposit or Written Guaranty
[Adopted 3-17-1930 by Ord. No. 239]
§ 745-56. Application for water supply.
After the effective date of this article, no water shall be turned on for the
purpose of supplying water from the City water system to any consumer
desiring water supplied from said system until the applicant for said water
supply shall file a written application with the Clerk of the Water
Department, signed by said applicant. Such application shall be made upon
blanks furnished by the City. Such application shall give the location and
description of the property to be served with water; shall state whether
the use is to be for single residence, apartment, industrial or commercial
purposes; shall give the name of the owner of the premises; and any other
information reasonable and proper for the carrying into effect of this article.
§ 745-57. Deposits; receipts; refunds. [Amended 9-17-1934 by Ord.
No. 292; 10-13-1952 by Ord. No. 696; 12-27-1955 by Ord. No. 849]
Said applicant shall make a cash deposit with the City Treasurer to secure
payment of any water bills incurred by him or furnish a guaranty signed
by the owner of the property for which service is desired before any water
is supplied for the premises. For a single-family residence, the amount of
such deposit shall be $10; for apartment buildings, hotels, motels, rooming
houses, or for industrial or commercial use, the amount of such deposit
shall be fixed by the Superintendent of Water Service, and shall be based
upon the estimated amount of a six-month billing, but in no event less than
$10. The City Treasurer shall give a receipt for each deposit made and shall
keep a duplicate of said receipt on file in the Treasurer's office. At any time
after all water bills have been paid promptly for a period of three years,
said cash deposit may be returned to the applicant, upon recommendation
of the Superintendent of the Water Service Department. In any event, said
cash deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon his request when he
discontinues use of the City water service. All refunds shall be reported to
the City Commission.
§ 745-58. Interest upon deposits. [Amended 4-23-1934 by Ord. No.
285; 10-13-1952 by Ord. No. 696]
No interest upon deposits made under the provisions of this article shall be
allowed or paid by the City.
§ 745-59. Return of deposit upon discontinuance of service; charge
to reconnect.
Any water service for which a deposit has been made shall be disconnected
at the time said deposit is returned. No charge shall be made for
disconnecting or turning on water under the provisions of this article;
provided, however, the City reserves the right to continue to make a charge
§ 745-56 WATER § 745-59
745:819
of $1 for turning on water after the same has been disconnected for
nonpayment of water rates, as provided in Chapter 752, Waterworks, as
amended.
§ 745-60. Guaranty.
§ 745-61. Old accounts to be settled.
In cases where the applicant for water supply is in default of payment for
water bills for water previously supplied to him, a settlement of the old
A. No deposit shall be required under the provisions of this article in case
the application for water supply is accompanied by written guaranty
signed by the owner of the property to be supplied, guaranteeing the
payment to the City of all bills for water supplied to the applicant by the
City. Such guaranty shall continue in force until the City receives a
written order from the consumer asking for discontinuance of the water
supply; provided such consumer vacates the premises supplied without
notice to the City, the Water Department of the City upon satisfactory
proof of the vacation of said premises, may upon application of the
owner and settlement of the account, discontinue such water service
and release the guaranty. Said guaranty shall be upon forms furnished
by the City and shall be substantially as follows:
Date ____________________. Until water service is discontinued at
__________________, I guarantee the payment of all water bills rendered
by the City of Royal Oak for water supply furnished at said premises
under contract heretofore made or hereafter to be made by
__________________________, applicant for such service without notice to
me of any default or defaults in payment by such consumer. Notice
to me by the City of Royal Oak of acceptance of this guaranty is
expressly waived. I represent that I am the owner of the premises
above described, and I hereby expressly authorize the City, in case of
default by me in payment of said bills, to place the amount thereof
upon the tax rolls of said City against the above described property.
It is expressly understood and agreed that this guaranty continues
until water at said premises is discontinued by order of the above
named applicant for water service, and that in no case will the City
discontinue said water service without the written order of said
applicant, or until said premises has been vacated by the applicant
and his family; or, unless the City deeming this security insufficient,
discontinues said water service for nonpayment of bills as provided in
Ordinance No. 72, as amended.
Witness:
_________________________
_______________________________
Address ________________________
B. In case application for water service is made by the owner of the
premises to be supplied, the said applicant, as such owner, may sign
said guaranty in his own behalf, and the same shall be acceptable.
§ 745-59 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-61
745:820
account or security for its settlement shall be required in addition to a
deposit to protect the new account before the water shall be turned on.
§ 745-62. Liability of owner for unpaid rates.
Nothing herein contained shall take away or in any way affect the liability
of the owner of the premises for payment of unpaid and delinquent water
rates, as provided in the Charter and Chapter 752, Waterworks, as
amended.
§ 745-63. Authority of City to discontinue service.
Nothing herein contained shall take away the right of the City to turn off
water or disconnect a water service for nonpayment of water bills where the
amount of such unpaid bill or bills exceeds the amount of the deposit made
by the consumer, or in other cases where the City deems itself insecure.
§ 745-61 WATER § 745-63
745:821

ARTICLE III
Cross Connections
[Adopted 1-17-1977 by Ord. No. 77-3]
§ 745-64. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cross Connection
Ordinance."
§ 745-65. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
BACKFLOW — Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
CROSS CONNECTION — A connection or arrangement of piping or
appurtenances through which water of questionable quality, wastes or other
contaminants could enter the public water supply system.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, business, corporation, or any
other association of individuals of whatever nature.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — The public water supply system of the
City of Royal Oak.
§ 745-66. Cross connections prohibited; adoption of rules by
reference.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain, or allow to be made
or maintained, upon property owned by such person, or under control of
such person, a cross connection between the public water supply system
and a secondary water supply system. The City of Royal Oak adopts, by
reference, the water supply Cross-Connection Rules of the Michigan
Department of Public Health, being R325.432 to R325.440 and
Amendments, inclusive, of the Michigan Administrative Code.
§ 745-67. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the City of Royal Oak Water Department or its
authorized agent to cause inspections to be made of all properties served
by the public water supply system, where cross connections with the public
water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspection and
reinspections, based upon potential health hazards involved, shall be
established by the City of Royal Oak Water Department, and as approved by
the Michigan Department of Public Health.
§ 745-68. Enforcement of plumbing standards.
In no way shall this article relieve the Chief Building Inspector of his
duties and responsibilities to enforce the City of Royal Oak Plumbing Code,
§ 745-64 WATER § 745-68
745:823
through inspections of all new plumbing systems, or alterations to plumbing
systems.
§ 745-69. Testing. [Amended 7-10-1978 by Ord. No. 78-15]
The testing for cross connections and backflow prevention devices shall
be accomplished by utilizing independent personnel properly trained and
certified for testing and/or repairing such devices. The test results shall be
submitted to the City of Royal Oak Water Department signed by a certified
tester. The City of Royal Oak Water Department may test or retest any
device for the purpose of confirmation of test results.
§ 745-70. Notice of violation; compliance period of time.
The City of Royal Oak Water Department, or its duly authorized agent, upon
determining that a violation of the provisions herein exists, shall notify the
owner and/or the occupant of the property so affected, in writing, of the
nature of the violation, said notice to include a period of time for compliance
which shall be commensurate with the degree of the hazard involved, but in
no case shall that period of time exceed nine months. Violations which pose
an extreme hazard shall be discontinued immediately. The failure to correct
the violation within the period of time prescribed, and each day thereafter,
shall constitute a separate violation of this article.
§ 745-71. Inspections; duty to furnish information regarding piping
systems; failure to comply.
The City of Royal Oak Water Department or its representatives shall have
the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a
connection to the water supply system of the City for the purpose of
inspecting the piping system, or systems thereof, for the cross connections.
Upon request, the owner or occupants of any property so served shall
furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the
piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information
or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed prima facie evidence
of the presence of cross connections. If there is a refusal, the City is
authorized to discontinue services upon 60 days' written notice by regular
mail, given to the last known address of the owner and/or occupants.
§ 745-72. Discontinuance of service; notice; restoration of service.
The representative of the City of Royal Oak Water Department is hereby
authorized, and may direct the discontinuance of water service, after giving
60 days' written notice to any property owner and/or occupant, at their
last known address, wherein any connection is in violation of this article,
and to take such additional precautionary measures which may be deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply system. Where it is determined that the public water supply system
is being contaminated, such services may be terminated immediately. Water
§ 745-68 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-72
745:824
service to such property shall not be restored until any cross connection has
been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 745-73. Protection of potable water supply; labeling of other
water outlets.
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the
public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination, as
specified by this article, and by the State and City of Royal Oak Plumbing
Code.194 Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic
purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system shall be labeled
in a conspicuous manner as "Water Unsafe for Drinking."
§ 745-74. Impact on plumbing standards; more stringent standards
to control.
This article shall supplement the State Plumbing Code and any plumbing
ordinances adopted by the City of Royal Oak. If a conflict should occur, the
code which is most restrictive shall govern.
§ 745-75. Use of backflow prevention devices.
A backflow prevention device properly installed in the water supply service
to a building does not exempt the internal piping system of such building
from inspection, and compliance to this article nor does it exempt such
piping system from City of Royal Oak Plumbing Ordinances.
§ 745-76. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment in the Royal Oak Jail for a period not to exceed 90
days, or by imposition of both fine and imprisonment within the discretion
of the court.
194. Editor's Note: The City of Royal Oak Plumbing Code (Ord. No. 75-7, as amended) was
repealed 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-01.
§ 745-72 WATER § 745-76
745:825

ARTICLE IV
Water Use Reduction Emergency
[Adopted 10-1-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10]
§ 745-77. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ESSENTIAL WATER USE — Water conservation measures and will prohibit
any person from utilizing the public water supply system for any type of
outdoor use other than responding to fire emergency.
WATER USE REDUCTION — Whenever the Southeastern Oakland County
Water Authority (SOCWA) determines the water usage from water
distribution system has such volume that unless restricted the public's
health, safety and general welfare is likely to be endangered.
§ 745-78. Applicability.
Every person, firm or corporation whose premises is supplied with water by
the City of Royal Oak shall be subject to the provisions of this article and to
all rules and regulations of the City Manager pertaining to use of City water.
§ 745-79. Authority to install and inspect meters.
It shall be lawful for the City Manager, or his representative, to enter
upon the premises of any person using the City water to install meters for
measuring water used and to inspect the meters and other fixtures and
appurtenances pertaining to the waterworks system.
§ 745-80. Authority to issue violation notices.
Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to issue ordinance
violation notices to any person violating any provision of this article or any
rule or regulation duly adopted in pursuance of this article.
§ 745-81. Conditions warranting water use reduction;
announcement of declaration.
A. Conditions warranting initiation of water use reduction.
(1) A prolonged drought or other system-wide heavy demand periods
that result in supply facilities including system pump stations and
reservoirs being operated at their optimum capacity with no
apparent means immediately available to adequately maintain
flows and residual pressures throughout the system.
(2) Any emergency condition that may arise which will negatively
affect operating flows and residual pressures in any substantial
portion of the system for any appreciable length of time.
§ 745-77 WATER § 745-81
745:827
§ 745-82. Termination of water use reduction emergency; authority
to grant exceptions.
§ 745-83. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall willfully violate any of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500 and the cost of prosecution or
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or engagement in community
service, or any combination of such fine, imprisonment and community
service, plus any cost involved in shutting off the water.
B. The above conditions may warrant only area-specific reduction
measures. A determination as to whether the above conditions exist will
be the responsibility of the SOCWA.
C. Upon declaration of such water use reduction emergency, the SOCWA
will announce such declaration by use of public radio or television and
newspapers with normal operating range covering the said community.
The City Manager or his designee will implement whatever reductions
are necessary to meet the water reduction requirements.
A. The prohibition shall remain in effect 24 hours per day, seven days per
week until the SOCWA has declared an end to the water use reduction
emergency or the SOCWA determines that a limited prohibition will be
sufficient to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
community.
B. The City Manager or designee may provide exception to § 745-81A(1)
where necessary to prevent imminent financial loss to a water user.
§ 745-81 ROYAL OAK CODE § 745-83
745:828
Chapter 752
WATERWORKS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Water supply — See Ch. 13.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Southeastern Oakland County Water
Authority — See Ch. 160.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 351.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 600.
Stormwater detention — See Ch. 644.
Wastewater — See Ch. 740.
Water — See Ch. 745.
§ 752-1. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations hereinafter named shall be considered a part of
the contract with every person, company or corporation that is supplied
with water through the water system of the City of Royal Oak, Michigan.
§ 752-2. Permit required for service connections.
Before any service connection shall be made or any work performed upon
old or new connections, a permit shall be obtained from the City Clerk.
No permit shall be issued to any person who is not licensed as a master
plumber in the City of Royal Oak.
§ 752-3. Fees. [Amended 3-16-1942 by Ord. No. 404]
The City Commission shall, from time to time, establish fees to be charged
for services rendered by the officers, agents and employees of the City
incident to the granting of the permit herein provided for, which fees shall
be paid before the permit is issued. Such fees shall include the cost of
tapping the main, installing the curb stop and laying the pipe to the curb
stop, which curb stop and pipe shall be and remain the property of the City
of Royal Oak.
§ 752-4. Supplying water to others; unnecessary waste.
No owner or occupant of any building or premises shall be allowed to supply
water to other persons or families, firm, company or corporation except by
permission of the City Manager, or permit any unnecessary waste of water.
If found doing so, the supply of water may be shut off at the option of the
City.
§ 745-83 WATERWORKS § 752-5
752:829
§ 752-5. Installation of service pipes; supervision.
All service pipes connecting with the distributing pipes of the Royal Oak
water mains shall be laid in accordance with the provisions of this article
and rules and regulations of the City of Royal Oak pertaining to its
waterworks and shall be under the supervision of the proper officers of said
City.
§ 752-6. Connections supplying more than one building.
In all cases where the connection is intended to supply more than one
tenement, shop, store or building, it shall be the duty of the person making
such connection or causing the same to be made to lay down a branch with
a stop cock for each branch outside the line of premises so to be supplied,
to be suitably protected and marked as to be easily found. In no case shall
one service supply more than one lot unless occupied by a single building
used for a single industry or enterprise.
§ 752-7. Meters. [Amended 3-16-1942 by Ord. No. 404]
Meters shall be installed by the City upon all premises supplied with water.
Any damage sustained by said meter resulting from the neglect or
carelessness of the agent, owner or tenant to properly secure and protect
the same shall be paid by the owner to the City. It shall be unlawful for
any person to interfere with or remove the water meter from any service
where it has been attached without permission from the proper officers of
the City, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to interfere with the reading of
said meters by duly authorized officers of the City.
§ 752-8. Disconnection; discontinuance of service.
Any premises may be disconnected from the distribution pipes of the Royal
Oak water system and the supply of water withheld from said premises
when the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City pertaining to the
water system have in any manner been violated by the owner or occupant
of said premises.
§ 752-9. Fire hydrants.
Proprietors of manufacturing institutions, lumberyards, hotels, stores,
elevators, warehouses, halls and other public buildings wishing to lay large
pipes with hydrant and hose coupling to be used only in case of fire will
be permitted to connect with the street main at their own expense, upon
application to the City Manager and under his direction, and will be allowed
to use all water for fire purpose free of charge, but all such pipes must
be provided with suitable valve which must be sealed by the City when
building. When the seal is broken for the extinguishments of fire, such
owner or party or proprietor shall immediately give notice to the City
Manager, and in case the said seal shall have been broken for any other
purpose, the owner or proprietor of such property shall be liable to the
penalties prescribed herein for the breach of any of the provisions of this
§ 752-5 ROYAL OAK CODE § 752-9
752:830
article. No standpipe will be allowed on any premises where the water is
not taken for other than fire purposes.
§ 752-10. Inspections; authority to require repairs and make
repairs.
The duly constituted authorities of the City of Royal Oak shall have power
and authority at all reasonable hours to enter upon any premises where
water service is established for the purpose of inspecting and making an
examination of all pipes and fixtures connected with the said waterworks,
and they shall have power and authority to require any pipes or fixtures to
be repaired, removed, replaced or changed where the same are defective
or not in compliance with the provisions of the ordinances of said City, or
the rules and regulations in relation to the waterworks of said City, and they
may make such alterations and repairs or do such other acts with relation
thereto as they shall deem necessary.
§ 752-11. Fee to turn water on.
Whenever the water is turned off from any premises at the request of
the owner or because of default of the owner or occupant thereof, the
same shall not be turned on again until the owner has deposited with the
City Manager the sum of $1 be cover the labor cost, and in cases where
extraordinary labor is required such additional sum as will compensate for
such additional labor.
§ 752-12. Payment of water rates; delinquent water roll; penalty
charge. [Amended 5-18-1936 by Ord. No. 302; 1-5-1976 by Ord. No.
76-3]
A. The owner or occupant of any land or premises against which water
rates shall be assessed shall pay same to the City Treasurer quarterannually
or more frequently as may be required according to such rules
and regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the City
Commission.
B. All water charges shall be a lien upon the premises from and after the
due date thereof and a five-percent penalty shall immediately attach
thereto. All unpaid water charges which upon the 31st day of December
have remained delinquent for a period of two months shall be placed on
the delinquent water roll and shall have appended thereto a fivepercent
penalty charge. If the items on the delinquent water roll remain
unpaid as of February 28, they shall be reported by the City Clerk to the
City Commission, and the City Commission may require such charges to
be transferred by the City Treasurer to the delinquent tax rolls. In the
process thereof, an additional five-percent penalty charge shall be
added. Said delinquent charges shall then be dealt with by the City
Treasurer and enforced in the same manner and by the same means as
are similar lien interests.
§ 752-9 WATERWORKS § 752-12
752:831
Chapter 757
WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public nuisances — See Ch. 484. Property maintenance — See Ch. 556.
§ 757-1. Commissioner of Noxious Weeds.
Pursuant to the provisions of Act 359, Public Acts of 1941 (MCLA §§ 247.61
to 247.72), there is hereby created the office of Commissioner of Noxious
Weeds. Said Commissioner of Noxious Weeds shall be appointed by the City
Commission in accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid Act 359 of
the Public Acts of 1941, and shall possess all rights and be subject to all
duties as prescribed in said Act.
§ 757-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NOXIOUS WEEDS — Includes Canada thistle (circium arvense), dodders
(any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian
mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota),
bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis),
hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison
ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix) or other
plant which, in the opinion of the City Commission, is regarded as a common
nuisance.
§ 757-3. Destruction of noxious weeds; notice to comply.
A. It shall be the duty of all owners of land on which noxious weeds are
found growing to destroy the same before they reach a seed-bearing
stage and to prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves or to
prevent such weeds becoming a detriment to public health. The
Commissioner shall notify, by certified mail, with return receipt
requested, the owner, agent or occupant of any land on which noxious
weeds are found growing. Such notice shall be in substantially the
following form:
City of Royal Oak Noxious Weed Notice
To: (Name and Address)
Re: (Location of land where weeds are found)
Notice is hereby given that noxious weeds are found growing upon the
above-described property in the City of Royal Oak. These weeds must
be cut down or destroyed within 10 days from the date of this notice.
§ 752-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 757-3
752:832
§ 757-4. Subdivided lands; costs for removal. [Amended 6-6-1966 by
Ord. No. 66-14]
In the event the owner, agent or occupant of any subdivided land in any
subdivision in which buildings have been erected on 60% of the lots
included in that subdivision, or the owner, agents or occupants of lots along
improved streets in common usage, for a depth of 10 rods or the depth of
the lots, whichever is the lesser, has failed, after 10 days' notice as provided
herein, to destroy such weeds or cause the same to be destroyed, then the
Commissioner of Noxious Weeds, or any official, inspector, or other agent
authorized by the City of Royal Oak, may enter upon such subdivided lands
and destroy by cutting, with or without mechanical equipment, which will
not damage the property or the sidewalk adjacent thereto, any such weeds,
and all expenses incurred in such destruction shall be paid by the owner
or owners of such subdivided lands. The City shall have a lien upon such
subdivided lands for such expense, such lien to be enforced in the manner
prescribed in the Charter of the City of Royal Oak and by the general laws
of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens.
§ 757-5. (Reserved)195
In case you fail or refuse to comply with this notice, the undersigned
Commissioner of Noxious Weeds will enter upon your land and destroy
said weeds. The expense incurred by the Commissioner of Noxious
Weeds in the destruction of said weeds will constitute a lien against
the above-described land, which will be enforced as provided by law.
Dated: ____________________
_______________________________
Commissioner of Noxious Weeds
B. Failure of the Commissioner to give such notice shall not, however,
constitute a defense in any action to enforce the payment of any penalty
provided for, or debt created, under the provisions of this chapter. In
case any such owner, agent or occupant shall refuse to destroy such
noxious weeds, or cause the same to be destroyed, the Commissioner
may enter upon such lands and destroy such noxious weeds or cause
the same to be destroyed. Express power to so enter upon such lands
and destroy such noxious weeds is hereby conferred upon such
Commissioner. Any expense incurred in such destruction shall be paid
by the owner or owners of such lands, and the City shall have a lien
against such lands for such expense, which lien shall be enforced in the
manner now provided by law for the enforcement of mechanic's liens.
195. Editor’s Note: Former § 757-5, Cutting of scrub brush, scrub trees and long grass, added
6-6-1966 by Ord. No. 66-14, as amended, was repealed 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07.
§ 757-3 WATERWORKS § 757-6
752:833
§ 757-6. Annual publication of notice. [Added 9-5-1972 by Ord. No.
72-19; amended 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
In lieu of the notice required by §757-3 of this chapter, the Commissioner
may cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
County during the month of March a notice that weeds or tall grass not
cut by June 1 or thereafter of that year will be cut by the Commissioner
and the owner of the property charged with the cost as provided for by this
chapter. The publication shall also contain all other information required of
the notice provided for in §757-3. The Commissioner may cut weeds or tall
grass as many times as is necessary and charge the cost to the property
owner.
§ 757-7. Responsibility for costs; late penalty. [Added 9-5-1972 by
Ord. No. 72-19]
Whenever the Commissioner, pursuant to the authority granted by §§ 757-3
and 757-4 of this chapter, enters upon land, either personally or through
his agents, for the purpose of causing the destruction of noxious weeds, it
shall become the obligation of the owner of such land to pay the expenses of
destruction. If the owner of the property has received services as specified
by this chapter, it shall be incumbent upon the owner to pay those expenses
incurred by the City upon mailing of a statement for services. If the
expenses remain unpaid as of March 1, following billing date, then a penalty
of 5% shall be added to the existing debt. Request for addition of the debt
plus penalty to the tax roll shall then be made.
§ 757-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-8; 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
A. A person violating this chapter for the first time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $50, plus costs.
B. A person violating this chapter for the second time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $100, plus costs.
C. A person violating this chapter for the third time is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and is subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $250, plus costs.
D. A person violating this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 757-6 ROYAL OAK CODE § 757-8
752:834
Chapter 770
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Downtown development — See Ch. 52.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 82.
Plan Commission — See Ch. 134.
Amusements — See Ch. 188.
Sale of books, magazines and videos — See
Ch. 213.
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 244.
Construction code enforcement — See Ch.
260.
Fences — See Ch. 323.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 351.
Gasoline service stations — See Ch. 363.
Hotels, boardinghouses, bed-and-breakfasts
and tourist homes — See Ch. 394.
Abandoned lands — See Ch. 412.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 447.
Drive-in restaurants — See Ch. 580.
Signs — See Ch. 607.
Smoke pollution — See Ch. 619.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 658.
Trees — See Ch. 710.
Vehicle dealers — See Ch. 727, Art. I.
§ 757-8 WATERWORKS § 757-8
752:835

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Scope; Validity; Conflicts
§ 770-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Royal Oak Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 770-2. Purpose.
§ 770-3. Scope and construction of regulations.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to promote, protect, regulate, restrict
and provide for the use of land and buildings within the City of Royal
Oak; to meet the needs of the state's residents for places of residence,
recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land; to insure
that uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and
relationships in accordance with the Master Plan; to implement the
goals, objectives and strategies of the Master Plan; to limit the
inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion of population and
transportation systems and other public facilities; to facilitate adequate
and efficient provision for transportation systems, sewage disposal,
water, energy, education, recreation, and other public service and
facility needs; and to promote public health, safety and welfare.
B. For those purposes set for forth herein, the City is divided into districts.
For each of those districts, regulations are imposed designating the
uses for which buildings or structures shall or shall not be erected or
altered, and designating the trades, industries, and the land uses or
activities that shall be permitted or excluded or subjected to special
regulations.
C. It is also the purpose of this chapter to provide for the establishment of
a Board of Appeals and its powers and duties; to provide for the
administration and enforcement hereof and for penalties for its
violation; and to provide for the repeal of any and all ordinances
inconsistent herewith.
A. This chapter shall be liberally construed in such manner that
implements its purpose. In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this chapter, the requirements shall be held with the intended purpose
to be for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience,
comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
B. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed or altered, and no new use or change shall
be made of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except as
permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
C. Where a condition imposed by a provision of this chapter upon the use
of any lot, building, or structure is conflicting with a condition imposed
§ 770-1 WATERWORKS § 770-3
752:837
§ 770-4. Validity and severability clause.
§ 770-5. Conflict with other laws, regulations and agreements.
§ 770-6. Vested right.
It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this chapter be held or
construed to give or grant to any person, firm, or corporation any vested
right, license, privilege or permit.
by any other provision of this chapter, or by the provision of an
ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more
restrictive, shall govern.
D. Nothing within this chapter shall be construed to prevent compliance
with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve,
strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition, any part of a
building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this chapter
to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this
chapter not specifically included in said ruling.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application
of any provision of this chapter to a particular land, parcel, lot, district,
use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other parcel, lot, district, use, building, or
structure not specifically included in said ruling.
A. Where any condition imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the
use of any lot, building, or structure is either more restrictive or less
restrictive than any comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this chapter or by the provision of any ordinance adopted
under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive or which
imposes a higher standard or requirement shall govern.
B. This chapter is not intended to modify or annul any easement, covenant,
or other private agreement, provided that where any provision of this
chapter is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or
requirement than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, the provision of this chapter shall govern.
C. Uses for enterprises or purposes that are contrary to local, state, and/or
federal laws or ordinances are prohibited. This prohibition shall not
apply to the medical use of marihuana as defined by and in accordance
with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCLA 333.26421 et seq., as
amended. [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-03; amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 770-3 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-6
752:838
ARTICLE II
Definitions; Rules Applying to Text
§ 770-7. Rules applying to text.
The following rules shall apply to the text and language of this chapter:
§ 770-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are herewith
defined.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A supplementary building or structure on the
same lot or parcel of land as the principal building, occupied by or devoted
exclusively to an accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use reasonably and customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the premises.
ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY — A governmental or nongovernmental
establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and
foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally
disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing
basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care
facility does not include nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals,
alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for
persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other
facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care
facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, MCLA § 400.701
et seq.; MSA 16.610(61) et seq., as amended. The following additional
definitions are provided:
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption, the text shall control.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive.
D. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in
the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
E. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to
be used or occupied."
F. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
common or standard utilization.
ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME — A private residence with
the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided
with foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more
A.
§ 770-7 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:839
ADULT-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE — An establishment which
draws its customers from one or more classes of the public, including, but
not limited to the following:
consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be
a member of the household and an occupant of the residence.
ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME — A facility with the
approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults who are provided
supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and
board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more
consecutive weeks for compensation.
B.
ADULT FOSTER CARE MEDIUM GROUP HOME — A facility with the
approved capacity to receive between seven and 12 adults who are
provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room
and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or
more consecutive weeks for compensation.
C.
ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME — A facility with
approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults
to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to
room and board, 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two
or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
D.
ADULT FOSTER CARE CONGREGATE FACILITY — An adult foster care
facility with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be
provided with foster care.
E.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment which has a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade sexually explicit verbal material.
"Sexually explicit verbal material" is defined as a book, pamphlet,
magazine, video, movie, printed matter reproduced in any manner,
or sound recording that contains an explicit and detailed verbal
description or narrative account of sexually explicit activity.
A.
ADULT CABARET — An establishment whose principal activity is the
conducting or presenting of any sexually explicit performance.
"Sexually explicit performance" is defined as a motion picture, video,
digital presentation, exhibition, show, representation, or other
presentation that, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit activity.
B.
ADULT VIDEO/MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An establishment
which, as its principal activity, presents or offers for sale or rents any
sexually explicit visual material. "Sexually explicit visual material" is
defined as a picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture
film, or similar visual representation that depicts sexually explicit
activity, or a book, magazine, or pamphlet that contains such a visual
representation. An undeveloped photograph, mold or similar visual
material may be sexually explicit material notwithstanding that
processing or other acts may be required to make its sexually explicit
content apparent.
C.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:840
ADULT RETAIL STORE — An establishment which has a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade in items used or advertised as
sexually explicit entertainment gimmicks, novelties, paraphernalia, any
sexually explicit matter or any combination thereof. "Sexually explicit
matter" is defined as any sexually explicit verbal material, sexually
explicit visual material, or sexually explicit performance.
D.
BODY PAINTING or NUDE MODELING STUDIO — Any building,
structure, premises or part thereof used primarily as a place which
offers as its principal activity the providing of models to exhibit, display
or perform any sexually explicit performance for a fee, or which
provides the services of body painting of the human body in conjunction
with any sexually explicit activity.
E.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT ACTIVITY — Any presentation, exhibition,
narrative, show, representation, depiction, or other description of any
of the following:
EROTIC FONDLING — The touching of a person's clothed or
unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if the person is female,
breasts, for the purpose of sexual gratification or stimulation.
(1)
NUDITY — The showing of the male or female genitals, pubic area,
vulva, anus, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, the showing of
the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or any lewd
display of the human male or female genitals or pubic area.
(2)
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Either of the following:
Flagellation, or torture, for sexual stimulation or gratification,
by or upon a person who is nude or clad only in undergarments
or in a revealing costume; or
(a)
The condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restrained for sexual stimulation or gratification, of a person
who is nude or clad only in undergarments or in a revealing
costume.
(b)
(3)
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(4)
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE — Intercourse, real or simulated, whether
genital-genital, oral-genital, anal-genital, or oral-anal, whether
between persons of the same or opposite sex or between a human
and an animal; or any intrusion, however slight, into the genital or
anal openings of another's body.
(5)
F.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
G.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:841
ALLEY — Any dedicated public way other than a street, providing a
secondary means of access to a property.
AUTOMOBILE — Unless specifically indicated otherwise, "automobile" shall
mean any vehicle, including, by way of example, cars, trucks, vans,
motorcycles, and the like.
AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP — A building or premises used primarily for
the sale of new or used automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION — A place used for the retail sale and
dispensing of fuel or lubricants together with the fixed equipment from
which the fuel is dispensed directly into motor vehicles. Automobile filling
stations may also incorporate additional uses as permitted and regulated by
this chapter.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE — An enclosed building where the
following services may be carried out: general repairs, engine rebuilding,
reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision services, such as frame or fender
straightening and repair; painting and undercoating of automobiles; and
similar repair activities.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A place used for the retail sale and
dispensing of fuel or lubricants together with the fixed equipment from
which the fuel is dispensed directly into motor vehicles, including the sale
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association that furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
H.
PAWNBROKERS and PAWNSHOPS —
PAWNBROKER — Any person, corporation or member or members
of a copartnership or firm, who loans money on deposit, or pledge
of personal property, or other valuable things, other than securities
or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the
purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on
condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price.
(1)
PAWNSHOP — Any location where a pawnbroker conducts
business.
(2)
I.
TATTOO, BODY PIERCING, BRANDING PARLOR — An establishment
which provides external body modification, through the application of a
tattoo, body-piercing, or branding.
J.
BODY PIERCING — The perforation of human tissue other than an ear
for a nonmedical purpose.
K.
BRANDING — A permanent mark made on human tissue by burning
with a hot iron or other instrument.
L.
TATTOO — An indelible mark made upon the body of another individual
by the insertion of a pigment under the skin or an indelible design made
upon the body of another by production of scars other than by branding.
M.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:842
of minor accessories (such as tires, batteries, brakes, shock absorbers,
window glass) and the servicing of and minor repair of automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE WASH ESTABLISHMENT — A building, or portion thereof,
the primary purpose of which is the washing of vehicles either by automatic
or self-service means.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having more than one-half of its
height below finished grade. (See Figure 1.196)
BED-AND-BREAKFAST OPERATIONS — A use which is subordinate to the
principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in
which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for
payment.
BILLBOARD or OFF-PREMISES SIGN — As defined in Chapter 607, Signs,
Article II, Sign Regulations.[Added 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07]
BROADCAST OR RECORDING STUDIO — A facility for the production
and broadcasting of television, radio, or internet programs and similar
products, or the recording of music, including, but not limited to, sound
stages, sets, recording and broadcasting studios, production facilities, and
administrative offices.[Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
BUILDING AREA — The horizontal area measured from the outside of the
exterior wall of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on
the lot, including all covered porches.
BUILDING CODE — The currently adopted code or codes regulating
building construction in the City of Royal Oak.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the finished
grade level to the roof surface as follows: 1) the top of the roof for flat
roofs, 2) the deck lines for a mansard roof and 3) the average height of the
highest roof peak as measured between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip
and gambrel roof, including dormer additions. Where the building may be
situated on sloping terrain, this height shall be measured from the average
level of the finished grade at the building wall. (See Figure 2.197)
AUTOMATIC WASH — Any facility, its structures, accessory uses, or
paved areas used wholly or partly to wash, clean and dry the exterior
of automobiles, using conveyors to move the vehicle, or equipment
that moves over or around the vehicle, or other automated equipment
intended to mechanically wash such vehicles.
A.
SELF-SERVICE WASH — Any facility, its structures, accessory uses or
paved areas used wholly or partly to wash, clean and dry the exterior of
automobiles using hand-held equipment.
B.
196. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
197. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:843
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The administrative official designated by the City
Commission to enforce the Building Code.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line established by the minimum required
setbacks forming the area within a lot in which a building may be located.
(See Figure 3.198)
CHILD FOSTER CARE FACILITY — A private home or residence which is
used for any of the following categories of foster care:
CIGAR BAR — An indoor establishment or area within an indoor
establishment that is open to the public and is designated for the smoking
of cigars, purchased on the premises or elsewhere, or as otherwise defined
in the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-Free Air Law, Michigan Public Act 188 of
2009.201[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT MEDICAL — A building or portion thereof providing
diagnostic, therapeutic, or preventive medical care, surgical or invasive
procedures not requiring inpatient admission, and/or emergency or urgent
care to ambulatory patients on an outpatient basis only, including customary
laboratories and pharmacies incidental or necessary to its operation or the
service of its patients, but without facilities for inpatient care or surgical
procedures that require inpatient admission.[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-16]
CONVALESCENT CENTER — A state-licensed facility for the care of
children, of the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily
CHILD FOSTER FAMILY HOME — A private home or residence, other
than a hospital, hotel, or motel, and which is licensed by the State
of Michigan as a full-time foster family home pursuant to Public Act
116 of 1973199 for one but not more than four minor children who
are unrelated to the other occupants thereof and are given care and
supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or
more consecutive weeks, and unattended by parent or legal guardian,
by or under the supervision of the licensee under said state law, who is
a resident of the facility.
A.
CHILD FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME — A private home or residence,
other than a hospital, hotel, or motel, and which is licensed by the State
of Michigan as a full-time foster family group home pursuant to Public
Act 116 of 1973200 for more than four but less than seven minor children
who are unrelated to the other occupants thereof and are given care
and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for
two or more consecutive weeks, and unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, by or under the supervision of the licensee under said state
law, who is a resident of the facility.
B.
198. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
199. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.111 et seq.
200. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.111 et seq.
201. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.12601 et seq.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:844
disorders. Said home shall conform to and qualify for license under state
law even though state law has different size regulations.
DAY-CARE FACILITIES — The following definitions shall apply in the
construction and application of this chapter:
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DENSITY BONUS — The granting of the allowance of additional density in
a development as regulated by this chapter.
DISTRICT — A portion of the City within which certain uses of land and/
or buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and
requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment that dispenses products or services
to patrons who remain in vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A passageway (primarily for use by vehicles) over private
property, leading from a street or other public way to a garage or parking
area. A horseshoe-shape drive or a T-shape drive located within a front yard
is included within this definition.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof which is used exclusively as a
residence, and containing no less than a kitchen, bathroom and bedroom/
living quarters. The following additional definitions are provided:
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME, CHILD — A private residence in which
one but not more than six minor children are received for care and
supervision for periods less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent
or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the
family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives
care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks in a calendar year.
A.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME, CHILD — A private residence in which
seven but not more than 12 children are received for care and
supervision for periods less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent
or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the
family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives
care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks in a calendar year.
B.
DAY-CARE CENTER, CHILD — A facility, other than a private residence,
receiving one or more children for care and supervision for periods less
than 24 hours, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately
available to the child.
C.
DAY-CARE, ADULT — A facility providing care for the elderly and/or
functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a
twenty-four-hour day.
D.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building consisting of three or
more dwellings.
A.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building
designed for, or occupied exclusively by, one family.
B.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:845
EASEMENT — The right of an owner of property, by reason of such
ownership, to use the property of another for purposes of ingress, egress,
utilities, drainage and similar uses.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE — A billboard or off-premises sign, or portion
thereof, that can be electronically changed by remote or automatic means,
or that appears to change or have movement caused by any method other
than manually removing and replacing the billboard or its components,
whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the billboard's
structure, or any other component of the billboard. This includes any video
display, revolving, flashing, or animated displays, and displays that
incorporate rotating or swinging panels, intermittent illumination or the
illusion of such illumination, light-emitting diodes (LEDs) manipulated
through digital input, "digital ink," or any other method or technology that
allows the billboard face to present a series of images.[Added 3-16-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-07]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services that are erected, constructed, altered,
or maintained by public utilities or municipal agencies of underground,
surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, poles, and other similar equipment or
accessories reasonably in connection therewith for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal agencies.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — An attached building
consisting of no more than eight dwelling units, each with individual
entries and designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
C.
D. DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building consisting of two dwellings.
SITE-BUILT DWELLING — A structure constructed in accordance with
the Michigan State Construction Code as promulgated by the Michigan
State Construction Code Commission under the provisions of 1972, PA
230, as amended,202 in which elementary building materials and parts
are transported to the building site where they are used to construct
the total dwelling unit, including its major individual components and
systems.
E.
MANUFACTURED DWELLING — A structure constructed in
accordance with Michigan State Construction Code, as promulgated
by the Michigan State Construction Code Commission under the
provisions of 1972, PA 230, as amended,203 in which individual
components, none of which in and of itself is suitable for occupancy,
are preconstructed and transported to the building site where they are
in need of further assembly in order to constitute a complete dwelling
ready for occupancy.
F.
202. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.
203. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:846
FAMILY — A family shall mean either of the following:
FIREARM — Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to
expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of
gas or escape of gas, excluding, however:
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings.[Amended
5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
A domestic family, that is one or more persons living together and
related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage or adoption, together
with servants of the principal occupants and not more than two
additional unrelated persons, with all of such individuals being
domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a
dwelling.
A.
The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living
together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is a permanent and
distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family
with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the
functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a
cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic
family must be cooking and otherwise housekeeping as a single,
nonprofit unit. This definition shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization or group
where the common living arrangement and/or the basis for the
establishment of the functional equivalency of the domestic family is
likely or contemplated to exist for a limited or temporary duration.
There shall be rebuttable presumption enforceable by the Zoning
Administrator in the first instance that the number of persons who may
reside as a functional equivalent family shall be limited to four. Such
presumption may be rebutted by application to the Plan Commission for
a special land use based upon the applicable standards in this chapter.
B.
Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, or BB gun which expels a single
globular projectile not exceeding 0.18 inch in diameter.
A.
Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or
recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate
Commerce Commission.
B.
Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive
rivets, or similar industrial ammunition.
C.
D. Model rockets designed to propel a model vehicle in a vertical direction.
In the case of residential uses, "usable floor area" is defined as the
sum of the gross horizontal areas of each story, floor or level of a
building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls without
deduction for interior walls, closets, stairways, openings to lower floors,
mechanical or utility rooms, or shafts at any level, excluding areas of
A.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:847
FOOTCANDLES — The unit of illumination when the foot is the unit of
length.
GARAGE, PARKING — A space or structure or series of structures for the
temporary storage or parking of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of a main building
designed or used primarily for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats,
house trailers, and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the
building to which it is accessory.
GARDEN, COMMUNITY — An area of land managed and maintained by an
individual or a group of individuals, and owned and operated in trust by the
City, another governmental entity or a recognized nonprofit organization to
grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops, such as
flowers, for personal or group use, consumption, donation, or sale, either
through cooperative shares, a publically owned and operated farmers'
market or directly to local grocers and restaurants. Community gardens
may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals
or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include
common areas maintained and used by group members.[Added 4-19-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-04]
unfinished attics, breezeways, basements, and unenclosed porches and
areas within the building utilized for the required off-street parking
spaces. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
Nonresidential uses.
In the case of nonresidential uses, "usable floor area" is defined as
the sum of the gross horizontal areas of each story, floor or level
of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
without deduction for interior walls, closets or shafts at any level,
but excluding the following: common or multitenant hallways;
stairways, stairwells, and elevator shafts; toilet rooms; mechanical
equipment rooms; vaults; walk-in coolers and freezers; dressing or
changing rooms; locker rooms; employee lounges or break rooms;
demonstration rooms; and other similar areas not utilized for
continuous occupancy, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(1)
In determining "usable floor area" for nonresidential uses, portions
of each story, floor or level of a building may be divided into
their separate and respective uses (sales, services, manufacturing,
offices, storage, etc.) when calculating required off-street parking,
as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
(2)
In the absence of floor plans or other detailed documentation,
"usable floor area" for nonresidential uses may be calculated as a
percentage of not less than 80% of the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of each story, floor or level of a building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls without deduction for interior
walls, closets or shafts at any level, as determined necessary by the
Zoning Administrator.
(3)
B.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:848
GARDEN, DOMESTIC — An area of land managed and maintained by the
owner or occupant of a dwelling to grow and harvest food crops for personal
use, consumption or donation. The growing of non-food, ornamental crops,
such as flowers or other decorative plants, by the owner or occupant of a
dwelling shall not be considered a domestic garden.[Added 4-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-04]
GARDEN, MARKET — An area of land managed and maintained by a
business, an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food
crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops, such as flowers, for sale, use or
consumption by the business, individual or group.[Added 4-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-04]
GRADE — The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
GREENHOUSE — An accessory structure for a domestic, community or
market garden constructed chiefly of glass, glass-like translucent material,
plastic, fiberglass, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or
cultivation of food crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops, such as
flowers, or other plants; including any hoop-house structure made of pipes
or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a halfround
or hoop shape; or any unheated cold-frame structure consisting of
a wooden or concrete frame and a top of glass or clear plastic, used for
protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.[Added 4-19-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-04]
GUNSHOP —
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is
clearly a customary incidental use of a residential dwelling unit and which
does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character
of the neighborhood.
HOSPITAL — A building or group of buildings providing diagnostic,
therapeutic, or preventive medical care, surgical procedures, trauma
centers, emergency and urgent care, and other health care services to
patients on primarily an inpatient basis, including such related facilities
as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, staff offices and
residences, central services facilities, gift shops, pharmacies, and
restaurants.[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
Any place, premises, room, building, or part thereof, from which there
is conducted the retail sale, repairing or renting of firearms, or the sale
of ammunition therefor;
A.
Any place, premises, room, building, or part thereof, from which there
is conducted the wholesale sale of firearms, and which also includes
within the place, premises, room, building, or part thereof, the storage
of firearms or ammunition.
B.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:849
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing rooms designed
to provide transient lodging for compensation for periods of 30 days or
less, with one or more common entrances for each building(s) serving all
lodging units, where each lodging unit is accessed from interior lobbies,
courts, or halls within the building(s), and in which building(s) there is
a general kitchen and dining room for the accommodation of the
occupants.[Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
KENNEL — Any place or premises where dogs, cats, or other domestic pets
are boarded, bred, or cared for for a twenty-four-hour period in return for
remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale. "Kennel" shall also mean
the keeping of four or more pets over the age of four months.
LANDSCAPING — The following definitions shall apply in the construction
and application of this chapter:[Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
BERM — A landscaped mound of earth which blends with the
surrounding terrain. (See Figure 4.204)
A.
BUFFER — A landscaped area composed of living material, wall, berm,
or combination thereof, established and/or maintained to provide visual
screening, noise reduction, and transition between zones. (See Figure
4.205)
B.
CALIPER — The diameter of a deciduous tree's perennial trunk
measured at 12 inches above the existing grade.
C.
CONFLICTING NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES — Any nonresidential zone
which abuts a residential zone. (See Figure 5.206)
D.
CONFLICTING RESIDENTIAL ZONES — Any residential zone
designated at a higher density (greater units per acre) or greater bulk
(increased lot coverage) which abuts a residential zone designated at a
lower density. (See Figure 5.207)
E.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT — The diameter of a deciduous tree's
perennial trunk measured at 4 1/2 feet above the existing grade.
F.
DRIP LINE — An imaginary vertical line that extends downward from
the outermost tips of a tree's branches or stems to the ground.
G.
GREENBELT — A landscaped area, established at a depth of the
minimum required front yard setback within a zoning district, which is
intended to provide a transition between a public road right-of-way and
an existing or proposed land use. (See Figure 6.208)
H.
204. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
205. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
206. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
207. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
208. Editor's Note: Figure 6 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:850
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading and/or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT — A parcel of land, excluding any portion in a street or other rightof-
way, of at least sufficient size to meet minimum requirements for use,
coverage, lot area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as
herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on a public street, or on
an approved private street, and may consist of a single lot of record; a
portion of a lot of record; any combination of complete and/or portions of
lots of record; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds. (See
Figure 7.209) Two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership shall
be considered a lot for purposes of this chapter. The following additional
definitions are provided:
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, but
excluding that portion within a street right-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area covered by the building
area.
I. OPACITY — The state of being impervious to sight.
PLANT MATERIAL — A collection of living evergreen and/or deciduous,
woody-stemmed trees, shrubs, vines and ground cover.
J.
SHRUB — A woody plant of up to six feet in height with several erect,
spreading, or prostrate stems and a general bushy appearance.
K.
TREE, DECIDUOUS — A woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, a
height of greater than six feet at maturity, and exhibiting a more or less
definite crown of leaves or other foliage that is shed on a seasonal basis.
L.
TREE, EVERGREEN — A woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, a
height of greater than six feet at maturity, and several erect, spreading
or prostrate stems that retain their foliage throughout the year.
M.
LOT, CORNER — A lot with frontage on two intersecting streets. The
narrower lot frontage shall be considered the front in determining
building siting and side and rear yard setbacks.
A.
LOT, THROUGH or DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot other than a corner
lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. In the case of
a row of double frontage lots, one street will be designated as the front
street for all lots in the plat and in the request for a zoning compliance
permit. If there are existing structures in the same block fronting one
or both of the streets, the required front yard setback shall be observed
on those streets where structures presently front.
B.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot with only one lot line
fronting on a street.
C.
209. Editor's Note: Figure 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:851
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance from the front line to the rear
lot line.
LOT LINE — Any line dividing one lot from another or from a public rightof-
way, and thus constitutes the property lines bounding a lot.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot, the dimensions of which are shown on a
subdivision plat recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Oakland
County, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of
which is attested to by a professional engineer or registered surveyor, so
designated by the State of Michigan, and said description so recorded with
the Register of Deeds.
LOT WIDTH — The required horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at the two points where the required front yard setback line
intersects the side lot lines. For lots located on the turning circle of a culde-
sac, the lot width may be reduced to 80% of the required lot width.
MANUFACTURING — The use of land, buildings or structures for the
purpose of manufacturing, assembling, making, preparing, inspecting,
finishing, treating, altering, repairing, fabricating or adapting for sale of
any goods, substance, article, thing or service.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — As defined in Chapter 447, Massage
Establishments, as amended.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any place, premises, room or
establishment in which:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or the payment of a price, may
be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices
as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball machines, mechanical grab
machines, coin-operated motion-picture machines, shuffle board game
machines or devices, whether played with discs, weights, pucks, or balls,
and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever
name they may be indicated, and whether operated by hand or electric
power, or a combination thereof.
MEZZANINE — An intermediate floor in any story occupying but not to
exceed more than 1/3 of the floor area of such story.
MOBILE HOME — A detached portable single-family dwelling,
prefabricated on its own chassis and intended for long-term occupancy. The
unit contains sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a wash basin, a tub
or shower, eating and living quarters. It is designed to be transported on its
own wheels or flatbed arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a
complete dwelling without permanent foundation and connected to existing
utilities.
A substantial and significant portion of the business carried on involves
the operation of mechanical amusement devices; or
A.
B. Three or more mechanical amusement devices are located.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:852
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any parcel of land intended and designed to
accommodate more than one mobile home for living use which is offered to
the public for that purpose; and any structure, facility, area, or equipment
used or intended for use incidental to that living use.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings of rental units, in which each
rental unit contains a bedroom and a bathroom, designed to provide
transient lodging for compensation for periods of 30 days or less, where
any number of lodging units may be accessed from a direct, independent
entrance, and/or where off-street parking is provided directly adjoining any
unit, provided that provision for cooking may be made in no more than 10%
of the individual rooms or units within a building.[Amended 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-13]
MOTION-PICTURE STUDIO — A facility for the production of motion
pictures, television programs, and similar products, including, but not
limited to, sound stages, sets, cafeterias, production studios and facilities,
research and development operations, training or education areas, and
administrative offices.[Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A facility intended to
provide a transfer station for multiple modes of transportation, including
but not limited to buses, trains, cabs, and cars.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A nonconforming building is a building
or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or
amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter in the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which lawfully occupied a building or
land at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and that
does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
OFFICE, BUSINESS, ADMINISTRATIVE, OR PROFESSIONAL — A building
or portion thereof used for general administrative offices of any of the
following occupations: executive, administrative, or professional;
accounting or financial management; writing, clerical, or stenographic;
data processing and computer centers; design; sales; architectural and
engineering; federal, state and local administration; and similar
professions. Business, administrative, and professional offices shall not
include medical offices, outpatient medical clinics, hospitals, veterinary
hospitals, or automotive brokers and wholesalers.[Added 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-16]
OFFICE, MEDICAL — A building or portion thereof providing diagnostic,
therapeutic, or preventive medical, osteopathic, chiropractic, dental,
psychological and similar or related treatment by a practitioner or group of
practitioners licensed to perform such services to ambulatory patients on an
outpatient basis only, but without facilities for inpatient care, major surgical
procedures, or emergency and urgent care.[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-16]
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:853
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA — A hard-surfaced facility providing
vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for
maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking
of automobiles.
PARKING LOT, ACCESSORY — A tract of land other than a street, designed
and used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles, for the use of
occupants, employees and patrons of the building or premises to which it is
accessory.
PARKING LOT, PUBLIC — A tract of land, other than an accessory parking
lot or a street, used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles for general
public use, either free or for remuneration.
PARKING SPACE — One unit of a parking area provided for the parking of
one vehicle, and shall be exclusive of driveways, aisles, or entrances giving
access thereto and shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of
permitted vehicles.
PAVEMENT, IMPERVIOUS — A surface material for parking lots,
maneuvering aisles, driveways, loading areas, sidewalks, pedestrian
pathways, and other areas which prevents the infiltration of surface water,
including, but not limited to, asphalt, concrete, brick, stone, or similar
materials. [Added 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-11]
PAVEMENT, PERVIOUS or PERMEABLE — A surface material for parking
lots, maneuvering aisles, driveways, loading areas, sidewalks, pedestrian
pathways, and other areas which allows the infiltration, treatment, and/
or storage of surface water, including, but not limited to, porous asphalt,
pervious concrete, permeable interlocking pavers, reinforced turf, or
similar materials.[Added 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-11]
PORCH — A covered or uncovered floor, deck or platform at the entrance
to a building, the height of which is eight inches or more above the average
grade.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — The main building or structure
in which the primary use is conducted.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person, firm, corporation, or municipal agency
authorized under federal, state, county or municipal regulations to furnish
electricity, gas, transportation, water, or sewer services.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE/TRAILER — A motor vehicle (or trailer to be
towed by a motor vehicle) constructed or altered to provide living quarters,
including permanently installed cooking and sleeping facilities, and is used
for recreation, camping, or other noncommercial use.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility which recovers resources, such as
newspapers, glassware, and metal cans, and collects, stores, flattens,
crushes, or bundles, essentially by hand, and within a completely enclosed
building.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:854
method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through,
fast-food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof, as
defined below:
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial enterprise devoted in whole
or in part to the sale, rental, and/or servicing of goods or commodities,
where such goods or commodities are available for immediate purchase and
removal from the premises by the purchaser.[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-08]
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT, LARGE-SCALE — A retail establishment with
100,000 square feet or more of gross floor area, with or without limited and/
or separate accessory uses within the same building.[Added 5-20-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-08]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A legal right of passage over real property typically
associated with roads and railroads.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings in
a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers to be
leased or owned for the storage of customer's goods or wares.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A restaurant whose method of operation
involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable
or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption primarily off the premises.
A.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — A restaurant whose primary business is
serving food to the public for consumption on the premises by order
from and service to vehicular passengers outside the structure.
B.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant whose method of operation
involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the
customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter
where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside or outside of the
structure, for consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle
at the site.
C.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD — A restaurant whose method of operation
involves either:
The delivery of prepared food by servers to customers seated at
tables; or
(1)
The acquisition by customers of prepared food at a cafeteria line
and its subsequent consumption by the customers at tables.
(2)
D.
BAR or LOUNGE — A type of restaurant which is operated primarily
for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages although the sale of prepared
food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of a
larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so
designated or operated.
E.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:855
SENIOR HOUSING — A building or group of buildings containing dwellings
intended to be occupied by elderly persons, as defined by the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended. Housing for the elderly may include independent
and/or assisted living arrangements but shall not include nursing or
convalescent homes regulated by the State of Michigan. Independent and
assisted living housing are defined as follows:
SETBACK — The minimum required horizontal distance between the
building or structure and the front, side, and rear lot lines. (See Figure 3.210)
SHOPPING CENTER — Three or more commercial establishments with a
total gross floor area of more than 10,000 square feet, planned, developed,
owned, managed, and functioning as a single property or unit, with offstreet
parking provided on the property.[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-08]
SIGN — As defined in Chapter 607, Article II, Sign Regulations.
SITE CONDOMINIUM — A condominium development containing
residential, commercial, office, industrial, or other structures or
improvements for uses permitted in the zoning district in which located,
in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights to a volume of space within
which a structure or structures may be constructed, herein defined as
a condominium unit, as described in the master deed. The following
additional definitions are provided:
SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING — Housing that is designed and
operated for elderly people in good health who desire and are capable
of maintaining independent households. Such housing may provide
certain services such as security, housekeeping and recreational and
social activities. Individual dwellings are designed to promote
independent living and shall contain kitchen facilities.
A.
SENIOR ASSISTED LIVING — Housing that provides twenty-four-hour
supervision and is designed and operated for elderly people who
require some level of support for daily living. Such support shall include
meals, security, and housekeeping, and may include daily personal care,
transportation and other support services, where needed. Individual
dwellings may contain kitchen facilities.
B.
A. CONDOMINIUM ACT — Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended.211)
CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS — The master deed, recorded pursuant
to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the
master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a coowner
in the condominium.
B.
CONDOMINIUM LOT — The condominium unit and the contiguous
limited common element surrounding the condominium unit, which
shall be the counterpart of "lot" as used in connection with a project
C.
210. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
211. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:856
SMOKING LOUNGE — An indoor establishment or area within an indoor
establishment primarily used for the smoking of tobacco, tobacco products,
cigars, or cigarettes, and/or the use of smoking paraphernalia, whether
purchased or leased on the premises or elsewhere, where the more
substantial and significant portion of the establishment's stock-in-trade and
gross floor area is dedicated to smoking and/or the use of smoking
paraphernalia instead of the retail sale of tobacco, tobacco products, cigars,
cigarettes, smoking paraphernalia, and other related items, and such retail
sales are reasonably and customarily incidental and subordinate to smoking
and/or the use of smoking paraphernalia. A "smoking lounge" shall have a
valid exemption certificate from the Michigan Department of Community
Health for a "tobacco specialty retail store," comply with all required
standards of the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-Free Air Law, Michigan Public Act
188 of 2009,213 and not be included as part of any outdoor cafe or outdoor
dining area.[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An aggregation of parts including any base,
mounts, tower, solar collectors, and accessory equipment such as utility
interconnections and solar storage batteries, etc., in such configuration as
necessary to convert solar radiation into thermal, chemical or electrical
energy. The following additional definitions are provided:[Added
6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
developed under the Subdivision Control Act, Act 288 of the Public Acts
of 1967, as amended.212
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — The portion of a condominium project
designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in
the master deed.
D.
GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS — The common elements other than
the limited common elements.
E.
LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS — A portion of the common elements
reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the
co-owners.
F.
MASTER DEED — The condominium document recording the
condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and
incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the
condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information
required by the Condominium Act.
G.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A photovoltaic cell, panel or array, or a heated
air or water collection device, which relies upon solar radiation as an
energy source for the generation of thermal, chemical or electrical
energy, i.e., solar cells or solar panels.
A.
212. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
213. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.12601 et seq.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:857
SPECIAL LAND USE — A use which is subject to special approval by the
Plan Commission. A special land use may be granted only when there is a
specific provision in this chapter. A special land use is not considered to be
a nonconforming use.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including
those basements used for the principal use. (See Figure 8.214)
STORY, ONE-HALF — A space under a sloping roof that has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five
feet or less, and occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story
directly beneath.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or as a principal means of access to
abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members
of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any
substantial changes in the roof and exterior walls.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected above ground level or
which is permanently attached to something located on the ground.
TENT — Any structure used for living or sleeping purposes or for sheltering
a public gathering constructed wholly or in part from canvas, tarpaulin,
or other similar material, and shall include shelter provided for circuses,
carnivals, side shows, revival meetings, camp meetings, and all similar
meetings or exhibitions in temporary structures.
TOBACCONIST — An indoor establishment primarily used for the retail sale
of tobacco, tobacco products, cigars, cigarettes, smoking paraphernalia,
and other related items. A "tobacconist" may include a "smoking lounge" as
an accessory use, provided:[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
SOLAR STORAGE BATTERY — A device that stores energy from solar
radiation and makes it available in the form of thermal, chemical or
electrical energy.
B.
The establishment has a valid exemption certificate from the Michigan
Department of Community Health for a "tobacco specialty retail store"
and complies with all required standards of the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-
Free Air Law, Michigan Public Act 188 of 2009;215
A.
The smoking lounge is reasonably and customarily incidental and
subordinate to the retail sale of tobacco, tobacco products, cigars,
cigarettes, smoking paraphernalia, and other related items; and
B.
214. Editor's Note: Figure 8 is included at the end of this chapter.
215. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.12601 et seq.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:858
TOBACCO SPECIALTY RETAIL STORE — An indoor establishment in which
the primary purpose is the retail sale of tobacco products and smoking
paraphernalia, and in which the sale of other products is incidental, or as
otherwise defined in the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-Free Air Law, Michigan Public
Act 188 of 2009.216 A "tobacco specialty retail store" does not include a
tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any
establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.[Added
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An aggregation of parts including the base,
tower, generator, turbine, rotor, blades, and accessory equipment such as
utility interconnections and battery banks, etc., in such configuration as
necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical energy,
i.e., wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine. The following additional
definitions are provided:[Added 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — All structures and
accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for
the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but
shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices
and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission
equipment, building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not
included within this definition are citizen band radio facilities; short-wave
The more substantial and significant portion of the establishment's
stock-in-trade and gross floor area is dedicated to retail sales instead of
a smoking lounge.
C.
ANEMOMETER TOWER — An aggregation of parts including the base,
tower, anemometer or wind speed recorder, wind direction vanes, data
logger, and accessory equipment such as any telemetry devices, etc., in
such configuration as necessary to monitor or transmit wind speed and
wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous
wind information or to characterize the wind resource at a given
location.
A.
NACELLE — The component of a wind energy system that sits atop the
tower and houses the turbine.
B.
ROTOR — A multiple-bladed airfoil assembly of a wind energy system
that extracts through rotation kinetic energy directly from the wind.
C.
TOWER — The vertical component of a wind energy system that
elevates the turbine, rotor and blades above the ground.
D.
TURBINE — The component of a wind energy system that converts
kinetic energy directly from the wind into mechanical or electrical
energy, or the generator.
E.
216. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.12601 et seq.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:859
facilities; ham, amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and governmental
facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which
preempt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this chapter, the
following additional terms are defined:[Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-14]
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches
above the general ground level of the graded lot, except as otherwise
provided herein; provided, however, that fences and walls may be permitted
in any yard, subject to the height limitation as indicated herein and in
the Building Code. The measurement of a yard shall be construed as the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building or
structure.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the principal building
and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the
closest point to the front lot line. In all cases, the front lot line shall be
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Wireless
communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such
as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like.
A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly
established shall not be included within this definition.
A.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURES — Structures
designed, erected, or modified to support, or are capable of supporting,
wireless communication equipment including antennas. Support
structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to,
monopoles, self-supporting lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and
guyed towers, water towers, utility poles, or buildings, or other
structures which appear to be something other than a mere support
structure.
B.
CO-LOCATION — The location by two or more wireless communication
providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure,
tower, or building, or within an existing equipment compound, with
the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to
support wireless communication antennas within the community.
C.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT — The set of equipment
and network components used in the provision of wireless
communications services, including, but not limited to, antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, equipment shelters, cabinets,
emergency generators, power supply cables, and coaxial and fiber optic
cables, but excluding wireless communications support structures.
D.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area
surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless communications
support structure and within which wireless communications
equipment is located.
E.
§ 770-8 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-8
752:860
considered to be that portion of the lot which abuts a public road right-ofway
or private road easement. (See Figure 3.217)
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the nearest point of the principal building. In the case of a lot which comes
to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be that imaginary line parallel to
the front lot line, not less than 10 feet long, lying wholly within the lot and
the farthest from the front lot line. (See Figure 3.218)
YARD, SIDE — A yard between any building and the side lot line, extending
from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard
shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line to
the nearest point of principal building. (See Figure 3.219)
ZONE — A section of the City for which the regulations governing the
height, area, use, structure, or size of buildings and premises are the same.
217. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
218. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
219. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 770-8 WATERWORKS § 770-8
752:861

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 770-9. Zoning Administrator.
A Zoning Administrator, or such deputies, shall be appointed by the City
Manager and designated to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 770-10. Duties.
The Zoning Administrator shall:
§ 770-11. Special land uses; permit procedures.
A. Receive and review for completeness all applications for site plan
review and special land use permits which the Plan Commission is
required to decide under this chapter and refer such applications to the
Plan Commission for determination.
B. Receive and review for completeness all applications for appeals,
variances, or other matters which the Zoning Board of Appeals is
required to decide under this chapter and refer such applications to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for determination.
C. Receive and review for completeness all applications for amendments
to this chapter and refer such applications to the Plan Commission for
determination.
D. Implement the decisions of the Plan Commission and City Commission
related to this chapter.
E. Coordinate enforcement of this chapter with the Enforcement Officer.
A. Application. Applications for special land use permits authorized in this
chapter shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a form
provided by the City. In addition to a complete application form, the
applicant is required to submit a site plan, building floor plans and
elevations prepared in accordance with § 770-12, Site plan review, and
pay all associated fees. Incomplete submittals shall not be accepted by
the Zoning Administrator.
B. Procedures.
(1) Special land use permits may be granted by the Plan Commission at
its discretion.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed application
and site plan pursuant to § 770-12, Site plan review, to determine if
all required information has been supplied, and forward the
complete application, site plan, and supporting data to the Plan
Commission.
§ 770-9 WATERWORKS § 770-11
752:863
(3) Prior to a decision by the Plan Commission, a public hearing shall
be held in accordance with § 770-13, Public hearings.
(4) Following the public hearing the Plan Commission may deny,
approve, or approve with conditions a request for a special land
use. The decision of the Plan Commission shall be incorporated in a
statement of conclusions relative to the special land use under
consideration. Any decision which denies a request or imposes
conditions upon its approval shall specify the basis for the denial or
the conditions imposed. The Plan Commission may impose such
additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the
general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights,
and for insuring that the purposes of this chapter and the general
spirit and purpose of the district in which the special land use is
proposed will be observed.
C. Basis of determinations. The Plan Commission shall review the
proposed special land use in terms of the standards stated within this
chapter and shall establish that such use and the proposed location:
(1) Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives
or any specific objectives of the Master Plan.
(2) Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the
essential character of the area.
(3) Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing uses or uses
reasonably anticipated in the future.
(4) Will be an improvement in relation to property in the immediate
vicinity and to the City as a whole.
(5) Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities
or that the persons responsible for the establishment of the
proposed use will provide adequately any such service or facility.
(6) Will not create excessive additional public costs and will not be
detrimental to the economic welfare of the City.
(7) Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this chapter, and
comply with all applicable provisions and standards which are
established for said use by this chapter and other applicable codes.
D. Duration, voiding and extensions of permit.
(1) Unless otherwise specified by the Plan Commission, any special
land use permit granted under this section shall be null and void
unless the development proposed shall have its first building
permit within one year from the date of granting of the permit. The
Zoning Administrator may grant an extension thereof for good
cause.
§ 770-11 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-11
752:864
§ 770-12. Site plan review.
The Plan Commission shall have the authority to review and to approve,
approve with conditions or reject all site plans.
(2) The Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued
erroneously on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the
applicant or his agent and is in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or of any other ordinances or regulations of the City.
E. Reapplication. No application for a special land use permit which has
been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted until the expiration
of one year or more from the date of such denial, except on grounds of
newly discovered evidence or change of conditions found to be
sufficient as determined by the Zoning Administrator to justify a new
application being considered by the Plan Commission.
A. Where required.
(1) Site plan review is required for all proposed uses and certain
existing uses within the City where an alteration, addition,
expansion, change or conversion constitutes an increase or
reduction to the existing structure or use. Site plan review shall
also be required for the paving of any off-street parking for any use
for which off-street parking is required by this chapter.
(2) Site plan review shall not be required for one- and two-family
residential, or their customary accessory storage buildings.
(3) The City shall not issue a building permit until a site plan has been
approved and is in effect. A use, not involving a building or
structure, shall not be commenced or expanded, nor shall the
Zoning Administrator or duly appointed agent issue an occupancy
permit for such use until a site plan has been approved and is in
effect.
B. Site plan.
(1) Application. An applicant shall submit a request for site plan review
by filing with the Zoning Administrator the required number of
copies of a site plan as well as the data and exhibits required in the
application, the review fee, and a complete application form. The
Administrator, upon receipt of the complete application, shall
transmit the site plan drawing(s) to the Plan Commission prior to
its next regular meeting.
(2) Information required. A site plan submitted for review and
approval shall contain all of the information identified on the site
plan review data check list prior to its submission to the City for
review. Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire
development. Sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches with plan
§ 770-11 WATERWORKS § 770-12
752:865
view drawn to a scale of no greater than one inch equals 50 feet.
The Zoning Administrator may also request copies of all plans and
drawings in electronic form and at a reduced size format.
(3) Standards for review. In reviewing the site plan, the Plan
Commission shall determine whether the plan meets the following
specifications and standards:
(a) The plan conforms to the approved preliminary site plan, when
applicable, and with all Zoning Ordinance regulations;
(b) All required information is provided;
(c) The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding
neighborhood and protects the general health, safety, welfare
and character of the City;
(d) There is a proper relationship between major thoroughfares
and proposed service drives, driveways and parking areas.
Proper access to all portions of the site and all sides of any
structure is provided. All structures or groups of structures
shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle access by
some practical means to all sides;
(e) The location of buildings is such that the adverse effects of
such uses will be minimized for the occupants of that use and
surrounding areas;
(f) Natural resources will be preserved to the maximum extent
possible in the site design;
(g) Sites which include storage of hazardous materials or waste,
fuels, salt, or chemicals will be designed to prevent spills and
discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the ground,
groundwater or nearby water bodies in accordance with
Article VII, county and state standards;
(h) Landscaping, including grass, trees, shrubs and other
vegetation, are provided to maintain and improve the aesthetic
quality of the site and area; and
(i) The proposed use is in compliance with all City ordinances and
any other applicable laws.
C. Supplemental information requirements.
(1) The following supplemental information shall be submitted in
connection with all site plan applications for nonresidential uses:
(a) A scaled drawing of the interior layout, showing the total
square footage of floor space, and the location and use of all
rooms. If the use has several floors or areas with typical
design, such design may be submitted along with an
§ 770-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-12
752:866
explanation of its general application in specified areas of the
building.
(b) On the drawing, or on separate sheets that may be referenced
to particular areas of the drawing, for each use there shall be a
description with regard to the specific services provided and/or
goods to be stored, sold or displayed, and a specification
relative to each type of services or goods as it relates to each
type of services or goods:
[1] The approximate percentage of the total square footage
space to be used for each type of service and goods; and
[2] The approximate percentage of total gross receipts
anticipated to be generated with regard to each type of
service and goods.
(c) A written business plan, which shall be in narrative or other
format, describing all uses and business activities to be
undertaken on the premises.
(d) Additional reasonable information required by the Planning
Department for the purpose of determining the nature of the
use planned for the premises.
(2) Following submission and approval of the site plan based upon the
information provided in accordance with this subsection, the
Planning Department shall retain the supplemental application on
file in connection with the property. In the event there is a material
change in the information that would indicate a new or different
use, a different percentage of space or receipts, or otherwise alter
the understanding of the various aspects of the use and/or
business, the applicant shall provide the Planning Department with
a revision of the earlier submission so as to ensure a file that is
current in its reflection of the use of the property. The revised
information shall be filed with the Planning Department within 30
days following the applicant's knowledge of such change.
(3) Plan Commission action. The Plan Commission shall study the site
plan and shall determine whether the site plan be approved,
approved with conditions or denied. The Plan Commission may
suggest and/or require modifications to the proposed site plan as
are needed to gain approval. The Plan Commission shall state in the
record of its proceedings the grounds for the action taken upon
each site plan submitted for its approval.
(4) Effect of approval. Approval of a site plan authorizes issuance of a
building permit or, in the case of uses without buildings or
structures, issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance. All plans
submitted for building permit review shall incorporate all
contingencies required by the Plan Commission as part of its
§ 770-12 WATERWORKS § 770-12
752:867
approval. No plans shall be accepted by the Building Department
that do not contain all site plan contingencies.
(5) Expiration of approval. Unless otherwise specified by the Plan
Commission, any site plan approved or approved with
contingencies under this section shall be null and void unless the
development proposed shall have its first building permit within
one year from the date of the granting of the permit. The Zoning
Administrator may grant an extension(s) thereof for good cause.
D. Administrative review for site plans involving minor modifications.
Administrative review may be conducted by the Zoning Administrator
for site plans that involve minor modifications, as defined herein. Such
minor modifications shall constitute an alteration, addition or expansion
to the existing structure and/or use of less than 500 square feet or 10%
of the gross floor area, whichever is less. Minor modifications involving
the change or conversion of a use shall be allowed if determined to be
less intense by the Zoning Administrator. All plans submitted for
administrative review shall comply with § 770-12B, Site plan, and
§ 770-12C, Supplemental information requirements. However, the
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to take any site plan
before the Plan Commission.
E. Amendment of approved site plan. The Zoning Administrator shall have
the authority to determine if a proposed change requires an
amendment to an approved site plan. A site plan may be amended upon
application and in accordance with the procedure herein for a site plan.
The Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes in an approved
site plan, provided that a revised site plan drawing(s) be submitted
showing such minor changes, for purposes of record.
F. Modification of site plan during construction. All improvements shall
conform to the site plan. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
notify the Zoning Administrator of any such changes. If the applicant
makes any changes during construction in the development in relation
to the approved site plan, such changes are at the applicant's risk
without any assurances that the Zoning Administrator or Plan
Commission will approve the changes. The Plan Commission or Zoning
Administrator may require the applicant to correct the changes so as to
conform to the approved site plan.
G. Phasing of development. The applicant may, at his or her discretion,
divide the proposed development into two or more phases. In such case,
the site plan shall cover the entire property involved and shall clearly
indicate the location, the size, timing, and character of each phase.
H. Inspection. The Building Inspector shall be responsible for inspecting
all improvements for conformance with the approved site plan. All
subgrade improvements such as utilities, a subbase installation for
drives and parking lots, and similar improvements shall be inspected
§ 770-12 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-12
752:868
§ 770-13. Public hearings.
and approved prior to covering. The applicant shall be responsible for
requesting the necessary inspection.
I. Violations. The approved site plan shall regulate development of the
property and any violation of this article, including any alteration or
improvement not in conformance with the approved site plan, and any
use of the property inconsistent with the file information provided as
required under § 770-12C, Supplemental information requirements,
above, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter as provided in
§ 770-18, Violations and penalties; abatement of nuisances, and shall be
subject to all penalties specified therein.
J. Public hearing requests. A public hearing for a site plan shall be
established in accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006,220 as amended,
or in either of the following events:
(1) When at least three members of the Plan Commission deem it
necessary; or
(2) When requested by the applicant seeking site plan review and
approval.
A. A public hearing plan shall be established as permitted by this chapter
and in accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.221
B. Procedures for public hearings. A public hearing date shall be set and a
notification published in at least one newspaper of general circulation
within the City and sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of
the property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to
whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to
the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property
regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning
jurisdiction. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant
of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one
dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or
spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure
containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas
owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or
organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the
structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary
entrance of the structure. The notice shall be given not less than 15
days before the date of the public hearing. The notice shall:
(1) Describe the nature of the request.
220. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
221. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 770-12 WATERWORKS § 770-13
752:869
§ 770-14. Site condominium project regulations.
(2) Indicate the property which is the subject of the request. The notice
shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the
property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no
such addresses currently exists within the property. If there are no
street addresses, other means of identification may be used.
(3) State when and where the request will be considered.
(4) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
A. Intent. Pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 141 of the
Condominium Act,222 preliminary and final site plans shall be regulated
by the provisions of this chapter and approved by the Plan Commission.
B. General requirements.
(1) Each condominium lot shall be located within a zoning district that
permits the proposed use.
(2) Each condominium lot shall have direct access to a public or
private street or easement which has been approved by the City
and constructed to City standards.
(3) For the purposes of this chapter, each condominium lot shall be
considered equivalent to a single lot and shall comply with all
regulations of the zoning district in which located, and the
provisions of any other statutes, laws, ordinances, and/or
regulations applicable to lots in subdivisions.
(4) In the case of a condominium containing single-family detached
dwelling units, not more than one dwelling unit shall be located on
a condominium lot, nor shall a dwelling unit be located on a
condominium lot with any other principal structure or use.
Required yards shall be measured from the boundaries of a
condominium lot.
C. Site plan approval requirements. Preliminary approval of the site plan
and final approval of the site plan and condominium documents by the
Plan Commission shall be required as a condition to the right to
construct, expand or convert a site condominium project. No permits
for erosion control, building construction, grading, or installation of
public water or sanitary sewerage facilities shall be issued for property
in a site condominium development until a final site plan has been
approved by the Plan Commission and is in effect. Preliminary and final
approval shall not be combined.
222. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.241 et seq.
§ 770-13 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-14
752:870
(1) Preliminary site plan review. The purpose of such preliminary
review is to confirm general compliance with City standards as well
as to suggest changes, if necessary, for final site plan approval. The
applicant shall submit a site plan pursuant to the standards and
procedures set forth in § 770-12B(2), Information required, and
§ 770-12C, Supplemental information requirements, of this chapter
for preliminary site plan review and approval. Approval of the
preliminary site plan by the Plan Commission shall indicate its
general acceptance of the proposed layout of buildings, streets and
drives, parking areas, other facilities and overall character of the
proposed development. Approval of the preliminary site shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of approval and shall
expire and be of no effect unless an application for a final site plan
is filed with the Zoning Administrator within that time period.
(2) Final site plan review. The applicant shall submit a final site plan to
include the following:
(a) Preliminary site plan revised to reflect all contingencies
required by the Plan Commission as part of its approval.
(b) Draft condominium documents for the review by the City
Attorney and other appropriate staff.
(c) Detailed engineering plans.
(3) The Plan Commission shall approve or deny the final site plans
based upon conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances and
design standards.
(4) The Plan Commission, as a condition of final approval of the site
plan, shall require the applicant to deposit a performance
guarantee as set forth in § 770-16, Performance guaranty, for the
completion of improvements associated with the proposed use.
(5) The final condominium documents and engineering plans may be
administratively approved following approval of the final site plan
by the Plan Commission.
(6) All other provisions of § 770-12, Site plan review, shall apply to final
site plan review and approval.
D. Required improvements.
(1) All design standards and required improvements that apply to a
subdivision, under Chapter 658, Subdivision Regulations, adopted
by the City Commission, shall apply to any condominium
development.
(2) Each condominium unit shall be connected to the City water,
sanitary and storm sewers. Utility standards stated in the Building
Code shall apply to all condominium units proposed for location on
§ 770-14 WATERWORKS § 770-14
752:871
property which is not subdivided and recorded, or property which
is to be further subdivided.
(3) Monuments shall be set at all boundary corners and deflection
points and at all road right-of-way intersection corners and
deflection points. Lot irons shall be set at all condominium lot
corners and deflection points of condominium lot lines. The City
may grant a delay in the setting of required monuments or irons for
a reasonable time, but not to exceed one year, on condition that the
developer deposit with the City Clerk cash, a certified check, or an
irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the City, whichever the
developer selects, in an amount as determined from time to time by
resolution of the Plan Commission. Such deposit shall be returned
to the developer upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor
registered in the State of Michigan that the monuments and irons
have been set as required, within the time specified. If the
developer defaults, the Plan Commission shall promptly require a
registered surveyor to set the monuments and irons in the ground
as shown on the condominium site plans, at a cost not to exceed the
amount of the security deposit.
(4) Road rights-of-way shall be described separately from individual
condominium lots, and shall be accurately delineated by bearings
and distances on the condominium subdivision plan and the final
site plan. The right-of-way shall be for roadway purposes and for
the purposes of locating, installing, maintaining, and replacing of
public utilities. The developer shall declare easements to the City
for all public water and sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances.
(5) All improvements in a site condominium shall comply with the
design specifications as adopted by the City and any amendments
thereto.
E. Information required prior to occupancy. Prior to the issuance of
occupancy permits for any condominium units, the applicant shall
submit the following to the Zoning Administrator:
(1) A copy of the recorded condominium documents (including
exhibits).
(2) A copy of any recorded restrictive covenants.
(3) A copy of the site plan on laminated photostatic copy or Mylar
sheet.
(4) Evidence of completion of improvements associated with the
proposed use, including two copies of an as-built survey.
F. Revision of site condominium plan. If the site condominium subdivision
plan is revised, the final site plan shall be revised accordingly and
submitted for review and approval or denial by the Plan Commission
§ 770-14 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-14
752:872
§ 770-15. Use of consultants.
From time to time, the City Commission may employ planning, engineering,
legal, traffic or other special consultants to assist in the review of special
land use permits, site plans, rezonings or other matters related to the
planning and development of the City.
§ 770-16. Performance guaranty.
In the interest of insuring compliance with the Zoning Ordinance provisions,
protecting the natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of an area for
which an application for a proposed use has been submitted, the City
official administering the application shall require the applicant to deposit
a performance guaranty as set forth herein. The performance guaranty
shall be required for the following purposes: to insure completion of
improvements connected with a proposed use as required by this chapter,
including but not limited to streets, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, drainage,
fences, screens, walls, and landscaping; to ensure that property is secured
and stabilized in the event active development ceases; and to provide
before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is
required.
G. Amendment of condominium documents. Any amendment to a master
deed or bylaws that affects the approved preliminary or final site plan,
or any conditions of approval of a preliminary or final site plan, shall be
reviewed and approved by the City Attorney and Plan Commission
before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is
required. The Plan Commission may require its review of an amended
site plan if, in its opinion, such changes in the master deed or bylaws
require corresponding changes in the site plan.
H. Relocation of boundaries. Relocation of boundaries between adjoining
condominium units, if permitted in the condominium documents, as
provided in Section 48 of the Condominium Act,223 shall comply with all
regulations of the zoning district in which located and shall be approved
by the Zoning Administrator. These requirements shall be made a part
of the bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
I. Subdivision of condominium lot. Each condominium lot that results
from a subdivision of another condominium lot, if such subdivision is
permitted by the condominium documents, as provided in Section 49 of
the Condominium Act,224 shall comply with all regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located, and shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator. These requirements shall be made a part of the
condominium bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
223. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.148 et seq.
224. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.149 et seq.
§ 770-14 WATERWORKS § 770-16
752:873
security in connection with the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy in order to ensure completion of development plans.
A. In general. Subject to the exceptions and special provisions set forth in
Subsection B, below, a performance guaranty shall mean a cash
deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit in the
amount of 125% of the estimated cost of the improvements for which
the guaranty is required, as determined by the applicant and verified by
the City. If the amount of such estimated cost is not reasonably
ascertainable by the City, the applicant may be required by the
department administering the performance guaranty to submit a
certified estimate prepared by the applicant's licensed engineer or
architect; or, alternatively, a bona fide contract for the work to be
performed, including a provision authorizing enforcement of the
contract by the City in the event of a default by the applicant. To the
extent that amounts required to be deposited are in excess of $250,000,
such amounts may be posted in the form of a corporate surety bond
approved as to form and substance by the City official administering the
application, such bond to contain terms and provisions to promote a
certain and efficient entitlement to such funds by the City in the event
of the need for such funds in order to carry out the intent of the security.
A letter of credit and corporate surety bond shall cover a time period
equal to or longer than the time anticipated to complete improvements
or take other actions, as applicable, and shall require 30 days' advance
written notice to the City official administering the application prior to
termination. The City shall be authorized to employ the City Engineer
and Building Official to review cost estimates and conduct periodic
inspections of progress relative to required improvements and/or
actions.
B. Exceptions and special provisions.
(1) Commercial, multifamily residential and mixed-use projects.
(a) The performance guaranty posted in connection with the
proposed construction shall be in an amount equal to 20% of
the amount estimated and certified by the applicant's licensed
engineer or architect for completion of improvements to
streets, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, drainage (including
retention or retention facilities, if any), fences, screens, walls
and landscaping, or any other portion of the project
determined by the Building Official to have an impact upon the
public interest, infrastructure or upon the health, safety or
welfare of the general public.
(b) The 20% shall be posted either in cash or by letter of credit, the
form and substance of which shall be approved by the Building
Official, whose approval shall not unreasonably be withheld. As
a condition of approval of a site plan, special land use, and/or
planned unit development, the Plan Commission may require a
higher performance guaranty be posted prior to building
§ 770-16 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-16
752:874
permits being issued but in no case shall it exceed 125% of
the estimated costs of improvements. The first 20% of any such
amount shall be posted either in cash or by letter of credit,
and the balance, 80% shall be in the form of cash, letter of
credit or a surety bond, the form and substance of which shall
be approved by the Building Official, whose approval shall not
unreasonably be withheld.
(2) One- and two-family dwellings. In connection with the issuance of a
building permit for one single-family detached dwelling or a twofamily
dwelling, the Building Official shall be authorized to require
a performance guaranty in an amount not to exceed 5% of
estimated construction cost. Such amount may be utilized by the
City to secure and stabilize the property and avoid hazards in the
event construction ceases, and to complete any improvements
specified in the introductory paragraph to this section.
(3) City-funded projects. In connection with the issuance of a building
permit for a City-funded project, the Building Official shall be
authorized to require no performance guaranty.
C. Building occupancy. If the person to whom a building permit has been
issued requests a temporary certificate of occupancy or is approved to
occupy the building during site improvements, the condition for such
issuance shall include the posting of a performance guaranty in the
form of cash or letter of credit as contemplated in this section. The
amount of the performance guaranty shall be equal to 125% of the cost
of satisfying all conditions specified for securing a permanent
certificate of occupancy. The first 20% of any such amount shall be
posted either in cash or by letter of credit, and the balance, 80% shall
be in the form of cash, letter of credit or a surety bond, the form and
substance of which shall be approved by the Building Official, whose
approval shall not unreasonably be withheld. Such amount shall be
determined by the applicant and verified by the City, and, if such
amount is not reasonably ascertainable by the City, the applicant may
be required by the department administering the certificate of
occupancy to provide a certification of amount by the applicant's
licensed engineer or architect, or, alternatively, a bona fide contract for
the work to be performed, including a provision authorizing
enforcement of the contract by the City in the event of a default by the
applicant. The posting of a performance guaranty under this Subsection
C shall be accompanied by an agreement, as referenced in Subsection
E, below. If a performance guaranty enforceable by the City is
otherwise posted for one or more of the purposes for which a
performance guaranty is required under this subsection, the amount of
the guaranty under his subsection may be reduced accordingly in order
to avoid a duplication of security for identical purposes.
D. Terms and provisions of performance guaranties.
(1) An acceptable surety bond shall be issued:
§ 770-16 WATERWORKS § 770-16
752:875
(a) By a company licensed to do business in the State of Michigan
by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Office
of Financial and Insurance Services;
(b) By a company with a rating of not less than "A" as determined
by A.M. Best Company or a similarly recognized rating agency;
(c) In a form that does not require the City of Royal Oak to expend
money to complete the project bonded and thereafter seek
reimbursement from the surety company;
(d) By a company with additional qualifications or in a form
containing additional provisions or restrictions as may
reasonably be required by the Building Official based upon the
need for provisions to protect the City under the particular
facts and circumstances; and
(e) With a provision specifying that any dispute on whether and/or
the amount of payment to be made by the surety, shall be
resolved by binding arbitration.
(2) A performance guaranty under this section shall be deposited with
the City Treasurer prior to the issuance of the requested permit or
certificate.
(3) The approval by the City, building permit, temporary certificate of
occupancy, and the like, shall prescribe the period of time before
completion of the improvements and/or actions for which the
performance guaranty has been required.
(4) The City, upon written request of the applicant, shall rebate
portions of the performance guaranty upon determination by the
City that the improvements and/or actions for which the rebate has
been requested have been satisfactorily completed in accordance
with the approved plans, permits, temporary certificate of
occupancy, and all other applicable laws, regulations and
ordinances.
(5) Upon satisfactory completion of all performance for which the
guaranty was required, as determined by the City, the City shall
return to the applicant the performance guaranty deposited, and
any interest accrued thereon, provided the City generally is not
anticipated to deposit the performance guaranty in an interestbearing
account.
(6) If the applicant fails to timely complete all improvements and/or
timely take the required action for which the performance guaranty
was required, the applicant shall be deemed to be in default. Unless
a shorter period has been specified by building permit, ordinance
or code, "timely" completion of improvements shall mean not
longer than two years from the date of issuance of the building
permit; provided, however, a longer period of time may be specified
§ 770-16 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-16
752:876
§ 770-17. Fees.
The City Commission shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and
expenses, for matters pertaining to this chapter, certificates of occupancy,
appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The City shall have
the authority to include fees for the use of engineering, planning, legal or
in an agreement entered into as provided in Subsection E, below,
or in an amendment of such agreement.
(7) In the event of a default, the City shall, following notice to the
applicant, have the right to use the performance guaranty
deposited, including any interest earned thereon, to complete the
improvements or take the appropriate actions to achieve
completion, and the application for site plan approval, building
permit, temporary certificate of occupancy, or the like, shall be
deemed to have authorized the right of the City to enter upon the
property to bring about such completion. A notice to an applicant
given under this section may be provided by one or more of the
following methods: regular mail, to the address on the application
for permit; and/or by delivery of the notice to the applicant at such
address, and/or by posting the property.
(8) In the event the performance guaranty posted is insufficient in
amount to allow the City to complete the improvements and/or
actions, the applicant shall be required to pay the City such
additional costs as needed for the completion of such
improvements and/or actions. Should the City use the performance
guaranty, or a portion thereof, to achieve such completion, any
amounts remaining shall first be applied to the City's
administrative costs, including, without limitation, attorneys' fees,
planning consultant fees, engineering consultant fees, and the like,
utilized in connection with securing the guaranty and completing
the improvements and/or actions, and the balance remaining
thereafter shall be refunded to the applicant.
(9) If the applicant has been required to post a performance guaranty
with another governmental agency other than the City for the
purpose of ensuring completion of an improvement, and the
amount and terms of such performance guaranty are deemed
adequate by the City, and are enforceable by the City, the applicant
shall not be required to deposit with the City a duplicate
performance guaranty for the same improvement.
E. Written agreement. At the time the performance guaranty is deposited
with the City, and prior to the issuance of permits, approved occupancy
of the building or temporary certificates of occupancy, the applicant
may be required to enter into an agreement executed by the applicant
and the City relative to the terms and provisions applicable to the use of
the performance guaranty; provided, however, in the absence of such
agreement, the terms and provisions of this section shall govern.
§ 770-16 WATERWORKS § 770-17
752:877
other special consultants. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the City
offices, and may be altered or amended only by the City Commission. No
permit, certificate, special land use on approval, or variance shall be issued
unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been paid in full,
nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the Board of Appeals,
unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
§ 770-18. Violations and penalties; abatement of nuisances.
Uses of land, buildings, or structures, erected, altered, razed, or converted
in violation of any provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be
nuisances per se. The court having jurisdiction shall order such nuisance
abated, and the owner and/or agent in charge shall be adjudged guilty of
maintaining a nuisance per se. Any person, persons, firm or corporation,
or any other acting on behalf of said person, persons, firm or corporation,
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or
any of the regulations adopted in pursuance hereof, or who shall hamper,
impede or interfere with the performance of the duties of the official or
agent of the City of Royal Oak or other officer under the provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction, and upon being found
responsible therefor, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 for the
first offense and $500 for a subsequent violation following the first offense.
Each act of violation and every day upon which such violation shall occur
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 770-17 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-18
752:878
ARTICLE IV
Zone Regulations and General Provisions
§ 770-19. Zone designations.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Royal Oak is hereby divided into
the following zones:
One-Family Residential
One-Family Large Lot Residential
Two-Family Residential
Multiple-Family Residential
Office Service
Neighborhood Business
Neighborhood Business II
Central Business District
Regional Business
General Business
General Industrial
Mixed Use 1
Mixed Use 2
Planned Unit Development
Special Redevelopment
§ 770-20. Zoning Map.
A. Identified. The zoning districts as provided in § 770-19, Zone
designations, are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled
"Zoning Map of the City of Royal Oak." The Zoning Map, along with all
notations, references, and other explanatory information, shall
accompany and be made a part of this chapter.
B. Authority. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Zoning
Map which may be published, a true and current copy of the Zoning
Map available for public inspection shall be located in and maintained
by the office of the City Clerk. The Clerk's copy shall be the final
authority as to the current status of any land, parcel, lot, zone, use,
building, or structure in the City.
C. Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of any of the districts indicated on the Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) A boundary indicated as approximately following the center line of
a street, highway, alley, easement, or right-of-way shall be
construed as following such center line. Upon vacation of a public
§ 770-19 WATERWORKS § 770-20
752:879
§ 770-21. Application of Zoning District regulations.
The regulations herein established within each zoning district shall be the
minimum regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety,
and general welfare and shall be uniform for each class of land, buildings,
structures, or uses throughout each district. Except as hereinafter provided,
district regulations shall be applied in the following manner:
right-of-way, the adjacent zone district to which the vacated land is
distributed shall govern the zone designation for the vacated land.
(2) A boundary indicated as approximately following a recorded lot line
or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as following such
line.
(3) A boundary indicated as approximately following a municipal
boundary line shall be construed as following such line.
(4) A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed
as being located at the center line of said right-of-way. Upon
vacation of a public right-of-way, the adjacent zone district from
which the vacated land is distributed shall be construed as the new
boundary line.
(5) Where an existing physical feature is at variance with that shown
on the Official Zoning Map or any other circumstances not covered
by Subsection C(1) through (4) preceding, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine the boundary line.
A. Uses in zoning districts.
(1) Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be permitted by right only if
specifically listed in the various zones or as determined in
compliance with Subsection A(4).
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses are permitted only if such uses are
clearly incidental to the permitted principal uses and specifically
permitted in the zone district.
(3) Special land uses. Special land uses are permitted at the discretion
of the Plan Commission, or as otherwise specified herein, according
to the terms of § 770-11, Special land uses; permit procedures, and
only if specifically listed in the various zones.
(4) Determination of similar use.
(a) In recognition that every potential land use cannot be
specifically addressed in this chapter, land uses may also be
permitted in a given zone if the Zoning Administrator
determines that the use is similar to a permitted or special land
use within the respective zone; the use is not specifically listed
as either a permitted or special land use in any other zone; and,
the use is not specifically prohibited by this chapter.
§ 770-20 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-21
752:880
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall select the use listed in that
zone which most closely resembles the proposed use and the
proposed use shall comply with all requirements and standards
applicable to that similar use. The determination as to whether
a proposed use is similar in nature and class to another
permitted or special land use within a zone shall be considered
an expansion of the use regulations. Any use determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be a similar use shall thereafter be
included in the enumerations of permitted or special land uses
in that zone.
(5) Outdoor uses and activities. All permitted uses, special land uses,
and accessory uses shall be conducted entirely and completely
within an enclosed building, except as expressly permitted by this
chapter. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
B. Application of area, width and frontage regulations.
(1) The area and width of a lot shall not be reduced below the minimum
requirements herein established for the zone in which such lot is
located, except as set forth in Subsection B(2). For purposes of this
chapter, two or more contiguous lots held under common
ownership shall be considered one lot.
(2) In One-Family Residential and One-Family Large Lot Residential
Zoning Districts, a single lot of record or two or more contiguous
lots under the same ownership shall not be further divided for the
purpose of erecting a single-family dwelling unless the following
conditions are met:
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine that the proposed
lot(s) are the same size or larger than the majority (50% or
more) of the developed lots in the area. The Zoning
Administrator shall evaluate the width, depth and area of the
lot(s) when determining compatibility with the developed lots
in the area. The proposed lot shall be equal to or greater in
width, depth and area than the developed lots in the area to be
considered under this provision. For purposes of this
subsection, "area" shall mean the following:
[1] Lots with the same zoning; and
[2] The "area" shall be determined as follows:
[a] Interior lots, within a defined block: analysis shall
include interior lots on both sides of a street upon
which the subject property is located; or
[b] Interior lots, when no defined block exists: analysis
shall include interior lots on both sides of the street
within 300 linear feet upon which the subject property
is located; or
§ 770-21 WATERWORKS § 770-21
752:881
[c] Corner lots: analysis shall include the corner lots
located at the same intersection upon which the
property is located.
(b) All other ordinance requirements shall apply.
(c) If all the criteria are not met, such lot(s) shall not be developed,
divided, utilized or sold in a matter which diminishes
compliance with lot and/or area requirements of this chapter.
(3) Every lot shall have direct access to and required frontage upon a
public or private street which has been approved by the City and
constructed to City standards.
C. Application of setback regulations.
(1) No part of a required setback for any building or use shall be
included as a part of a required setback for another building or use.
(2) All required front yard setback lines shall be the minimum
perpendicular distance measured from the right-of-way of the road
upon which a lot or parcel fronts to the nearest point of the
principal structure.
(3) All required side and rear yard setback lines shall be the minimum
perpendicular distance between the nearest point on the side or
rear of the structure and the side or rear lot line parallel thereto.
(4) On all corner lots, the required front setbacks shall be provided
along both street frontages, unless otherwise noted herein.
(5) Exceptions.
(a) Terraces, patios, decks and similar structures that are
unroofed, without walls or other continuous enclosure and
located at grade: no setback shall be required. Terraces,
patios, decks and similar structures that are unroofed, without
walls or other continuous enclosure and located six inches or
more above grade shall be located a minimum of three feet
from the rear lot line and a minimum of three feet from the side
lot line if located entirely within the rear yard. If located in the
side yard, all required setbacks for the principal structure shall
apply.
(b) Unenclosed porches and steps may extend from the face of the
building into a required front yard setback a distance not more
than seven feet, and shall not exceed one story in height.
Enclosed porches and other enclosed appurtenances shall be
considered an integral part of the building to which they are
attached and shall be subject to all yard requirements thereof.
(c) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, cornices,
eaves, gutters, bay windows, buttresses and similar features
§ 770-21 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-21
752:882
§ 770-22. Accessory buildings.
may project into any required yard setback a maximum of
24 inches. Cantilevers, bays and other similar projections
containing floor area shall meet the minimum setbacks for the
building.
D. Application of height regulations.
(1) No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed,
or structurally altered to exceed the height limit hereinafter
established for the zone in which the building is located.
(2) Measuring height. The height of a building is the distance between
the average of the finished grade at the base of the front of the
building to the mid-point of the roof surface for pitched roofs and to
the roofline for flat roofs. (See § 770-8, definition of "building
height," Figure 2.225)
(3) Exceptions. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate
and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights,
towers, steeples, screens, chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks,
television, radio and satellite antennae, belfries, stage towers or
scenery lofts, ornamental spires, flagpoles, wind or solar energy
systems, or similar structures may be erected above the height
limits herein prescribed, but shall remain proportional to the
principal building. To reduce the impact on adjacent properties and
public rights-of-way, all roof structures shall be effectively screened
and setback from the building edge a distance equal to its height or
a distance as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
No such structure shall exceed by more than 15 feet above the
height limit of the district in which it is located. [Amended
6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
E. Location and number of buildings on a lot of record.
(1) Every building erected, altered, or moved shall be located on a lot
of record as defined herein.
(2) There shall be only one single-family dwelling permitted per lot,
unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this chapter. Where there
is more than one single-family dwelling located on a lot of record at
the time of adoption of this chapter, said lot shall not be divided
except in conformity with the requirements of this chapter.
F. The location and number of buildings within a site condominium shall
be subject to the standards set forth in § 770-14, Site condominium
project regulations.
225. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 770-21 WATERWORKS § 770-22
752:883
A. Requirements applicable to accessory buildings within residential
districts.
(1) No accessory building shall be built upon a lot or parcel unless and
until a principal building is erected, and shall not exceed two
accessory structure(s) per lot.
(2) Accessory buildings shall only be located within the side or rear
yards. Accessory buildings not located entirely within the rear yard
shall comply with all setbacks required for the principal building.
(3) The accessory building may extend beyond the first floor of the
front building line by no more than seven feet, provided it does not
encroach into the required front yard setback.
(4) Accessory buildings shall be located a minimum of three feet from
the adjacent rear lot line and a minimum of three feet from the side
lot line when located entirely within the rear yard.
(5) The sum total floor area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed
10% of the lot area, provided that in no instance shall the total
ground floor area of all accessory buildings exceed 800 square feet.
(6) Accessory buildings shall be included in the total lot coverage
limitations.
(7) Accessory buildings shall not exceed 13 feet in height. Additional
height may be permitted of up to 15 feet, provided one additional
foot of setback is provided beyond the minimum required setback
for each additional one foot in height.
(8) The width of an accessory building shall not be greater than 50% of
the total width of the principal building's primary facade as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(9) Where a corner lot adjoins the side boundary of a lot in a residential
zone, no part of any accessory building within 25 feet of the
common lot line shall be nearer the street bounding the front lot
line than the required front yard setback along such street.
(10) Where a public alley lies to the rear of the lot and a garage is
entered at right angles to a public alley, it shall be setback no less
than 10 feet from the rear lot line. Accessory buildings shall comply
with § 770-29, Visibility at intersections.
(11) An accessory building does not include a combination of services,
which makes it easily convertible to habitable space. The
combination of services may include water, sewer, gas, electric,
telephone, and/or cable as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(12) All accessory buildings shall have either a mansard, hip, gambrel or
gable roof and shall be compatible with the principal structure.
§ 770-22 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-22
752:884
§ 770-23. Minimum floor area of dwelling units.
B. Requirements applicable to accessory buildings within all other zones.
Accessory buildings shall be subject to the same placement, coverage
and height requirements as principal buildings in the zone district in
which it is located.
A. One-Family Residential and One-Family Large Lot Residential Zones.
The minimum usable floor area for a single-family dwelling unit shall be
determined by the minimum usable floor area of the existing adjacent
single-family dwelling units. The adjacent single-family dwelling unit
with the smallest usable floor area shall establish the minimum usable
floor area; however, in no case shall the minimum usable floor area as
contained in the records of the City Assessor's office be less than 1,000
square feet for a one-family dwelling or 1,300 square feet for a onefamily
large lot dwelling. Adjacent dwelling units shall be those units
located to the side or front of the subject parcel. The front and side
property line of the subject parcel shall be extended in either direction,
crossing no more than one street right-of-way until an adjacent parcel
with an existing structure is reached. Single-family dwelling units
adjacent to the rear property line shall not be considered and are
hereby specifically excluded from consideration when determining
minimum usable floor area.
B. Two-Family Residential Zone. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered for a one-family dwelling shall conform to the
usable floor area requirements given in Subsection A; for two-family
residences the usable floor area for each dwelling shall be determined
by the minimum usable floor area of the existing adjacent two-family
residences. The adjacent two-family dwelling unit with the smallest
floor area in an individual unit shall establish the minimum usable floor
area; if none exists, the adjacent single-family dwellings shall be used,
and each dwelling unit within the proposed two-family unit shall be 80%
of that required for the one-family dwelling as determined by
Subsection A. However, in no case shall a two-family dwelling unit have
an individual unit with a usable floor area below 800 square feet.
Adjacent two-family dwelling units shall be those units located to the
side or front of the subject parcel. The front and side property line of
the subject parcel shall be extended in either direction, crossing no
more than one street right-of-way until an adjacent parcel with an
existing two-family dwelling unit is reached. Two-family dwelling units
adjacent to the rear of property line shall not be considered and are
hereby specifically excluded from consideration.
C. Multiple-Family Residential Zone. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered for a one-family dwelling shall conform to the
usable floor area requirement given in Subsection A; for two-family
residences, the usable floor area for each unit shall conform to the
requirements established in Subsection A; for multiple dwellings other
than special group-housing developments, the minimum square feet of
§ 770-22 WATERWORKS § 770-23
752:885
§ 770-24. One-family dwelling unit standards.
No site built, mobile homes, modular housing, or prefabricated housing
located outside a mobile home park shall be permitted unless said dwelling
unit conforms to the following standards:
§ 770-25. Home occupations.
All home occupations shall be subject to the following requirements:
living space for each family shall be subject to the following space
requirements:
Number of Bedrooms
Minimum Living Space
(square feet)
Efficiency 250
1-bedroom unit 450
2-bedroom unit 600
3-bedroom unit 750
A. Square footage. A dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum floor
area requirements of this chapter.
B. Dimensions. A dwelling unit shall have a minimum width across any
front, side, or rear elevation of 20 feet.
C. Foundation. A dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent
foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the Building
Code and shall be securely anchored to the foundation in order to
prevent displacement during windstorms. Dwelling units shall not be
installed with attached wheels. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any
exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage, or chassis.
A. A home occupation must be clearly incidental to the principal use of the
dwelling unit for dwelling purposes. No more than 10% of the floor area
of the dwelling shall be devoted to a home occupation. All activities
shall be carried on within an enclosed structure. There shall be no
outside display of any kind, or other external or visible evidence of the
conduct of a home occupation.
B. A home occupation shall not change the residential character of the
premises or surrounding residential area, both in terms of use and
appearance.
C. A home occupation use shall not create a nuisance or endanger the
health, safety, welfare, or enjoyment of any other person in the area, by
reason of noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, unsanitary or unsightly
conditions, fire hazards, or the like, involved in or resulting from such
home occupation.
§ 770-23 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-25
752:886
§ 770-26. Family day-care homes.
D. Only a resident of the dwelling shall be engaged or employed in the
home occupation.
E. There shall be no vehicular traffic permitted for the home occupation,
other than domestic trips and routine deliveries normally expected for a
single dwelling in a residential area.
F. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the dwelling,
and no such occupation may be conducted in any accessory building
whether detached or attached. There shall be no exterior operations,
storage or display of materials, products, inventory or equipment of any
kind, and no exterior signage, except one commercial vehicle may be
parked on the premises pursuant to the requirements of § 770-28,
Restrictions on parking of commercial vehicles.
G. The home occupation shall not require, or result in, any interior or
exterior alterations to the dwelling or property upon which the dwelling
is located.
H. No material or mechanical or electrical equipment may be utilized
except that which is necessarily, customarily and ordinarily used for
household or leisure purposes.
I. Direct sales of products to individuals on the premises of a home
occupation shall not be permitted.
J. No storage or display of goods within the dwelling unit shall be visible
from outside the dwelling unit.
K. The home occupation shall not require additional off-street parking
spaces or loading/unloading areas.
A. The intent of this section is to establish standards for day-care facilities
which will insure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain
the character of the neighborhood.
B. Standards for family day-care homes. Family day-care homes are
subject to the following requirements:
(1) The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements
for the zone in which it is located.
(2) The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the
character of the neighborhood.
(3) There shall be an outdoor play area of at least 300 square feet
provided on the premises. Said play area shall not be located within
the front yard setback.
§ 770-25 WATERWORKS § 770-26
752:887
§ 770-27. Essential services.
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law
and other ordinances of the City. The construction of buildings associated
with essential services shall be subject to the provisions of § 770-12, Site
plan review. Otherwise, the construction, maintenance, and alteration of
essential services shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 770-28. Restrictions on parking of commercial vehicles.
In districts zoned One-Family, Two-Family or Multiple-Family Residential,
for each dwelling unit on a lot not more than one commercial vehicle, owned
by an occupant, and having a weight fully equipped of not more than 6,000
pounds may be parked on the premises.
§ 770-29. Visibility at intersections.
No structure, wall, fence, or landscaping shall be erected, maintained or
planted on any lot which will obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle
approaching an intersection of a street, highway, alley or a driveway. A
ten-foot triangular area measured along the public right-of-way line and
driveway line shall be provided from the intersection of any street, highway,
alley and driveway. Landscaping under 30 inches and deciduous trees
where all branches are not less than 12 feet above the street level may
be permitted within the triangular area. (See Figure 9, Visibility at
Intersections.226) All landscaping shall comply with City of Royal Oak
Chapter 710, Trees, Art. I, Tree, Shrub and Plant Protection, Planting in
Public Areas. The Plan Commission, at its discretion and as part of site plan
review, may approve an alternate setback if deemed necessary based on the
site conditions.
§ 770-30. General building design and project compatibility.
(4) All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a fence that is designed
to discourage climbing, and is at least four feet in height, but no
higher than six feet.
(5) The hours of operation shall not exceed 16 hours within a twentyfour-
hour period. Activity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. shall be limited so that the dropoff and pickup of children is
not disruptive to neighboring residents.
(6) Applicable licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of this section is to ensure that the physical
characteristics of proposed new commercial and multiple-family
building(s), construction or significant facade renovations are
226. Editor's Note: Figure 9 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 770-26 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-30
752:888
compatible when considered within the context of the surrounding
area. Facade renovations determined by the Zoning Administrator
to be a significant change in character and materials shall require
site plan review to ensure compatibility. Design guidelines are
further intended to ensure building designs are compatible with
and/or enhance the characteristics of the surrounding area in
terms of scale, mass, building patterns, facade articulation, and
incorporating design elements of prevalent neighborhood
architectural style; and that building additions are compatible with
the principal building.
(2) These standards are further intended to:
(a) Stabilize and reinforce property values to protect private and
public investment.
(b) Preserve and reinforce the natural, historic, and architectural
qualities of neighborhoods.
(c) Establish and enhance aesthetic and architectural
compatibility within neighborhoods and commercial areas.
(d) Attract residential, business and industrial development and
redevelopment by establishing neighborhood and commercial
conditions that make for an aesthetic and pleasant living and
working environment.
B. General standards.
(1) Architectural character. New buildings and expansion and/or
alteration of existing buildings in or adjacent to existing developed
areas shall be compatible with and/or enhance the established
architectural character of such areas by using a design that is
complementary. Compatibility may be achieved through techniques
related to rooflines, building mass, outdoor spaces, relationships to
the street, window and door patterns, and/or the use of building
materials.
(2) Building orientation and entrances. To the maximum extent
feasible, primary facades and entries shall face the adjacent street.
Primary building entrances shall be readily identifiable and
accessible, with at least one main entrance facing and open directly
onto a connecting walkway with pedestrian frontage.
(3) Quality of materials. Building materials used shall be an
enhancement of the area in terms of durability, appearance and
performance and shall be appropriate for the function of the
building. In the selection of materials, the following additional
considerations shall apply:
(a) Low maintenance shall be a major consideration.
§ 770-30 WATERWORKS § 770-30
752:889
(b) Materials shall blend with or enhance those existing on
adjacent properties.
(c) One dominate material shall be selected, with a preference
towards masonry and stone. Exterior insulation and finish
systems (EFIS) are discouraged at the ground floor building
level.
(4) Variation in massing. To avoid large and dominant building mass,
the following measures shall be applied:
(a) Horizontal masses shall not exceed a height/width ratio of 1:3
without substantial variation in massing that may include a
change in height and/or projecting or recessed elements.
(b) Changes in mass shall be related to entrances, the integral
structure and/or the organization of interior spaces and
activities and not merely for cosmetic effect. False fronts or
parapets create an insubstantial appearance and are
prohibited.
(5) Character and image. Building design shall contribute to the
uniqueness of a district, and/or the community as a whole with
predominant materials, elements, features, color range and activity
areas tailored specifically to the site and its context.
C. Standards specific to multiple-family uses.
(1) Architectural character.
(a) In the case of a multiple-building development, each individual
building shall include predominant characteristics shared by
all buildings in the development so that the development forms
a cohesive place within the zoning district or community.
(b) Exterior building walls shall be subdivided and proportioned to
human scale, using offsets, projections, overhangs and
recesses, in order to add architectural interest and variety and
avoid the effect of a single, massive wall with no relation to
human size.
(2) Privacy considerations. Elements of the development shall be
arranged to maximize the opportunity for privacy by the residents
of the project and minimize infringement on the privacy of
adjoining land uses.
(3) Outdoor spaces. Buildings and extensions of buildings shall be
designed to form outdoor spaces such as balconies, arcades,
terraces, decks or courtyards, and to integrate development with
the landscape to the extent reasonably feasible.
D. Standard specific to office and commercial uses outside of the Central
Business District.
§ 770-30 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-30
752:890
(1) Facade treatment.
(a) In order to add architectural interest and variety and avoid the
effect of a single, long or massive wall with no relation to
human size, the following standards shall apply:
[1] Architectural interest shall be provided through the use of
repetitious patterns of color, texture and material
modules, at least one of which shall repeat horizontally.
[2] Building facades shall incorporate recess projections,
cornice work, decorative finish or spandrel windows.
Blank walls shall not face a public street. The ground floor
windows, awnings, and arcades shall be incorporated to
encourage pedestrian activity at the street facing level.
[3] Primary building entrances shall be clearly defined and
recessed or framed by a sheltering element such as an
awning, arcade or portico in order to provide shelter from
the summer sun and winter weather.
(b) Base and top treatments. All facades shall have:
[1] A recognizable "base" consisting of (but not limited to)
thicker walls, ledges or sills; integrally textured materials
such as stone or other masonry; integrally colored and
patterned materials such as smooth-finished stone or tile;
lighter or darker colored materials, mullions or panels; or
planters.
[2] A recognizable "top" consisting of (but not limited to)
cornice treatments, other than just colored "stripes" or
"bands," with integrally textured materials such as stone
or other masonry or differently colored materials; sloping
roof with overhangs and brackets; or stepped parapets.
E. Standard specific to uses within the Central Business District.
(1) Storefronts.
(a) Storefronts shall be integrally designed with the upper floors
to be compatible with the overall facade character. Buildings
with multiple storefronts shall be unified though the use of
architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings,
signage and lighting fixtures.
(b) Ground floor retail, service and restaurant uses shall have
large pane display windows. Such windows shall be framed by
the surrounding wall and relate to the original building's
architecture.
(2) Awnings. Awnings shall be no longer than a single building front.
§ 770-30 WATERWORKS § 770-30
752:891
(3) Build-to lines for streetfront buildings. Build-to lines based on a
consistent relationship of buildings to the street sidewalk shall be
established for new buildings and, to the extent reasonably
feasible, for additions or modifications of existing buildings, in
order to form visually continuous, pedestrian-oriented streetfronts
with no vehicle use area between building faces and the street.
(a) To establish build-to lines, buildings shall be built to the front
right-of-way line, and in case of corner lots, both street rightsof-
way, or located and designed to align or approximately align
with any previously established building/sidewalk relationships
that are consistent with this standard. [Amended 4-21-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(b) Exceptions to the build-to line standards shall be permitted in
the following circumstances:
[1] In order to form an outdoor space such as a plaza,
courtyard, patio or garden between a building and the
sidewalk; such a larger front yard area shall have
landscaping, low walls, fencing or railings, a tree canopy,
and/or other similar site improvements along the sidewalk
designed for pedestrian interest, comfort and visual
continuity.
[2] If the building is adjacent to a full arterial or major arterial
street, and the City has determined that an alternative
streetfront building should be considered due to high
volume and/or speed of traffic on the adjacent street(s);
and/or an established pattern of existing buildings that
makes a pedestrian-oriented streetfront nonfeasible.
[3] In the case of a large building with employment, vehiclerelated
or other uses that have little relationship to
pedestrians, or that have a need to limit ground floor
windows, where the build-to line is not feasible for the
entire building.
[4] Such an alternative to the street sidewalk must include a
connecting walkway(s) and may include internal walkways
or other directly connecting outdoor spaces such as
plazas, courtyards, squares or gardens.
(4) Facade orientation. The front facades of all structures shall be
oriented towards the streets they front, with a principal, functional
entrance for the public or direct-entry access into the structure
from the street frontage. A secondary access may be provided to
the side or rear facade. In the case of corner lots, a corner entrance
may be provided in lieu of a front entrance, or a second entrance
may be provided to the side street. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-04227]
§ 770-30 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-30
752:892
§ 770-31. (Reserved)
§ 770-32. (Reserved)
§ 770-33. (Reserved)
§ 770-34. One-Family Residential.
(5) Streetfront width. The entire streetfront of a property shall be
occupied by a structure or building, unless a lesser percentage is
determined to be necessary and advisable by the Planning
Commission in the course of its site plan review process, but in no
case shall such percentage be less than 50%. [Added 4-21-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(6) Parking structure design. To the extent reasonably feasible, all
parking structures shall meet the following design criteria:
(a) Where parking structures front streets, retail and other uses
shall be required along the ground level frontage to minimize
interruptions in pedestrian interest and activity. The Plan
Commission may grant an exception to this standard for all or
part of the ground level frontage on streets with low pedestrian
interest or activity.
(b) Awnings, signage and other architectural elements shall be
incorporated to encourage pedestrian activity at the street
facing level.
(c) Architectural elements, such as openings, sill details, emphasis
on vertical proportions such as posts, recessed horizontal
panels and other architectural features shall be used to
establish human scale at the street facing level.
(d) The architectural design of structures shall be compatible in
architectural design with adjacent buildings in terms of style,
mass, material, height, roof pitch and other exterior elements.
(e) Auto entrances shall be located to minimize pedestrian/auto
conflicts.
F. Plan Commission modifications to requirements. The Plan Commission
in the course of its site plan review process may determine design
standards as deemed necessary and advisable to ensure compliance
with this chapter and/or minimize impact on the surrounding area and
existing characteristics and development patterns.
A. Purpose. This zone is composed in those areas of the City where the
principal use is intended to be single-family detached dwellings. In
227. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E(4) as Subsection
E(6).
§ 770-30 WATERWORKS § 770-34
752:893
addition to the dwellings permitted in this zone, there are certain
nonresidential uses which may be compatible with and supportive of a
medium-density residential environment and may be permitted either
by right or through the special land use approval.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) A single-family detached dwelling, subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-23, Minimum floor area of dwelling units, and
§ 770-24, One-family dwelling unit standards.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-25, Home occupations.
(4) Public and private schools with curriculum equivalent to
kindergarten through 12th grade.
(5) Publicly owned and operated museums or libraries.
(6) Accessory buildings and structures, subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-22, Accessory buildings.
(7) Family day-care homes as an accessory use and subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-26, Family day-care homes.
(8) Adult foster care family homes and small group homes with a
capacity to receive six or fewer adults, child foster care family
homes and child foster care family group homes subject to the
conditions of the state regulatory agencies.
C. Special land uses.
(1) Group family day-care homes and day-care centers, when
incorporated with an existing church or school, subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-59, Day-care facilities.
(2) Police and fire stations, public safety buildings, public utility
buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer
stations and gas regulator stations, but not including service or
storage yards.
(3) Churches and other institutions for religious worship, subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-74, Churches and other
institutions for religious worship.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast operations, subject to the requirements set forth
in § 770-78, Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(5) Residential accessory parking lots, subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-73, Residential accessory off-street parking lots.
§ 770-34 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-34
752:894
(6) Senior accessory housing subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-71 Senior accessory housing.
(7) Golf courses and country clubs.
(8) Cemeteries subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-50,
Cemeteries.
(9) Community centers subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-51, Community centers.
(10) Those uses/parcels located in the One-Family (Single-Family)
Residential Overlay District, subject to the requirements set forth
in § 770-58, Single-Family Residential Overlay District.
(11) Reuse of school facilities when the existing principal building(s) are
maintained, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-87,
Special redevelopment projects.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Lot size. No lot shall be less than 6,000 square feet in area, unless
otherwise modified by § 770-21B, Application of area, width and
frontage regulations.
(2) Lot width. No interior lot shall be less than 50 feet in width, while a
corner lot shall be no less than 60 feet in width unless otherwise
modified by § 770-21B, Application of area, width and frontage
regulations.
(3) Lot depth. No lot shall have a depth of less than 100 feet, unless
otherwise modified by § 770-21B, Application of area, width and
frontage regulations.
(4) Height. No principal building shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(5) Front yard setback.
(a) Interior lot. All principal buildings shall be set back the greater
of 25 feet or the average setback of adjacent dwellings, but
shall not exceed 50 feet from the front property line.
(b) Corner lot. A front yard abutting the side street of a corner lot
where the adjacent lot does not front upon said side street shall
not be less than 10 feet in width; provided a lot with frontage of
less than 50 feet in width may have the side yard abutting the
street reduced to not less than eight feet. A front yard abutting
the side street of a corner lot where the adjacent lot does front
upon said side street shall maintain the minimum setbacks as
required for an interior lot.
(6) Side yard setback.
§ 770-34 WATERWORKS § 770-34
752:895
§ 770-35. One-Family Large Lot Residential.
(a) For lots equal to or greater than 45 feet in width at the building
line, all principal buildings shall be set back no less than five
feet from the side property line. The total of the two side yard
setbacks shall equal no less than 15 feet if no attached
accessory building is provided in the side yard.
(b) For lots less than 45 feet in width at the building line, the side
yard setback shall be a minimum of four feet. The total of the
two side yard setbacks shall be no less than 12 feet if no
attached accessory building is provided.
(c) For all lots without accessory buildings located in the side
yard, an open area a minimum of eight feet in width
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward and
suitable for a driveway shall be provided in one side yard.
(7) Rear yard setback. All principal buildings shall be set back no less
than 35 feet from the rear property line.
(8) Lot coverage. On lots less than 6,000 square feet, the lot coverage
of all buildings shall not exceed 35% of the site, provided that in no
instance shall the total ground floor area of all buildings exceed
1,800 square feet. On lots equal to or larger than 6,000 square feet,
the lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 30% of the site.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
(9) Maximum floor area. No single-family residential structure shall
exceed 3,500 square feet of usable floor area. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
A. Purpose. This zone is composed of those areas of the City where the
principal use is intended to be single-family detached dwellings on
large lots. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zone, there are
certain nonresidential uses which may be compatible with and
supportive of a low-density residential environment and may be
permitted either by right or through special land use approval.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted uses allowed in the One-Family Residential Zone.
C. Special land uses.
(1) All special land uses allowed in the One-Family Residential Zone.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
§ 770-34 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-35
752:896
§ 770-36. Two-Family Residential.
(1) Lot size. No lot shall be less than 13,000 square feet in area, unless
otherwise modified by § 770-21B, Application of area, width and
frontage regulations.
(2) Lot width. No interior lot shall be less than 70 feet in width, unless
otherwise modified by § 770-21B, Application of area, width and
frontage regulations.
(3) Lot depth. No lot shall have a depth of less than 100 feet, unless
otherwise modified by § 770-21B, Application of area, width and
frontage regulations.
(4) Height. No principal building shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(5) Front yard setback.
(a) Interior lot. All principal buildings shall be set back the greater
of 25 feet or the average setback of adjacent dwellings, but
shall not exceed 50 feet from the front property line.
(b) Corner lot. A front yard abutting the side street of a corner lot
where the adjacent lot does not front upon said side street shall
not be less than 10 feet in width A front yard abutting the side
street of a corner lot where the adjacent lot does front upon
said side street shall maintain the minimum setbacks as
required for an interior lot.
(6) Side yard setback.
(a) All principal buildings shall be set back no less than five feet
from the side property line. The total of the two side yard
setbacks shall equal no less than 15 feet if no attached
accessory building is provided in the side yard.
(b) For all lots, an open area a minimum of eight feet in width,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward and
suitable for a driveway, shall be provided in one side yard.
(7) Rear yard setback. All principal buildings shall be set back no less
than 35 feet from the rear property line.
(8) Lot coverage. The lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed
30%.
(9) Maximum floor area. No single-family residential structure shall
exceed 3,500 square feet of usable floor area. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
A. Purpose. This zone is composed of those areas of the City where the
principal use is intended to be two-family dwellings. The regulations of
this zone are designed to permit a higher density than is allowed in the
§ 770-35 WATERWORKS § 770-36
752:897
One-Family Residential Zone. In addition to the dwellings permitted
in this zone, there are certain nonresidential uses which may be
compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may
be permitted either by right or through special land use approval.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted uses allowed in the One-Family Residential Zone.
Single-family detached dwellings shall be subject to the standards
set forth in the One-Family Residential Zone.
(2) Two-family dwellings, subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-23, Minimum floor area of dwelling units.
C. Special land uses.
(1) All special land uses allowed in the One-Family Residential Zone.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements, shall
apply to all permitted and special uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Lot size. No lot shall be less than 9,000 square feet in area.
(2) Lot width. No interior lot shall be less than 50 feet in width, while a
corner lot shall be no less than 60 feet in width.
(3) Lot depth. No lot shall have a depth of less than 100 feet.
(4) Height. No principal buildings shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(5) Front yard setback.
(a) Interior lot. All principal buildings shall be set back the greater
of 25 feet or the average setback of adjacent dwellings, but
shall not exceed 50 feet from the front property line.
(b) Corner lot. A front yard abutting the side street of a corner lot
where the adjacent lot does not front upon said side street shall
not be less than 10 feet in width. A front yard abutting the side
street of a corner lot where the adjacent lot does front upon
said side street shall maintain the minimum setbacks as
required for an interior lot.
(6) Side yard setback.
(a) All principal buildings shall be set back no less than five feet
from the side property line. The total of the two side yard
setbacks shall equal no less than 15 feet if no attached garage
is provided.
(b) For all lots, an open area a minimum of eight feet in width,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward and
suitable for a driveway, shall be provided in one side yard.
§ 770-36 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-36
752:898
§ 770-37. Multiple-Family Residential.
(7) Rear yard setback. All principal buildings shall be set back no less
than 35 feet from the rear property line.
(8) Lot coverage. The lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed
30%.
A. Purpose. This zone is composed of those areas of the City where the
principal use is intended to be multiple-family dwellings at a higher
density than permitted in Two-Family Residential Zone. These areas
would be located near major streets for good accessibility and be
designed to be compatible with adjacent single-family areas. Various
types and sizes of residential units, for ownership or rental, would
thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family
groups in the community without creating an unreasonable burden to
existing community facilities, utilities, or services. In addition to the
dwellings permitted in this zone, there are certain nonresidential uses
which may be compatible with and supportive of a residential
environment and may be permitted either by right or through special
land use approval.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted uses allowed in the Two-Family Residential Zone.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings, subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-23, Minimum floor area of dwelling units, including
maintenance and management buildings, community buildings,
and private swimming pools intended to serve the occupants of the
multiple-family dwelling complex.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings, subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-23, Minimum floor area of dwelling units.
C. Special land uses.
(1) All special land uses allowed in the Two-Family Residential Zone.
(2) Senior housing, convalescent centers and adult foster care
congregate facilities subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-72, Senior housing, adult foster care congregate facility and
convalescent centers.
(3) Small, medium and large adult foster care group homes subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-60, Adult foster care facilities.
(4) Group day-care homes and day-care centers subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-59, Day-care facilities.
(5) Community centers subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-51, Community centers.
§ 770-36 WATERWORKS § 770-37
752:899
§ 770-38. Office Service.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings. Single-family detached dwellings
shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the One-Family
Residential Zone.
(2) Two-family dwellings. Two-family dwellings shall be subject to the
requirements set forth in the Two-Family Zone.
(3) Multiple-family dwellings shall be subject to the following:
(a) Lot size. Multiple-family dwellings shall provide 9,000 square
feet for the first two units and 3,000 square feet for each
additional unit.
(b) Height. No principal buildings shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(c) Setbacks. All building shall be setback from the front, side and
rear property line no less than 25 feet or a setback as may be
determined to be necessary and advisable by the Plan
Commission during the course of its site plan review process.
(d) Distance between buildings. No principal buildings shall be
closer than 20 feet from another principal building or a
distance as may be determined to be necessary and advisable
by the Plan Commission during the course of its site plan
review process.
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to provide locations for uses which
primarily consist of office uses. The Office Service Zone is intended to
provide for a compatible transition between commercial and residential
areas and/or between thoroughfares and residential areas. The uses
within the zone shall be characterized by the following: either operates
during normal business hours or has operating characteristics which do
not adversely affect adjacent residential areas; produce a low volume of
traffic; and are located in buildings which are architecturally
compatible with the surrounding area.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Business, administrative, and professional offices. [Amended
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
(2) Medical and dental offices, including outpatient medical clinics,
medical laboratories, and home health care services, subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-79, Hospitals and outpatient
medical clinics, if applicable. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-16]
§ 770-37 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-38
752:900
(3) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations without drivethrough
facilities.
(4) Public buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(5) Retail sale of drug and health care products, when occupying no
more than 25% of the floor area or 5,000 square feet, whichever is
less, of a building containing medical and dental offices, clinics and
medical laboratories.
(6) Business, technical or trade schools and automobile driving
schools.
(7) Libraries, museums and fine art centers.
(8) Churches and other institutions for religious worship, subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-74, Churches and other
institutions for religious worship.
C. Special land uses.
(1) Hospitals subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-79,
Hospitals and outpatient medical clinics. [Amended 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-16]
(2) Veterinary offices and hospitals, including accessory boarding,
provided no outdoor exercise runs or pens are permitted.
(3) Day-care centers subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-59,
Day-care facilities.
(4) Public utility transformer stations and substations, telephone
exchanges, and public utility offices.
(5) Research laboratories, provided that no heavy mechanical
equipment is used.
(6) Drive-through facilities for banks, credit unions, savings and loan
associations.
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) Heliopad when accessory to a hospital and subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-80, Heliopads.
(9) Ambulance services.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Height. No principal building shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(2) Setbacks.
§ 770-38 WATERWORKS § 770-38
752:901
§ 770-39. Neighborhood Business.
(a) Front yard setback. All buildings shall be set back no less than
25 feet.
(b) Side yard setback. All buildings shall be set back no less than
10 feet, except when a property abuts a street, upon which the
abutting property is a residential zone that fronts on said
street, the side and/or rear yards as measured from said street
shall be not less than the lesser of 25 feet or the average of the
actual setbacks of said adjacent residence(s) from said street.
(c) Rear yard setback. All buildings shall be set back no less than
25 feet, unless one additional foot is granted within the front
yard setback for each foot decreased from the rear yard
setback, not to be less than 15 feet.
(d) Alternately, the Plan Commission during the course of its site
plan review process may establish a greater or lesser setback
as it determines necessary and advisable. In determining such
yard setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
A. Purpose. This zone is designed primarily for the convenience of persons
residing in the City by providing office, limited retail and serviceoriented
businesses that serve the adjacent and surrounding
neighborhoods. It is the purpose of these regulations to permit
development of the enumerated functions in a manner which is
compatible with the adjacent residences. Specifically excluded from
this zone are uses which are regulated by § 770-82 of this chapter as
large scale retail establishments or uses that may generate significant
nuisance conditions.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted uses allowed in the Office Service Zone.
(2) Food and beverage sales, including convenience grocery stores
without sales of packaged alcoholic beverages. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(3) Photographic, art and music lesson studios.
(4) Retail sales of flowers, gifts, antiques, art and collectibles.
(5) Small appliance and electronic sales and repair, such as vacuum
cleaners, lamps, television and video and audio equipment and
computers and other nonmotorized home and garden equipment.
§ 770-38 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-39
752:902
(6) Standard and carry-out restaurants that do not dispense alcoholic
beverages and are not located within a shopping center.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
(7) Retail sales of drug and health care products, music, books and
personal attire, musical instruments, sporting goods, pet shops,
hardware, paint and home decorating supplies, home accessories,
floor coverings, furniture, automotive parts and accessories.
(8) Laundromats and dry-cleaning outlets.
(9) Personal service establishments, such as barber, hair salons, nail
salons, tanning salons, watch and jewelry repair, small electronic
appliance and computer repair, tailors and alteration shops, shoe
repair, locksmith, exterminators, janitorial services, carpet and
upholstery cleaning services, copy shops without off-set printing,
dog grooming facilities with no outdoor exercise runs or pens.
(10) Video rental and sales.
(11) Photographic film processing and camera shops.
(12) Fitness centers/training studios including use of equipment or
space for the purpose of physical exercise, including activities such
as aerobics, court sports, weight lifting/strength training and dance
and martial arts training with a gross floor area of 2,500 square
feet or less.
(13) Nonmotorized vehicle, such as bicycles and skateboards, sales and
repair.
(14) Rental leasing storefronts for consumer electronics, appliances,
attire, home health care and small-scale personal recreational
equipment.
(15) Surface parking lots, subject to requirements set forth in Article IX.
(16) Tobacconists, provided they comply with the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-
Free Air Law, Michigan Public Act 188 of 2009. [Added 10-1-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(17) Shopping centers without standard or fast-food restaurants.
[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
C. Special land uses.
(1) Veterinary offices and hospitals, including accessory boarding,
provided no outdoor exercise runs or pens are permitted.
(2) Public utility transformer stations and substations, and telephone
exchanges.
(3) Outdoor cafe service operated by a restaurant or other food
establishment which sells food or drinks for immediate
§ 770-39 WATERWORKS § 770-39
752:903
consumption, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-70,
Outdoor cafe service.
(4) Establishments serving alcohol, such as, but not limited to,
restaurants, bars, and lounges, subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(5) Residential dwelling units above a first floor of a permitted use
when the ground floor street frontage is a permitted use other than
parking or a special land use.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast operations, subject to the requirements set forth
in § 770-78, Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(7) Day-care centers subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-59,
Day-care facilities.
(8) Funeral homes.
(9) Drive-through facilities for any permitted or special land use.
(10) Interior decorators, upholsterers, design and building contractors
with workshops and repair facilities and similar professions
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
(11) Temporary or transient outdoor sales of seasonal goods, subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-69, Seasonal and transient
display of products or materials intended for sale.
(12) Caterers.
(13) Fitness centers/training studios including use of equipment or
space for the purpose of physical exercise, including activities such
as aerobics, court sports, weight lifting/strength training,
swimming and dance and martial arts training with a gross floor
area greater than 2,500 square feet.
(14) Cigar bars, provided they comply with the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-
Free Air Law, Michigan Public Act 188 of 2009. [Added 10-1-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(15) Standard or fast-food restaurants located within a shopping center.
[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
(16) Food and beverage sales, including convenience grocery stores
with sales of packaged alcoholic beverages, subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages.
[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(17) Sales of packaged alcoholic beverages by any permitted or special
land use, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of
alcoholic beverages. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 770-39 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-39
752:904
§ 770-40. Neighborhood Business II.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Height. No principal building shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) No setback shall be required except where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone. If a setback is to be provided, it
shall not be less than five feet. Where the property is adjacent
to a residential zone, the setback shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback. Where the property is on the same
side of a street, in the same block, as a property zoned
residential, with or without an intervening alley, the
required front yard setback shall be equal to that setback
required in the residential zone.
[2] Rear and side yard setback. Where there is no intervening
alley, the side and rear yard setbacks shall be 25 feet.
Where a public alley is adjacent to a side or rear lot line,
the setback shall be 25 feet measured from the center line
of said public alley.
(b) Alternately, the Plan Commission during the course of its site
plan review process may establish a greater or lesser setback
as it determines necessary and advisable. In determining such
yard setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
A. Purpose. This zone is designed to primarily benefit persons residing in
the adjacent neighborhoods by providing office, limited retail and
service-oriented businesses. The land uses within this district should
have limited impact on the adjacent neighborhood regarding the
number of vehicle trips per day, parking demands, and similar land use
related issues. Specifically excluded from this zone are uses which are
regulated by § 770-82 of this chapter as large scale retail
establishments or uses that may generate significant nuisance
conditions.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Business, administrative, and professional offices. [Amended
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
§ 770-39 WATERWORKS § 770-40
752:905
(2) Public buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(3) Photographic, art and music lesson studios.
(4) Small appliance and electronic sales and repair, such as vacuum
cleaners, lamps, television and video and audio equipment and
computers and other nonmotorized home and garden equipment.
(5) Retail sales of drug and health care products, music, books and
personal attire, musical instruments, sporting goods, pet shops,
hardware, paint and home decorating supplies, home accessories,
floor coverings, furniture, automotive parts and accessories and
2,500 square feet or less of gross floor area.
(6) Laundromats and dry-cleaning outlets.
(7) Personal service establishments, such as barber, hair salons, nail
salons, tanning salons, watch and jewelry repair, small electronic
appliance and computer repair, tailors and alteration shops, shoe
repair, locksmith copy shops without off-set printing
(8) Video rental and sales.
(9) Photographic film processing and camera shops.
(10) Nonmotorized vehicle, such as bicycles and skateboards, sales and
repair.
C. Special land uses.
(1) Food and beverage sales, including convenience grocery stores,
with or without sales of packaged alcoholic beverages, subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages.
[Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(2) Standard and carry-out restaurants, with or without service of
alcoholic beverages, subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages. [Amended 4-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-04]
(3) Outdoor cafe service operated by a restaurant or other food
establishment which sells food or drinks for immediate
consumption, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-70,
Outdoor cafe service.
(4) Residential dwelling units above a first floor of a permitted use
when the ground floor street frontage is a permitted use other than
parking or a special land use.
(5) Bed-and-breakfast operations, subject to the requirements set forth
in § 770-78, Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(6) Retail sales of drug and health care products, music, books and
personal attire, musical instruments, sporting goods, pet shops,
§ 770-40 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-40
752:906
hardware, paint and home decorating supplies, home accessories,
floor coverings, furniture, automotive parts and accessories and
2,500 square feet or greater of gross floor area.
(7) Interior decorators, upholsterers, design and building contractors
with workshops and repair facilities and similar professions
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
(8) Temporary or transient outdoor sales of seasonal goods, subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-69, Seasonal and transient
display of products or materials intended for sale.
(9) Fitness centers/training studios including use of equipment or
space for the purpose of physical exercise, including activities such
as aerobics, court sports, weight lifting/strength training,
swimming and dance and martial arts training with a gross floor
area no greater than 2,500 square feet.
(10) Sales of packaged alcoholic beverages by any permitted or special
land use, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of
alcoholic beverages. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Height. No principal building shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) No setback shall be required except where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone. If a setback is to be provided, it
shall not be less than five feet. Where the property is adjacent
to a residential zone, the setback shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback. Where the property is on the same
side of a street, in the same block, as a property zoned
residential, with or without an intervening alley, the
required front yard setback shall be equal to that setback
required in the residential zone.
[2] Rear and side yard setback. Where there is no intervening
alley, the side and rear yard setbacks shall be 25 feet.
Where a public alley is adjacent to a side or rear lot line,
the setback shall be 25 feet measured from the center line
of said public alley.
(b) Alternately, the Plan Commission during the course of its site
plan review process may establish a greater or lesser setback
as it determines necessary and advisable. In determining such
yard setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
§ 770-40 WATERWORKS § 770-40
752:907
§ 770-41. General Business.
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to accommodate office, business service,
and retail uses at a larger scale than the Neighborhood Business Zone,
including the City and portions of the surrounding communities. It is
the purpose of these regulations to permit development of the
enumerated functions in a manner which is compatible with uses in the
surrounding area. To these ends, certain uses are excluded which
would function more effectively in other zones.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted and special land uses, unless specifically listed herein
as a special land use, allowed in the Neighborhood Business Zone.
(2) Multimodal transportation facilities.
(3) Retail garden centers, when all sales and activities are conducted
entirely within an enclosed building.
(4) Retail sale and service of motorized home and garden equipment,
such as lawnmower and lawn maintenance equipment conducted
entirely within an enclosed building.
(5) Printing shops and newspaper plants.
(6) Radio broadcasting and television stations, studios and offices.
(7) Recreation centers, such as amusement arcades, theaters, bowling
alleys, roller and ice skating rinks, conducted within an enclosed
building.
(8) Research labs, provided no heavy mechanical equipment is used.
C. Special land uses.
(1) Adult business and entertainment subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-76, Adult-oriented commercial enterprises and
specified services.
(2) Adult day-care centers which are stand-alone facilities not
associated with a permitted principal use subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-59, Day-care facilities.
(3) Vehicle dealers and leasing agencies, subject to requirements set
forth in § 770-63, Vehicle dealers.
(4) Automobile filling stations, subject to requirements set forth in
§ 770-64, Automobile filling stations.
§ 770-40 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-41
752:908
(5) Automobile service and installation stations, subject to
requirements set forth in § 770-65, Automobile service stations.
(6) Automobile repair garage, subject to requirements set forth in
§ 770-66, Automobile repair garage.
(7) Automobile washes, subject to requirements set forth in § 770-67,
Automobile washes.
(8) Gunshops subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-77,
Gunshops.
(9) Outdoor recreation such as driving ranges and miniature golf
courses, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-81,
Miniature golf courses.
(10) Residential dwelling units above a first floor of a permitted use
when the ground floor street frontage is a permitted use other than
parking or a special land use.
(11) Drive-through or drive-in facilities for any permitted or special land
use.
(12) Wholesale sales, storage and service/repair of home center
building materials, power equipment, contractor's equipment,
furniture, food, fabrics, hardware, garden nursery and similar
goods contained within an enclosed building or displayed, stored or
serviced outside.
(13) Large scale retail establishments subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-82, Large scale retail facilities.
(14) Establishments serving alcohol, such as, but not limited to,
restaurants, bars, lounges, theaters, clubs or lodges and recreation
centers, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of
Alcoholic Beverages. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
(15) Public utility transformer stations and substations, telephone
exchanges, and public utility offices.
(16) Bed-and-breakfast operations, subject to the requirements set forth
in § 770-78, Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(17) Temporary or transient outdoor sales of seasonal goods, subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-69, Seasonal and transient
display of products or materials intended for sale.
(18) Pet day-care facilities with no overnight boarding and no outdoor
exercise runs or pens.
(19) Temporary employment agencies that require day laborers to meet
on-site.
§ 770-41 WATERWORKS § 770-41
752:909
(20) Hotels, provided they are no less than two stories. [Added
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
(21) Smoking lounges, when not conducted as an accessory use to a
tobacconist, provided they comply with the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-
Free Air Law, Michigan Public Act 188 of 2009. [Added 10-1-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(22) Standard or fast-food restaurants located within a shopping center.
[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
(23) Food and beverage sales, including convenience grocery stores
with sales of packaged alcoholic beverages, subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages.
[Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(24) Sales of packaged alcoholic beverages by any permitted or special
land use, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of
alcoholic beverages. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(25) Outdoor display and sales by a large-scale retail establishment or
retail garden center, subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-84, Outdoor display and sales. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-04]
(26) Outdoor cafe service operated by a restaurant or other food
establishment which sells food or drinks for immediate
consumption, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-70,
Outdoor cafe service. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter.
(1) Height. No principal building shall exceed a height of 30 feet.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) No setback shall be required except where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone. If a setback is to be provided, it
shall not be less than five feet. Where the property is adjacent
to a residential zone the setback shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback. Where the property is on the same
side of a street, in the same block, as a property zoned
residential, with or without an intervening alley, the
required front yard setback shall be equal to that setback
required in the residential zone.
[2] Rear and side yard setback. Where there is no intervening
alley, the side and rear yard setbacks shall be 25 feet.
Where a public alley is adjacent to a side or rear lot line,
§ 770-41 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-41
752:910
§ 770-42. Central Business District.
the setback shall be 25 feet measured from the centerline
of said public alley.
(b) Alternately, the Plan Commission during the course of its site
plan review process may establish a greater or lesser setback
as it determines necessary and advisable. In determining such
yard setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
A. Purpose. This zone is designed to provide for a variety of office,
business service, entertainment and retail uses which occupy the prime
retail frontage, by serving the comparison, convenience, and service
needs of the market area which includes the City and surrounding
communities. The regulations of the Central Business District are
designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the stability
of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and
by prohibiting automotive-related services and nonretail uses which
tend to break up such continuity.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted uses allowed in the Neighborhood Business Zone.
(2) Private service clubs, social organizations and lodge halls, subject
to requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages.
(3) Hotels, provided they are no less than four stories.
(4) Residential dwelling units above a first floor of a permitted use
when the ground floor street frontage is a permitted use other than
parking.
(5) Retail sale of used clothing and furniture.
(6) Standard and carry-out restaurants, provided that they are located
with direct access to a public alley and able to provide adequate
provisions for loading and unloading and refuse collection.
C. Special land uses.
(1) Residential dwelling units on a ground floor or on an aboveground
floor of parking or a special land use.
(2) Outdoor cafe service or dining, operated by a restaurant or other
food establishment which sells food or drinks for immediate
consumption, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-52,
§ 770-41 WATERWORKS § 770-42
752:911
Sale of alcoholic beverages, if applicable, and § 770-70, Outdoor
cafe service.
(3) Entertainment facilities, including performing arts and cinematic
theaters, and billiard halls, excluding mechanical amusement
arcades with all activities conducted within an enclosed building.
(4) Licensed dance hall when associated with a restaurant.
(5) Funeral homes.
(6) Multimodal transportation facilities.
(7) Senior housing, adult foster care congregate facility and
convalescent centers, subject to the requirements of § 770-72,
Senior housing, adult foster care congregate facility and
convalescent centers.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast operations, subject to the requirements set forth
in § 770-78, Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(9) Establishments serving alcohol, such as, but not limited to,
restaurants, bars, lounges, theaters, clubs or lodges and recreation
centers, provided that they are located with direct access to a
public alley and able to provide adequate provisions for loading and
unloading and refuse collection and subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(10) Convention and exhibition halls and conference and banquet
centers.
(11) Food and beverage sales, including convenience grocery stores
with sales of packaged alcoholic beverages, subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages.
[Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(12) Fitness centers/training studios including use of equipment or
space for the purpose of physical exercise, including activities such
as aerobics, court sports, weight lifting/strength training,
swimming and dance and martial arts training with a gross floor
area greater than 2,500 square feet.
(13) Private parking structure, when not associated with a permitted
use.
(14) Cigar bars, provided they comply with the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-
Free Air Law, Michigan Public Act 188 of 2009. [Added 10-1-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(15) Sales of packaged alcoholic beverages by any permitted or special
land use, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale of
alcoholic beverages. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 770-42 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-42
752:912
§ 770-43. Regional Business.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Height. Subject to a determination of the Plan Commission, height
shall be subject to the following:
(a) All buildings, or portions of buildings, on lots immediately
adjacent to a residentially zoned parcel and not separated by
any street, alley, or other right-of-way, or separated by only an
alley, shall be maintained at no greater than 30 feet in height;
[Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08228]
(b) All buildings, or portions of buildings, less than 100 feet from a
residentially zoned parcel shall be maintained at no greater
than 50 feet in height;
(c) All buildings, or portions of buildings, between 100 and 150
feet from a residential zoned parcel shall be maintained at no
greater than 75 feet in height;
(d) All buildings, or portions of buildings, between 150 feet and
300 feet from a residential zoned parcel shall be maintained at
no greater than 100 feet in height;
(e) All buildings, or portions of buildings, greater than 300 feet
from a residential zoned parcel shall be maintained at no
greater than 125 feet in height;
(f) Or, a total height as determined to be advisable by the Plan
Commission in the course of its site plan review process.
(2) Setbacks. When a property is abutting or adjacent to a One-Family
Residential Zone with or without an intervening alley or street, the
setback shall be 25 feet or a setback as may be determined to be
necessary and advisable by the Planning Commission in the course
of its site plan review process. Portions of a structure or building
over 40 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from
any right-of-way, except for a public alley, or a distance as may be
determined to be necessary and advisable by the Planning
Commission in the course of its site plan review process.
[Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
A. Purpose.
(1) The Regional Business Zone is intended to provide for the
combining of office, high-density multiple-family, and hotels in a
planned development, and to provide for the combining of ancillary
228. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
D(1)(a) through (e) as Subsection D(1)(b) through (f), respectively.
§ 770-42 WATERWORKS § 770-43
752:913
retail and service uses with the office, hotel and/or residential
development. The zone is established in order that the public
health, safety and general welfare will be furthered through
redevelopment efforts intended to correct and prevent physical
deterioration and obsolescence, and promote economic growth in
the City. The zone is also established to further the public health,
safety and general welfare of the Detroit region through the
provision of regionally oriented facilities in an urbanized area
where necessary infrastructure improvement already exists, thus
relieving the general public of the costs of providing such
improvements in rural or semi-rural areas.
(2) It is further intended that this zone complement and enhance the
City's Central Business District, rather than competing with it.
Therefore, secondary retail business or service establishments are
permitted only as set forth below and subject to the requirements
set forth in subsequent sections of this chapter.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Business, administrative, and professional offices. [Amended
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
(2) Hotels with no less than two stories and 100 units/suites, each
containing no less than 300 square feet. All hotels shall also contain
conference/banquet room facilities to accommodate at least 500
persons, or a lesser number of people determined necessary and
advisable by the Planning Commission. [Amended 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-13]
(3) Multiple-family dwellings at a density of no less than 10 units per
acre.
(4) Enclosed theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, auditoriums,
convention halls, exhibition halls and, fitness centers/training
studios including use of equipment or space for the purpose of
physical exercise, including activities such as aerobics, court
sports, weight lifting/strength training, swimming, and similar
activities. Such uses shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet
or be associated and ancillary to a permitted use.
C. Special land uses.
(1) Outdoor cafe service, operated by a restaurant or other food
establishment which sells food or drinks for immediate
consumption subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-52, Sale
of alcoholic beverages, if applicable, and § 770-70, Outdoor cafe
service.
(2) The following uses shall be considered secondary uses and shall not
exceed 10% of the total combined square footage of all primary and
secondary uses:
§ 770-43 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-43
752:914
(a) Standard restaurants, for on-site consumption, provided that
establishments serving alcohol are subject to the requirements
set forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages, if applicable.
(b) Retail sale of prepackaged food and beverages, including sales
of packaged alcoholic beverages, drug and health care
products, jewelry, tobacco, clothing, clothing accessories,
shoes, eyeglasses, books, newsstands, prerecorded music,
luggage, hobby, toy, games, gifts, small electronics, office and
household supplies. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
(c) Florists shops.
(d) Retail sales of gifts, books and jewelry.
(e) Personal service establishments: small scale postal, courier
and messenger services drop-off centers, photographic
studios, barber and hair salons, nail shops, and tanning salons,
watch and jewelry repair, tailors and alteration shops and shoe
repair, laundry or dry cleaning outlets, print shops or copiers
without off-set printing, and similar establishments.
(f) Day-care centers or nursery schools which are ancillary to a
principal use.
(3) Hospitals and outpatient medical clinics, subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-79, Hospitals and outpatient
medical clinics. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
(4) Heliopad subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-80,
Heliopads.
(5) Automobile dealerships subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-63, Vehicle dealers.
(6) Motels with no less than two stories and 100 units/suites, each
containing no less than 300 square feet. All motels shall also
contain conference/banquet room facilities to accommodate at
least 500 persons, or a lesser number of people determined
necessary and advisable by the Planning Commission. [Amended
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13]
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Lot size. No lot shall be less than 15 acres in area.
(2) Height. No principal building shall be taller than 50 feet unless the
Plan Commission determines that the following conditions have
been met:
§ 770-43 WATERWORKS § 770-43
752:915
§ 770-44. General Industrial.
(a) The number of buildings so excepted shall not be detrimental
to the site or surrounding properties and shall be consistent
with an approved Master Plan for the area.
(b) The excepted buildings are consistent and compatible with the
general character of the building development in the City.
(c) The excepted buildings serve a defined and generally
recognized architectural purpose, i.e., creation of a focal point
for the project, establishment of a view or vista, etc., which is
central to the overall design concept of a regional business
zone development.
(d) The excepted buildings shall not be detrimental to adjacent
properties outside of the Regional Business District Zone.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) No setback shall be required except where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone. If a setback is to be provided, it
shall not be less than five feet. Where the property is adjacent
to a residential zone, the setback shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback. Where the property is on the same
side of a street, in the same block, as a property zoned
residential, with or without an intervening alley, the
required front yard setback shall be equal to that setback
required in the residential zone.
[2] Rear and side yard setback. Where there is no intervening
alley, the side and rear yard setbacks shall be 25 feet.
Where a public alley is adjacent to a side or rear lot line,
the setback shall be 25 feet measured from the center line
of said public alley.
(b) Alternately, the Plan Commission in the course of its site plan
review process may establish a greater or lesser setback as it
determines necessary and advisable. In determining such yard
setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
A. Purpose. This zone is designed to provide the location and space for all
manner of industrial, wholesale, and industrial storage uses. It is the
purpose of these regulations to permit the development of certain
functions, to protect the surrounding areas from incompatible
industrial activities, to restrict the intrusion of nonrelated uses such as
§ 770-43 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-44
752:916
residential, retail business and commercial, and to encourage the
discontinuance of uses presently existing in the zone which are
nonconforming by virtue of the type of use. To these ends, certain uses
are excluded which would function more effectively in another zone and
which would interfere with the operation of the uses permitted in this
zone.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted and special land uses unless specifically listed herein
as a special land use allowed in the Office Service Zone.
(2) Bottling of soft drinks and other beverages.
(3) Lithographic and blueprinting.
(4) Warehouse, distribution centers or cold storage plant completely
contained within an enclosed building.
(5) Commercial laundry and dry-cleaning plants.
(6) Manufacturing, research, packaging, treatment fabrication,
assembly, testing and repair of the following:
(a) Previously prepared materials, including bone, cellophane,
canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, cardboard, plastic, precious or semiprecious
metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wood (excluding
planing mill), wax, wire, yarns and paint not requiring a boiling
process.
(b) Data processing equipment and systems, office, computing,
and accounting machines.
(c) Musical instruments, glass, novelties, pottery, figurines or
similar ceramic products, small electrical parts (excluding
signs), rubber or metal stamps, hardware, tools cutlery,
electronics, audio and video equipment, small household
appliances, and similar items.
(d) Baking goods, beverages, candy, cosmetics, dairy products,
perfumes, toiletries, tobacco manufacturing, condiments and
other packaged food products (except butchering,
slaughtering, fish, sauerkraut, cornstarch, vinegar and yeast).
(e) Biological products, drugs, medicinal chemicals, and
pharmaceutical preparation.
(7) Research and design centers.
(8) Metal fabrication. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(9) Pet kennels and day-care facilities with overnight facilities and
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
§ 770-44 WATERWORKS § 770-44
752:917
(10) Printing (off-set included), publishing, book binding and engraving
shops.
(11) Self-service storage facilities subject to requirements set forth in
§ 770-62, Self-storage facilities.
(12) Above ground tanks for inflammable fluids, provided they comply
with the Inflammable Liquids Regulations of the City of Royal Oak.
(13) Above-ground tanks for flammable, cryogenic, class I, and class II
liquids and liquefied petroleum gas, provided they comply with
Chapter 340, Fire Prevention. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
(14) Broadcast or recording studios, provided that all satellite dishes
and antennas shall be subject to the required standards set forth in
§ 770-86, Utilities and communication devices, and § 770-88,
Wireless communication facilities. [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-01]
(15) Motion-picture studios contained within an enclosed building,
provided that there is no on-site housing of personnel and talent.
[Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
(16) Billboards, subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-57,
Billboards. [Added 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07]
C. Special land uses.
(1) Storage yards for lumber, coal, brick, stone and contractor's
supplies subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-68, General,
building and landscape contractor's offices and yards.
(2) Manufacturing, research, assembly, testing and repair of the
following:
(a) Plastic products and miscellaneous molded or extruded
products.
(b) Electric power manufacture.
(c) Manufacture and repair of signs, heating and ventilating
equipment, and appliances.
(3) Machine shop or blacksmith shop, wrought iron shop, tool and die
shop, stone/marble/granite grinding, dressing or cutting
operations, finished carpentry, including painting and varnishing,
excluding punch presses over 20 tons' rated capacity, drop hammer
and screw machines.
(4) Material recovery facility for the receipt, temporary storage,
handling, sorting and distribution of solid recyclable materials
subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-75, Materials
recovery facility
§ 770-44 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-44
752:918
(5) Acetylene gas, alcohol, paint, oil (including linseed), shellac,
turpentine, lacquer, varnish, shoe polish, and oxygen manufacture.
(6) Solvent recovery centers.
(7) Salvage yards subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-83,
Salvage yards.
(8) Battery manufacture, tire recapping or retreading.
(9) Rock, sand, gravel distribution, excavation or crushing.
(10) Wholesale storage of petroleum, gasoline or oil.
(11) Salt works or sodium compounds manufacture.
(12) Motor freight depot or trucking terminal.
(13) Standard and carry-out restaurants, provided that all
establishments serving alcohol shall be subject to the requirements
set forth in § 770-52, Sale of alcoholic beverages.
(14) Indoor commercial recreation such as fencing, court sports, large
scale gymnastics facilities, gun and archery ranges, subject to
§ 770-53, Indoor commercial recreation facilities.
(15) Large-scale retail establishments, subject to the requirements set
forth in § 770-82, Large-scale retail facilities, including any outdoor
display and sales subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-84,
Outdoor display and sales. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
(16) (Reserved)229
(17) Automobile repair garage subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 770-66, Automobile repair garage.
(18) Crematorium.
(19) Heliopad when accessory to a hospital and subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-80, Heliopads.
(20) Churches and other institutions for religious worship, subject to
the requirements set forth in § 770-74, Churches and other
institutions for religious worship.
(21) Hospitals and outpatient medical clinics, subject to the
requirements set forth in § 770-79, Hospitals and outpatient
medical clinics. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
(22) Drive-through facilities for banks, credit unions, savings and loan
associations.
229. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(16), which listed billboards as a special land use, was
repealed 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07.
§ 770-44 WATERWORKS § 770-44
752:919
(23) Residential, commercial, industrial and large scale recreational/
amusement machinery and equipment rental and leasing agencies,
with or without outdoor storage.
(24) Truck, utility trailer and recreational vehicle rental or leasing.
(25) Transportation service providers (taxi, limousine, private or
charter bus).
(26) Public utility substations and transmission facilities.
(27) Pet kennels and day-care facilities with overnight facilities and/or
outdoor exercise runs or pens.
(28) Auto storage lots and vehicle towing centers.
(29) Automobile dealerships when associated with a repair/service
facility subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-66,
Automobile repair garage.
(30) Motion-picture studios with outdoor sets, production facilities, or
storage of materials, provided that there is no on-site housing of
personnel and talent. [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special land uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Height. No building shall be taller than four stories or 50 feet.
(2) Setbacks:
(a) No setback shall be required except where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone. If a setback is to be provided, it
shall not be less than five feet. Where the property is adjacent
to a residential zone, the setback shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback. Where the property is on the same
side of a street, in the same block, as a property zoned
residential, with or without an intervening alley, the
required front yard setback shall be equal to that setback
required in the residential zone.
[2] Rear and side yard setback. Where there is no intervening
alley, the side and rear yard setbacks shall be 25 feet.
Where a public alley is adjacent to a side or rear lot line,
the setback shall be 25 feet measured from the center line
of said public alley.
(b) Alternately, the Plan Commission in the course of its site plan
review process may establish a greater or lesser setback as it
determines necessary and advisable. In determining such yard
setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
§ 770-44 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-44
752:920
§ 770-45. Mixed Use 1.
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to provide for a mixture of residential,
office and low-intensity public/institutional uses in an urban design
pattern. While permitting redevelopment and reuse of certain areas of
the City, uses within the Mixed Use 1 District are intended to be
compatible with the established residential neighborhoods. In order to
be eligible for approval under this section, a proposed development
must meet the standard set forth in § 770-85, Mixed use development
regulations, and all of the following criteria:
(1) The property shall be located within an area planned for mixed use
residential/office/public/institutional in the Master Plan.
(2) In general, the proposed development shall be consistent with the
Master Plan. In particular, the proposed development shall be
compatible with adjacent uses and improvements, shall minimize
adverse impact to traffic circulation, and shall be of overall benefit
to the community. A single use may be proposed; however, said
proposed use shall be consistent and compatible with the mixed
use intent of this section.
(3) The proposed development shall not be in conflict with a
development agreement entered into with the City relative to the
property.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted and special land uses in and subject to all
requirements of the One-Family Residential Zone.
(2) Two-family dwellings, provided each dwelling has an exclusive
principal entry from the exterior at grade and is attached to the
other dwelling solely by common walls, subject to all requirements
of the Two-Family Residential Zone.
(3) Senior housing subject to the requirements set forth in § 770-72,
Senior housing, adult foster care congregate facility and
convalescent centers.
(4) Single-family attached dwellings.
(5) All permitted uses in the Office Service Zone.
C. Special land uses.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings subject to the requirements set forth for
multiple-family dwelling in § 770-37, Multiple-Family Residential.
§ 770-44 WATERWORKS § 770-45
752:921
Regarding multiple-family and senior housing properties which are
located at least 150 feet from all established residential zones, a
density bonus of up to 100% by the Plan Commission if it finds that:
(a) The proposed density will not adversely impact adjacent
properties or nearby residential neighborhoods.
(b) The added density is necessary to support redevelopment of an
area, which currently contains uses that have an adverse
impact upon adjacent properties.
(c) The proposed development is designed to facilitate the
objectives and strategies of the Master Plan.
(2) Special land uses in the Office Service Zone.
(3) Recreational areas or social facilities, institutions or community
recreational centers, and swimming pools, or tennis clubs as a
component of a mixed use development.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Lot area and width. No lot shall have a minimum frontage of less
than 50 feet, while the minimum area shall be established by the
restrictions governing lot coverage, setbacks, screening, and
parking requirements.
(2) Height. No building shall exceed a height of 30 feet. The Plan
Commission may allow a development with greater height, if it
finds that:
(a) The setback of the proposed building relative to a neighboring
residential property shall be increased from the minimum
applicable setback by two feet for every one foot of additional
building height.
(b) The proposed height will not adversely impact adjacent
properties or nearby residential neighborhoods.
(c) The added height is necessary to support redevelopment of an
area which currently contains uses that have an adverse
impact upon adjacent neighborhoods.
(d) The proposed development is designed to facilitate the
objectives and strategies of the Master Plan.
(3) Setback (excluding single-family detached and two-family
dwellings).
(a) No setback shall be required except where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone. If a setback is to be provided, it
§ 770-45 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-45
752:922
§ 770-46. Mixed Use 2.
shall not be less than five feet. Where the property is adjacent
to a residential zone the setback shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback. Where the property is on the same
side of a street, in the same block, as a property zoned
residential, with or without an intervening alley, the
required front yard setback shall be equal to that setback
required in the residential zone.
[2] Rear and side yard setback. Where there is no intervening
alley, the side and rear yard setbacks shall be 25 feet.
Where a public alley is adjacent to a side or rear lot line,
the setback shall be 25 feet measured from the center line
of said public alley.
(b) Multiple-family yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
(c) Alternately, the Plan Commission in the course of its site plan
review process may establish a greater or lesser setback as it
determines necessary and advisable. In determining such yard
setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
(4) Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between two
multiple-family buildings on a single lot or on contiguous property
under the same ownership shall be 20 feet, or such distance
determined necessary by the Plan Commission to enhance the
character of development.
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to provide for a mixture of residential,
office, low-intensity public/institution uses, and neighborhood business
uses in an urban design pattern. Such uses are intended to link the
Central Business District with residential neighborhoods and the
Woodward/I-696 Regional Business District. Upper floor residential
uses are encouraged above lower level retail or office uses. In order to
be eligible for approval under this section, a proposed development
must meet the standard set forth in § 770-85, Mixed use development
regulations, and all of the following criteria:
(1) The property shall be located within an area planned for mixed use
residential/office/commercial in the City of Royal Oak Master Plan.
(2) In general, the proposed development shall be consistent with the
Master Plan. In particular, the proposed development shall be
compatible with adjacent uses and improvements, shall minimize
adverse impact to traffic circulation, and shall be of overall benefit
§ 770-45 WATERWORKS § 770-46
752:923
to the community. A single use may be proposed; however, said
proposed use shall be consistent and compatible with the mixed
use intent of this section.
(3) The proposed development shall not be in conflict with a
development agreement entered into with the City relative to the
property.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted uses set forth in the Mixed Use 1 Zone.
(2) All permitted land uses set forth in the Neighborhood Business
Zone.
(3) Multiple-family dwellings subject to the requirements set forth for
multiple-family dwelling in § 770-37, Multiple-Family Residential.
Regarding multiple-family and senior housing properties which are
located at least 150 feet from all established residential zones, a
density bonus of up to 100% by the Plan Commission if it finds that:
(a) The proposed density will not adversely impact adjacent
properties or nearby residential neighborhoods.
(b) The added density is necessary to support redevelopment of an
area, which currently contains uses that have an adverse
impact upon adjacent properties.
(c) The proposed development is designed to facilitate the
objectives and strategies of the Master Plan.
C. Special land uses.
(1) All special land uses set forth in the Neighborhood Business Zone,
except drive-through facilities which are specifically prohibited.
D. Area and bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall
apply to all permitted and special uses unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this chapter:
(1) Lot area and width. No lot shall have a minimum frontage of less
than 50 feet, while the minimum area shall be established by the
restrictions governing lot coverage, setbacks, screening, and
parking requirements.
(2) Height. No building shall exceed a height of 30 feet. The Plan
Commission may allow a development with greater height, if it
finds that:
(a) The setback of the proposed building relative to a neighboring
residential property shall be increased from the minimum
applicable setback by two feet for every one foot of additional
building height
§ 770-46 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-46
752:924
§ 770-47. Planned Unit Development.
(b) The proposed height will not adversely impact adjacent
properties or nearby residential neighborhoods.
(c) The added height is necessary to support redevelopment of an
area which currently contains uses that have an adverse
impact upon adjacent neighborhoods.
(d) The proposed development is designed to facilitate the
objectives and strategies of the Master Plan.
(3) Setback (excluding single-family detached and two-family
dwellings).
(a) No setback shall be required except where the property is
adjacent to a residential zone. If a setback is to be provided, it
shall not be less than five feet. Where the property is adjacent
to a residential zone the setback shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard setback. Where the property is on the same
side of a street, in the same block, as a property zoned
residential, with or without an intervening alley, the
required front yard setback shall be equal to that setback
required in the residential zone.
[2] Rear and side yard setback. Where there is no intervening
alley the side and rear yard setbacks shall be 25 feet.
Where a public alley is adjacent to a side or rear lot line,
the setback shall be 25 feet measured from the center line
of said public alley.
(b) Multiple-family yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
(c) Alternately, the Plan Commission in the course of its site plan
review process may establish a greater or lesser setback as it
determines necessary and advisable. In determining such yard
setbacks, the Plan Commission shall consider the size and
configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to
the existing and proposed buildings and uses of land, and their
relationship to existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order
to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety and reduce any
negative impact on adjacent land uses.
(4) Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between two
multiple-family buildings on a single lot or on contiguous property
under the same ownership shall be 20 feet, or such distance
determined necessary by the Plan Commission to enhance the
character of development.
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to provide for various types of land uses
planned in a manner which shall encourage the use of land in
§ 770-46 WATERWORKS § 770-47
752:925
§ 770-48. Special redevelopment.
accordance with its character and adaptability; encourage innovation in
land use planning; provide enhanced housing, employment, shopping,
traffic circulation and recreational opportunities for the people of the
City; and bring about a greater compatibility of design and use. All
planned unit development projects are subject to the criteria and
standards set forth in Article VIII.
A. Purpose. This zone is intended to address developments proposed as a
result of obsolete or materially nonconforming hotel or motel sites,
school sites or other sites as identified by the Plan Commission. This
zone is intended to provide for various types of land uses planned in a
manner which shall encourage the use of land in accordance with its
character and adaptability; encourage innovation in land use planning;
provide enhanced housing, employment, shopping, traffic circulation
and recreational opportunities for the people of the City; and bring
about a greater compatibility of design and use. All special
redevelopment projects are subject to the criteria and standards set
forth in § 770-87, Special redevelopment projects.
§ 770-47 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-48
752:926
ARTICLE V
Special Provisions
§ 770-49. Intent.
In addition to the permitted compatible uses contained in this chapter,
there are certain other uses which may be desirable to permit in certain
zone districts. However, due to their potential impact on neighboring land
uses there is a need to regulate them with respect to their use, design
and location. Additional conditions which may be imposed by the Plan
Commission shall be designed to protect natural resources; the health,
safety and welfare as well as the social and economic well being of those
who will use the land use or activity under consideration; residents and
landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use and the
community as a whole. It is the intent of this article to provide the
regulations necessary to address such uses and provide the Plan
Commission with a set of standards upon which to make its decision.
§ 770-50. Cemeteries.
§ 770-51. Community centers.
A. The Plan Commission as part of site plan review shall determine that
the lot area and frontage is adequate to support the operation in
compliance with all ordinance requirements. Consideration shall be
given to the arrangement of an assembly area and off-street parking.
B. The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major
thoroughfare or collector street, and all access to and egress from the
site shall be by such thoroughfare or street.
C. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be laid out as to minimize
possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and
adjacent land uses.
D. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of the
mortuary establishment.
E. The minimum yard setback for all structures, burial plots, drives and
parking areas shall be no less than 25 feet from any public road right-ofway
or property line, except when located adjacent to residentially
zoned property when a minimum setback of 50 feet is required.
F. Delivery areas and outdoor storage of equipment shall be screened in
accordance with Article VI, Landscaping and Screening Design
Standards.
G. Buildings shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
A. The Plan Commission as part of site plan review shall determine that
the lot area and frontage is adequate to support the operation in
compliance with all ordinance requirements. Consideration shall be
§ 770-49 WATERWORKS § 770-51
752:927
§ 770-52. Sale of alcoholic beverages.230 [Amended 4-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 770-53. Indoor commercial recreation facilities.
An indoor commercial recreation facility located in a General Industrial
Zone District shall be conducted entirely within the building and shall be
limited to those activities that the Zoning Administrator determines will
generate a low volume of vehicle trip generation and minimal impact on the
surrounding area regarding potential nuisance activities.
given to the arrangement of outdoor recreation areas, off-street parking
and dropoff and pickup drives.
B. The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major
thoroughfare or collector street, and all access to and egress from the
site shall be by such thoroughfare or street.
C. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be so designed to
minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major
thoroughfares and adjacent land uses.
D. Any and all recreation equipment, including play structures, batting
cages, sporting fields, etc., shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet and
effectively screened from any residential zoned property.
A. All establishments selling packaged alcoholic beverages shall require
special land use approval, subject to § 770-11, Special land uses; permit
procedures, even if such establishments are a permitted use in a given
zoning district.
B. All establishments dispensing, or seeking to dispense, alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises, such as, but not limited to,
restaurants, theaters, clubs or lodges and recreation centers, shall
require special land use approval, subject to the requirements of
§ 770-11, Special land uses; permit procedures, even if such
establishments are a permitted use in a given zoning district.
C. For new licenses or issuance of an existing license to be transferred to a
new location that requires approval by the City Commission, the
Planning Commission may conduct a public hearing as set forth in
§ 770-11B(3), Procedures. However, a decision shall not be made by the
Planning Commission until the liquor license has received approval
from the City Commission.
D. For an expansion to an existing liquor-licensed establishment, the
Planning Commission may conduct a public hearing as set forth in
§ 770-11, Special land uses; permit procedures, and may take an action
on the item pending approval by the City Commission.
230. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 430, Liquor.
§ 770-51 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-53
752:928
§ 770-54. Wind and solar energy systems. [Added 6-15-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-06]
A. The Plan Commission as part of site plan review shall determine that
the lot area and frontage is adequate to support the operation in
compliance with all ordinance requirements. Consideration shall be
given to the arrangement of off-street parking and drop-off and pick-up
drives.
B. The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major
thoroughfare or collector street, and all access to and egress from the
site shall be by such thoroughfare or street.
C. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be so designed to
minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major
thoroughfares and adjacent land uses.
A. Purpose and intent. It is the general purpose and intent of the City to
balance the need for clean, renewable and abundant energy resources
that may reduce dependence upon scarce and nonrenewable fossil
fuels, with the necessity to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the city, as well as to preserve the integrity, character, property
values, and aesthetic quality of the community at large. The City
therefore finds these regulations are necessary in order to facilitate
adequate provision of sites for wind and solar energy systems and
ensure they are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to
other land uses, structures and buildings, without significantly
increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of such systems.
B. Authorization.
(1) Wind energy systems with a rated capacity of up to 20 kilowatts (20
kw) and solar energy systems shall be allowed as an accessory use
in any zoning district, subject to the required standards of this
section, provided that they are to be incidental and subordinate to a
use on the same parcel and shall supply electrical power
exclusively for on-site consumption, except as otherwise provided
by this chapter.
(2) Wind and solar energy systems may be connected to the electrical
grid when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives
electrical power supplied by a utility company. If a parcel on which
a system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not
presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company
in accordance with applicable state and federal law.
(3) Solar energy systems and wind energy systems with a rated
capacity of more than 20 kilowatts (20 kw) that are intended to
produce electricity for sale to a utility and/or other customers for
off-site consumption shall be prohibited, except as a special land
§ 770-53 WATERWORKS § 770-54
752:929
use in the General Industrial Zoning District under § 770-44
General Industrial, Subsection C, Special land uses, Subsection
(2)(b), Electrical power manufacture. Wind or solar energy systems
developed as a special land use in the General Industrial Zoning
District shall be subject to the required standards of this section.
C. Standards specific to wind energy systems.
(1) Number of systems per lot. No more than one ground-mounted or
freestanding wind energy system may be placed on any lot of
record. Arrays of multiple-turbine roof-mounted wind energy
systems may be allowed, provided that they are architecturally
integrated with the building upon which they are attached as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, and otherwise comply
with the required standards of this section.
(2) Height.
(a) The total system height of a ground-mounted or freestanding
wind energy system shall not exceed twice the maximum
permitted height for principal structures on a site within or
adjacent to any residential or mixed-use zoning districts, or
100 feet on any other site that is not adjacent to any residential
or mixed-use zoning district. The total system height shall
include the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower
to the center of the rotor hub, including the turbine and the
highest vertical extension of any blades and rotors.
(b) The height of roof-mounted wind energy systems are subject to
the required standards in § 770-21, Application of Zoning
District Regulations, Subsection D, Application of height
regulations, Subsection (3), Exceptions.
(3) Location and setbacks.
(a) Ground-mounted or freestanding wind energy systems shall
not be located within a front yard in any residential or mixeduse
zoning district and shall be set back from all lot lines and
rights-of-way to the center of the tower base no less than a
distance equal to 1/2 the diameter of the rotor and blades, or
the minimum required front, side and rear yard setbacks for
principal structures within a site's given zoning district,
whichever is greater.
(b) No portion of any wind energy system's blades, rotor, or other
exposed moving parts shall extend to within 20 feet of the
ground, or to within 10 feet of any overhead utility lines.
(c) Roof-mounted wind energy systems shall be setback from the
building edge a distance equal to 1/2 the diameter of its rotor
and blades, or a distance as determined necessary by the
Zoning Administrator. No portion of any roof-mounted wind
§ 770-54 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-54
752:930
energy system's blades, rotor or other exposed moving part
shall extend beyond the edge of the building to which it is
attached, or to within 20 feet of any outdoor surfaces that
are located directly below the system and intended for human
occupancy, such as balconies or rooftop patios.
D. Standards specific to solar energy systems.
(1) Number of systems per lot. No more than one ground-mounted or
freestanding solar energy system may be placed on any lot of
record, and its solar collector shall not exceed 800 square feet of
surface area. Solar collectors shall not be counted towards lot
coverage, but the area covered or enclosed by solar collectors may
be counted as required open space. Arrays of multiple-collector
roof-mounted, building-mounted, or facade-mounted solar energy
systems may be allowed, provided that they are architecturally
integrated with the building upon which they are attached as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, and otherwise comply
with the required standards of this section.
(2) Height. Ground-mounted or freestanding solar collectors and any
mounts shall not exceed a height of 20 feet when oriented at
maximum tilt. Building-mounted or facade-mounted solar
collectors shall not exceed the height of the building to which they
are attached. Roof-mounted solar collectors and any mounts are
subject to the standards in § 770-21, Application of zoning district
regulations, Subsection D Application of height regulations,
Subsection (3) Exceptions.
(3) Location and setbacks.
(a) Ground-mounted or freestanding solar energy systems shall
not be located within a front yard in any residential or mixeduse
zoning district, and shall be set back from all lot lines and
rights-of-way to any part of the system no less than the
minimum required front, side and rear yard setbacks for
accessory structures within a site's given zoning district.
(b) Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be setback from the
building edge a distance equal to its height or a distance as
determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
(c) Building-mounted or facade-mounted solar energy systems
shall not be attached to any front building facade that directly
faces and is visible from any right-of-way. Such systems may be
located on any side or rear building facade, provided that they
do not directly face and are not visible from any right-of-way,
and provided that they are architecturally integrated with the
building upon which they are attached, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
§ 770-54 WATERWORKS § 770-54
752:931
(d) Solar collectors shall be placed so as not to shade any existing
solar collector or adjacent property to the north between the
hours of 9:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on
December 21 of each year any more than would a structure
built to the maximum permitted bulk and area standards for a
site's given zoning district.
(4) Solar storage batteries. When solar storage batteries are included
as part of the solar energy system, they must be placed in a secure
container or enclosure meeting the requirements of the City's
building and electrical codes when in use and, when no longer
used, shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable City,
state and federal laws and regulations.
E. General standards.
(1) Screening. Landscape screening in accordance with § 770-90,
Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and screening, Subsection D,
Screening between land uses, shall be provided along all property
lines to mitigate aesthetic impacts upon the neighborhood if a
ground-mounted or freestanding wind or solar energy system is
located within or adjacent to any residential or mixed-use zoning
districts, except when a principal structure is placed between the
system and a property line. Roof-mounted wind or solar energy
systems shall be effectively screened as determined necessary by
the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Access and safety. All wind or solar energy systems shall be
designed and installed so as to prevent unauthorized access to
electrical and mechanical components and shall be secured or
locked at all times when service personnel are not present. All
ground-mounted or freestanding wind or solar energy systems shall
be adequately enclosed by a six-foot fence, or placed within a yard
that is entirely enclosed by a six-foot fence, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 323, Fences. All climbing apparatus shall be
located at least 12 feet above ground, and any tower must be
designed to prevent climbing within the first 12 feet.
(3) Lighting. Exterior lighting from a direct source upon a wind or
solar energy system shall be prohibited. No lights shall be installed
on a tower or any other part of a wind or solar energy system,
unless required to meet federal aviation regulations.
(4) Controls. All wind energy systems shall be equipped with manual
and automatic override brakes in order to limit the blade rotation
speed to within its design limits, to prevent uncontrolled rotation
and excessive pressure on the tower, rotors, blades and other
components, and to shut down turbines in the event of an electrical
outage.
(5) Underground wiring. All wiring connected with a wind or solar
energy system shall be underground, except for wiring that runs
§ 770-54 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-54
752:932
from the turbine to the base of the wind energy systems, and
all wiring associated with roof-mounted wind energy systems, and
roof-mounted, building-mounted, or facade-mounted solar energy
systems.
(6) Noise and electrical disturbance. All wind energy and solar systems
shall comply with the required standards of § 770-94, Noise and
vibrations, and § 770-95, Electrical disturbance, electromagnetic or
radio frequency interference.
(7) Signs. All signs on a wind or solar energy system visible from any
right-of-way or adjacent property shall be prohibited, except for the
manufacturer's or installer's identification on the nacelle or solar
collector, appropriate warning signs, or the owner and/or
operator's identification.
F. Access easements.
(1) The enactment of this section does not constitute the granting of an
easement by the City for access to wind or solar radiation. The
owner and/or operator shall provide covenants, easements, or
similar documentation to assure sufficient wind or solar radiation
to operate a wind or solar energy system unless adequate
accessibility to the wind or solar radiation is provided by the site.
(2) Nothing within this section shall prevent any owner, occupant or
other person in control of property from legally placing or planting
any vegetation or trees, or legally constructing any structure that
may cast a shadow on a solar energy system or block wind from a
wind energy system, provided that such vegetation, trees, or
structures comply with the required standards of this chapter and
all other applicable laws, codes and ordinances.
G. Removal.
(1) An owner and/or operator shall remove any ground-mounted or
freestanding wind or solar energy system when it has not been
used for a period of 180 days or more or has otherwise been
abandoned. For purposes of this section, the removal of rotors,
blades, turbines, solar collectors, solar batteries, or other
equipment from a wind or solar energy system, or the cessation of
electrical power generation, shall be considered as the beginning
of a period of nonuse or abandonment. Nonuse or abandonment
may also be proven by reports from an interconnected utility.
(2) Once a ground-mounted or freestanding wind or solar energy
system has not been used for a period of 180 days or more or has
otherwise been determined to be abandoned, the owner and/or
operator shall immediately apply or secure the application for any
required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed
with and complete the demolition and removal, restoring the
§ 770-54 WATERWORKS § 770-54
752:933
premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by
the Building Official and/or Zoning Administrator.
(3) If the required removal of a wind or solar energy system has not
been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline,
and after at least 30 days' written notice by the City Attorney,
Building Official, and/or Zoning Administrator, the City may pursue
legal action to remove or secure the removal of the system at the
owner's and/or operator's sole expense.
(4) The Zoning Administrator and/or Building Official may require that
an application for a ground-mounted or freestanding wind or solar
energy system include a security to be posted at the time of
receiving a building permit to ensure its removal when it has been
abandoned or is no longer in use, as provided in this section. The
security may, at the election of the owner and/or operator, be in the
form of cash; surety bond; letter of credit; or an agreement in a
form approved by the City Attorney and recordable at the office of
the Register of Deeds, establishing a promise of the owner and/or
operator to timely remove the wind or solar energy system as
required under this section, with the further provision that the
owner and/or operator shall be responsible for the payment of any
costs and attorney's fees incurred by the City in securing removal.
The City's actual costs and reasonable administrative charges to
remove or secure the removal of a wind or solar energy system may
be drawn or collected from such security.
H. Applications and permits. The owner and/or operator of any wind or
solar energy system shall obtain a building permit, along with any other
permits required by federal, state and local agencies, prior to erecting a
system. Wind or solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable
state and City construction and electrical codes and City building
permit requirements, and also all requirements of the Federal Aviation
Administration, the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23 of 1950,
MCLA § 259.431 et seq.), the Michigan Tall Structures Act (Public Act
259 of 1959, MCLA § 259.481 et seq.), and all other applicable state and
federal regulations.
(1) Wind energy systems. Applications for permits to install a wind
energy system shall include a site plan prepared in accordance
with § 770-12, Site plan review, along with the following additional
information:
(a) The location of all buildings within 200 feet of the property
including exterior dimensions, height and uses.
(b) The location and dimensions of any other natural or man-made
features within 200 feet of the property, such as trees,
overhead utility lines, utility poles and towers, streets and
rights-of-way, wireless community devices, etc.
§ 770-54 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-54
752:934
(c) The plans and specifications identifying all parts of the system,
including, but not limited to, the manufacturer and model,
turbine, tower height and type, rotor diameter, foundation, any
accessory equipment, and the manufacturer's electrical plans
and specifications.
(d) Certification from a licensed engineer or qualified professional
that the manual and automatic override brakes have been
designed for the proposed system.
(e) Evidence that the applicant has notified the affected utility of
the intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator, and that the generator meets the minimum
requirements established by the affected utility, the Michigan
Public Service Commission, the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, and all other applicable state and federal
standards. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(f) Evidence from a qualified professional that the site is feasible
for a wind energy system, or that covenants, easements and
other assurances to document sufficient wind to operate the
wind energy system have been obtained.
(g) Evidence that the proposed wind energy system will comply
with applicable federal aviation regulations, including any
necessary approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration.
(h) A visual simulation that includes views from all rights-of-way
within 500 feet.
(i) Any other evidence or information as required by the Zoning
Administrator and/or Building Official.
(2) Solar energy systems. Applications for permits to install a solar
energy system shall include a site plan prepared in accordance
with § 770-12, Site plan review, along with the following additional
information:
(a) The plans and specifications identifying all parts of the system,
including, but not limited to, the manufacturer and model,
solar collector or generator, mount height and type,
foundation, solar batteries, any accessory equipment, and the
manufacturer's electrical plans and specifications.
(b) Evidence that the applicant has notified the affected utility of
the intent to install an interconnected customer-owned solar
collector, and that the collector meets the minimum
requirements established by the affected utility, the Michigan
Public Service Commission, the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, and all other applicable state and federal
§ 770-54 WATERWORKS § 770-54
752:935
§ 770-55. Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District. [Added 2-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-05]
standards. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(c) Evidence from a qualified professional that the site is feasible
for a solar energy system, including between the hours of 9:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on December 21 of
each year, or that covenants, easements and other assurances
to document sufficient solar radiation to operate the solar
energy system have been obtained.
(d) Evidence that the proposed solar energy system will comply
with applicable state and federal regulations.
(e) Any other evidence or information as required by the Zoning
Administrator and/or Building Official.
I. Additional and accessory uses.
(1) The applicable standards and requirements of this section shall
also apply to anemometer towers used to conduct wind site
assessments for possible installation of wind energy systems.
(2) Co-location of wireless communication facilities on any wind or
solar energy system shall be subject to the requirements of
§ 770-88, Wireless communication devices. Co-location of any
equipment or facilities other than wireless communication facilities
that are not used for wind or solar power purposes shall only be
permitted if allowed elsewhere within this chapter.
A. Intent and purpose. The Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District shall be
composed of a portion of the Forest Heights Subdivision where the
principal use is intended to be single-family detached dwellings on lots
with lot depths that are deeper than typical parcels in the one-family
residential zone.
B. Uses. All permitted uses in the one-family residential zone shall be
permitted uses in the Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District. All special
land uses in the one-family residential zone shall be special land uses in
the Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District.
C. Area and bulk regulations. Single-family detached dwellings in the
Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District shall be subject to the requirements
set forth in the one-family residential zone, unless a more restrictive
requirement is provided for in this section. The following minimum
requirements shall apply to all permitted and special land uses within
the Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District:
(1) Lots size. No lot within the Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District
shall be less than 10,000 square feet in area.
§ 770-54 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-55
752:936
§ 770-56. Domestic, community and market gardens. [Added
4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-04]
(2) Lot depth. No lot within the Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District
shall have a depth of less than 180 feet.
(3) Front yard setback. All principal buildings on lots with frontage on
Vinsetta Boulevard within the Vinsetta Boulevard Overlay District
shall be set back the greater of 50 feet or the average setback of
adjacent dwellings from the front property line. A front yard
abutting the side street of a corner lot within the Vinsetta
Boulevard Overlay District shall not be less than 10 feet in width.
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure
that domestic, community and market gardens are appropriately
located and protected to meet the need and demand for local food
production, and to enhance community health, community education,
garden-related job training, natural resource protection, preservation
of green space, and community enjoyment. Because they will typically
exist in close proximity to residential uses, concern will be given to
ensuring compatibility between uses.
B. General standards.
(1) All domestic, community, and market gardens shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) Operating standards. All domestic, community, and market
gardens must adhere to the generally accepted agricultural
management practices (GAAMP) adopted by the Michigan
Department of Agriculture. Application of fertilizer, compost,
pesticides, insecticides, herbicides, and/or agricultural-use
chemicals shall be consistent with the manufacturer's
instructions, Michigan's GAAMP, and all other local, state and
federal laws.
(b) Machinery and equipment. Agricultural machinery, equipment
and/or vehicles used in the tending of any domestic garden
shall be limited to 35 horsepower and/or a fully equipped
weight of 2,000 pounds, and 50 horsepower and/or a fullyequipped
weight of 4,000 pounds for any community or market
garden. These restrictions shall not apply to vehicles making
deliveries to or receiving crops from a community or market
garden.
(c) Composting and fertilizers. No fruits, vegetables, food waste,
fresh manure or other animal waste or other animal byproducts
shall be composted at any domestic or community
garden. No fresh manure or manure-based fertilizers shall be
used at any domestic, community or market garden other than
§ 770-55 WATERWORKS § 770-56
752:937
fully composted manure. On-site composting at any market
garden shall be prohibited.
(d) Weeds. Crops grown in any domestic, community, or market
garden shall be exempt from the required standards and
regulations of Chapter 757, Weeds.
(e) Fences. Any fence proposed as part of a domestic, community,
or market garden shall be subject to the required standards
and regulations of Chapter 323, Fences.
(f) Burning. Open burning or prescribed burning at any domestic,
community, or market garden shall be prohibited, except as
provided in § 633-7, Unlawful burning.
(g) Keeping of animals. The keeping of any animals or animal
husbandry (cows, chickens, pigs, goats, bees, etc.) as part of
any domestic, community, and market garden shall be
prohibited, except as provided in Chapter 195, Animals.
(h) Nuisances. Any domestic, community, or market garden shall
be operated so as to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to
emanate therefrom which might be noxious to occupants of any
other nearby properties, whether by reason of an unreasonable
amount of dust, noise, fumes, vibration, smoke, lights, or the
presence of toxic materials.
(2) The operator(s) and/or property owner(s) of a domestic, community
or market garden shall be responsible for maintaining the property
so that it does not become overgrown with weeds, infested by
invasive or noxious plants, insects, pests, vermin or wild animals, a
source of erosion or stormwater runoff, polluted by fertilizers,
pesticides, insecticides, herbicides, or other agricultural-use
chemicals, and/or a public nuisance.
C. Domestic gardens. Domestic gardens shall be permitted as an
accessory use in any One-Family Residential, One-Family Large Lot
Residential, Two-Family Residential, or Multiple-Family Residential
Zoning District, and for any dwelling unit in a Neighborhood Business,
Neighborhood Business II, Mixed Use 1, or Mixed Use 2 Zoning
District, subject to the following required standards:
(1) Placement. Domestic gardens shall be located within a side or rear
yard only. If placed on a lot without a principal dwelling, a domestic
garden shall have a minimum front yard setback equivalent to that
of any adjacent dwelling.
(2) Accessory structures. Any greenhouse or other accessory structure
related to a domestic garden shall comply with § 770-22, Accessory
buildings.
§ 770-56 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-56
752:938
D. Community gardens. Community gardens shall be permitted as a
special land use in any zoning district, provided that there are no
existing dwelling units upon the property, subject to the following
required standards:
(1) Special land use and site plan review. All community gardens shall
require special land use approval and site plan review by the
Planning Commission according to § 770-11, Special land uses;
permit procedures, and § 770-12, Site plan review. All applications
for a community garden shall include a plan of operation that
addresses how the garden's activities will be managed to avoid
impacts on natural systems of surrounding uses as well as the
garden's compliance with the Michigan Department of
Agriculture's GAAMP. The plan of operation shall include a detailed
description of all activities that will take place, including, but not
limited to: management and oversight; planting and harvesting of
crops; processing of crops produced on site; watering and
irrigation; application of fertilizers, compost, pesticides,
insecticides, herbicides, and other agricultural chemicals; and use
of equipment and vehicles.
(2) Hours of operation. No gardening or farming activities using
machinery and equipment shall take place between 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. at any community garden.
(3) Placement.
(a) Community gardens on residentially zoned property shall have
a minimum front yard setback equivalent to that of any
adjacent dwelling, or 25 feet where there are no adjacent
dwellings, and minimum side and rear yard setbacks of five
feet. The required front yard setback shall be provided along
both street frontages for community gardens located on corner
lots. Community gardens shall not be placed within any front
yard of residentially zoned property.
(b) Community gardens on property zoned other than residential
shall have minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks of five
feet or the average of adjacent buildings, whichever is greater.
Where a community garden is on the same side of a street on
the same block as a property zoned residential, with or without
an intervening alley, the required front yard setback shall be
that of the adjacent dwelling, or 25 feet if there is no adjacent
dwelling.
(c) All required yard setbacks shall be landscaped with grass,
ground cover, shrubs, or other natural landscape materials
acceptable to the Planning Commission, and shall otherwise
comply with the required standards and regulations of
§ 770-90, Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and screening.
§ 770-56 WATERWORKS § 770-56
752:939
(4) Accessory structures. Any greenhouse related to a community
garden shall comply with the yard setback requirements as
specified in Subsection D(3) above, provided that the combined
ground floor area of all accessory structures does not exceed 25%
of the site's lot area. All other accessory structures related to a
community garden shall comply with § 770-22, Accessory buildings.
(5) Screening. Community gardens shall be screened from view with a
landscaped berm, solid wall or a combination of a wall fencing and
landscaping at least six feet in height along all side and rear lot
lines, as deemed necessary and advisable by the Planning
Commission. Community gardens shall be screened from view with
a landscaped berm, solid wall or a combination of a wall, fencing
and landscaping at least 30 inches in height along all front lot lines
and side lot lines within a front yard, and also along the perimeter
of those sides which are visible from a public street, as deemed
necessary and advisable by the Planning Commission.
(6) Off-street parking. Each community garden shall have a minimum
of two off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for every
acre of garden site lot area over two acres. Off-street parking for a
community garden shall be limited in size to 10% of the garden site
lot area and may be either unpaved or surfaced with gravel or
similar loose material or paved with pervious paving material. Offstreet
parking areas for a community garden shall be exempt from
the hard-surfacing requirements of § 770-109, Off-street parking
lot design and construction, Subsection A.
(7) Additional uses and structures. Community gardens may also
include any of the following accessory uses and/or structures:
raised or accessible planting beds; compost bins; picnic tables;
fences; garden art; rain barrel systems; rest room facilities or
portable toilets; and children's play areas.
(8) Waste containers and enclosures. All community gardens shall have
suitable waste and recyclable containers that are regularly
serviced and screened in accordance with § 770-90I, Screening of
refuse and recyclable containers. The Planning Commission may
also allow screening in the form of a landscape buffer or fence in
accordance with § 770-90D, Screening between land uses.
(9) Sale of crops prohibited. Seasonal farm stands and the on-site sale
of crops grown at a community garden and any other items shall be
prohibited.
(10) Overhead lighting prohibited. Overhead and/or exterior lighting
shall be prohibited at any community garden.
E. Market gardens. Market gardens shall be permitted as a special land
use within any Neighborhood Business, Neighborhood Business II,
General Business, Mixed Use 1, or Mixed Use 2 Zoning District, but
§ 770-56 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-56
752:940
only as an accessory use to any restaurant, grocery store, farmers'
market, or similar use, subject to the following required standards:
(1) Special land use and site plan review. All market gardens shall
require special land use approval and site plan review by the
Planning Commission according to § 770-11, Special land uses;
permit procedures, and § 770-12, Site plan review. All applications
for a market garden shall include a plan of operation that addresses
how the garden's activities will be managed to avoid impacts on
natural systems of surrounding uses as well as the garden's
compliance with the Michigan Department of Agriculture's GAAMP.
The plan of operation shall include a detailed description of all
activities that will take place, including, but not limited to:
management and oversight; planting and harvesting of crops;
processing of crops produced on site; watering and irrigation;
application of fertilizers, compost, pesticides, insecticides,
herbicides, and agricultural chemicals; and use of equipment and
vehicles.
(2) Placement. Market gardens shall have minimum front, side and
rear yard setbacks of five feet or the average of adjacent buildings,
whichever is greater. Where a market garden is on the same side of
a street on the same block as a property zoned residential, with or
without an intervening alley, the required front yard setback shall
be that of the adjacent dwelling, or 25 feet if there is no adjacent
dwelling. All required yard setbacks shall be landscaped with
grass, ground cover, shrubs, or other natural landscape materials
acceptable to the Planning Commission, and shall otherwise
comply with the required standards and regulations of § 770-90,
Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and screening.
(3) Hours of operation. No gardening or farming activities using
machinery and equipment shall take place between 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. at any market garden.
(4) Accessory structures. Any greenhouse or other accessory structure
related to a market garden shall comply with § 770-22, Accessory
buildings, and comply with the area and bulk regulations for the
zoning district in which it is located.
(5) Screening. Market gardens shall be screened from view with a
landscaped berm, solid wall, or a combination of a wall, fencing and
landscaping at least six feet in height along all side and rear lot
lines, as deemed necessary and advisable by the Planning
Commission. Market gardens shall be screened from view with a
landscaped berm, solid wall, or a combination of a wall, fencing and
landscaping at least 30 inches in height along all front lot lines and
side lot lines within a front yard, and also along the perimeter of
those sides which are visible from a public street, as deemed
necessary and advisable by the Planning Commission.
§ 770-56 WATERWORKS § 770-56
752:941
§ 770-57. Billboards. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07]
All billboards shall be subject to the following requirements and standards:
(6) Off-street parking. No additional off-street parking shall be
required for a market garden other than that required for the
restaurant, grocery store, farmers' market, or similar use with
which the garden is associated. If additional off-street parking is
provided, it shall be limited in size to 10% of the garden site lot
area and may be either unpaved or surfaced with gravel or similar
loose material or paved with pervious paving material. Off-street
parking areas for a market garden shall be exempt from the hardsurfacing
requirements of § 770-109, Off-street parking lot design
and construction, Subsection A.
(7) Additional uses and structures. Market gardens may also include
any of the following accessory uses and/or structures: raised or
accessible planting beds; compost bins; picnic tables; seasonal
farm stands for the sale of crops; fences; garden art; rain barrel
systems; rest room facilities or portable toilets; and children's play
areas.
(8) Seasonal farm stands. A market garden may include a seasonal
farm stand for the sale of items grown at the site only and no other
merchandise, provided that the stands shall be removed from the
premises or stored inside a building on the premises or off site at
another location when the garden is not in operation.
(9) Waste containers and enclosures. All market gardens shall have
suitable waste and recyclable containers that are regularly
serviced and screened in accordance with § 770-90I, Screening of
refuse and recyclable containers.
(10) Overhead lighting prohibited. Overhead and/or exterior lighting
shall be prohibited at any market garden.
A. Where permitted. Billboards shall be permitted only in the General
Industrial zone on lots that are not subject to a conditional zoning
agreement and have at least one property line abutting a principal or
minor arterial, as designated by the City of Royal Oak's Master Plan,
subject to the standards contained herein, and the Highway Advertising
Act of 1972, as amended.231
B. Spacing.
(1) Not more than three billboards may be located per linear mile of
street or highway, regardless of the fact that such billboards may
be located on different sides of the street or highway. The linear
mile measurement shall not be limited to the boundaries of the City
where the particular street or highway extends beyond such
231. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 252.301 et seq.
§ 770-56 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-57
752:942
boundaries. Double-faced billboard structures (i.e., structures
having back-to-back billboard faces) and V-type billboard
structures having only one face visible to traffic proceeding from
any given direction on a street or highway shall be considered
as one billboard. Additionally, billboard structures having tandem
billboard faces (i.e., two parallel billboard faces facing the same
direction and side by side to one another) or stacked billboard
faces (i.e., two billboard faces facing the same direction with one
face being directly above the other) shall be considered as one
billboard. Otherwise, billboard structures having more than one
billboard face shall be considered as two billboards and shall be
prohibited in accordance with the minimum spacing requirement
set forth in Subsection (B)(2) below.
(2) No billboard shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard
abutting either side of the same street or highway.
(3) No billboard shall be located within 200 feet of a residential zone
and/or existing residence. If the billboard is illuminated, this
required distance shall instead be 300 feet.
(4) No billboard shall be located closer than 75 feet from a property
line adjoining a public right-of-way or 10 feet from any interior
boundary lines of the premises on which the billboard is located.
(5) All required spacing and setback measurements shall be measured
to the nearest point of a billboard’s structure, including its face or
surface display area.
C. Height. The height of a billboard shall not exceed 25 feet above the
level of the street or road upon which the billboard faces or to which the
message upon the billboard is directed. In the event that the billboard is
situated upon two streets or roads having different levels, the height of
the billboard shall be measured from the higher street or road.
D. Surface area. The surface display area of any side of a billboard may not
exceed 300 square feet. In the case of billboard structures with tandem
or stacked billboard faces, the combined surface display area of both
faces may not exceed 300 square feet.
E. Electronic message.
(1) Findings.
(a) It is recognized that billboards with changeable or continuous,
dynamic content are more distracting and less comprehensible
than static images as they require more attention for longer
periods of time to comprehend the intended message. Studies
show that there is a direct correlation between electronic
messages on billboards and the distraction of drivers which
can lead to traffic accidents. Drivers can be distracted by a
changing message, by waiting for the next change to occur on
§ 770-57 WATERWORKS § 770-57
752:943
a sign, and by messages that do not tell the full story in one
look. Drivers are more distracted by special effects used to
change the message of a billboard, by messages on a sign that
are too small to be clearly seen, or by messages that contain
more than a simple, easily read message.
(b) Despite these public safety concerns, there is merit to allowing
new technologies to easily update messages on billboards.
Except as prohibited by state or federal law, billboard owners
should have the opportunity to use these technologies with
certain, reasonable restrictions. The restrictions are intended
to minimize potential driver distraction and to minimize
proliferation near residential areas where billboards with
electronic messages can adversely impact residential
character.
(c) It is also recognized that billboards do not need to serve the
same way-finding function as do on-premises signs allowed
under Chapter 607, Signs. Further, billboards are allowed only
within certain zoning districts. Billboards are in themselves
distracting and their removal serves public safety. A single
electronic message can serve the function otherwise
performed by multiple traditional billboards. Thus, billboard
owners ought to be encouraged to use electronic messages to
consolidate such activities in appropriate locations while
removing traditional billboards from areas where they are not
appropriate.
(d) The standards within this subsection are therefore intended to
provide incentives for the voluntary and uncompensated
removal of billboards in certain settings. Their removal results
in an overall advancement of one or more of the goals set forth
in this chapter that should more than offset any additional
burden caused by the incentives. These provisions are also
based on the recognition that the incentives create an
opportunity to consolidate billboards that would otherwise
remain distributed throughout the City.
(e) Electronic messages should therefore be allowed on billboards
but with significant and reasonable controls to minimize their
proliferation and potential threats to public safety.
(2) Regulations. A billboard shall not contain any visible moving parts,
revolving parts or mechanical movement of any description or
other apparent visible movement, including intermittent electrical
pulsation or by action of normal wind currents, except for
electronic messages, subject to the following requirements and
standards:
§ 770-57 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-57
752:944
(a) A single, contiguous electronic message may be permitted on
each billboard face. Electronic messages may occupy all of the
actual copy and graphic area of a billboard.
(b) The images and messages displayed must be static or still
images. Animation, video streaming, moving images, or other
pictures and graphics displayed in a progression of frames that
give the illusion of motion or moving objects shall be
prohibited.
(c) The transition from one static image or message to another on
an electronic message shall be instantaneous without any
delay or special effects accomplished by varying the light
intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually reduces
intensity or appears to dissipate and lose legibility
simultaneously with the gradual increase in intensity,
appearance and legibility of the second message, such as, but
not limited to, flashing; blinking; spinning; revolving; shaking;
zooming; fading; dissolving; scrolling; dropping; traveling;
chasing; exploding; or similar effects that have the appearance
of movement, animation, changing in size, or being revealed
sequentially rather than all at once.
(d) An electronic message shall have a minimum duration of 30
seconds except for changes that are necessary to correct time,
date, and/or temperature information. Time, date, and/or
temperature information shall be considered one electronic
message and may not be included as a component of any other
electronic message.
(e) Sequential messaging as part of an electronic message shall be
prohibited. The images and messages displayed shall be
complete in themselves without continuation in content to the
next image or message or to any other billboard.
(f) Every line of copy and graphics in an electronic message must
be at least 12 inches in height. If there is insufficient room for
copy and graphics of this size within the actual copy and
graphic area of a billboard then no electronic message shall be
permitted.
(g) Electronic messages shall be designed and equipped to freeze
the device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays
must also be equipped with a means to immediately
discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the billboard
owner must immediately stop the electronic message when
notified by the City that it is not complying with the standards
of this section. Prior to issuing any necessary permits for an
electronic message, the applicant shall submit to the City
written verification from the manufacturer that the electronic
message is so designed and equipped.
§ 770-57 WATERWORKS § 770-57
752:945
(h) Audio speakers shall be prohibited in association with any
electronic message.
(3) Incentives.
(a) An applicant may obtain a permit for an electronic message on
an existing billboard, even if said billboard is nonconforming,
and the City shall issue such a permit, provided the electronic
message complies with the following permit requirements and
meets all other required standards of this chapter.
[1] The applicant shall agree, in writing, to permanently
remove, prior to the issuance of any necessary permits to
install an electronic message, at least two other
nonconforming billboards within the City owned or leased
by the applicant, each of which must satisfy the criteria of
Subsection E(3)(a)[2] through [4] below. Removal shall
include the complete removal of the structure and
foundation supporting each billboard. The Zoning
Administrator shall verify that the billboards to be
removed are nonconforming, and the Building Official
shall verify that the nonconforming billboards have been
removed prior to issuing any necessary permits for an
electronic message. The applicant shall also agree, in
writing, that it is removing the nonconforming billboards
voluntarily and that it has no right to compensation for the
removed billboards under any law. When executed, the
applicant shall record said agreement with the Oakland
County Registrar of Deeds.
[2] No permit for an electronic message based on the removal
of the particular billboards relied upon in this permit
application shall have previously been issued by the City.
[3] Each removed billboard shall have a copy and graphic area
equal to or greater than the area of the copy and graphic
area for which the electronic message permit is sought.
[4] If a billboard to be removed is one for which a permit is
required by the State of Michigan, the applicant shall
surrender its permit to the state upon removal of the
billboard. Proof shall be submitted to the City that the
state permit has been surrendered prior to any necessary
permits for an electronic message being issued by the City.
(b) No permit for an electronic message shall be issued for an
existing, nonconforming billboard unless the applicant is able
to remove at least two other nonconforming billboards within
the City owned or leased by the applicant as described is
Subsection E(3)(a)[1] through [4] above.
§ 770-57 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-57
752:946
F. Illumination. A billboard may be illuminated, provided such illumination
is concentrated on the surface of the sign and is located so as to avoid
glare or reflection onto any portion of an adjacent street or highway, the
path of oncoming vehicles or any adjacent premises. In no event shall
any billboard have flashing or intermittent lights, nor shall the lights be
permitted to rotate or oscillate, except for electronic messages in
accordance with the required standards of this section.
(1) All billboards including any electronic messages shall meet the
following illumination and brightness standards in addition to those
contained in § 770-96, Glare and exterior lighting:
(a) No illuminated billboard shall be brighter than is necessary for
clear and adequate visibility.
(b) No illuminated billboard shall be of such intensity or brilliance
as to impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver with average
eyesight or to otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of
a motor vehicle.
(c) No illuminated billboard shall be of such intensity or brilliance
that it interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic
sign, device or signal.
(2) Prior to issuing any necessary permits for an electronic message,
the applicant shall submit to the City written verification from the
manufacturer that the electronic message is preset not to exceed
the maximum permitted illumination levels of this chapter, and
equipped with a manual control that allows the brightness to be
lowered but not raised above the maximum permitted illumination
levels of this chapter.
(3) The person owning or controlling the billboard shall adjust its
illumination to meet the brightness standards in accordance with
the City's instructions. The adjustment shall be made immediately
upon notice of noncompliance from the City.
(4) All billboards with illumination by a means other than natural light
shall be equipped with a mechanism to automatically adjust the
brightness in response to ambient conditions and to produce a
distinct reduction in the level of illumination for the time period
between one half-hour prior to sunset and one half-hour after
sunrise. Such billboards shall also be equipped with a means to
immediately turn off the display or lighting if they malfunction, and
the billboard owner shall immediately turn off the electronic
messages or lighting when notified by the City that it is not in
compliance with the standards of this chapter.
G. Construction and maintenance.
(1) No billboard shall be on top of, cantilevered or otherwise
suspended above the roof of any building.
§ 770-57 WATERWORKS § 770-57
752:947
§ 770-58. Single-Family Residential Overlay District.
In the One-Family Residential Zone, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected, converted, or structurally altered unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the following
uses:
(2) A billboard must be constructed in such a fashion that it will
withstand all wind and vibration forces that can normally be
expected to occur in the vicinity. A billboard must be maintained so
as to assure proper alignment of structure, continued structural
soundness and continued readability of message.
A. Existing two-family and/or multiple-family and/or commercial uses shall
be permitted in the One-Family Residential Overlay District (See
map232), subject to special land use approval to the limited area extent
and in accordance with the standards and procedures provided in this
subsection.
(1) Definitions. For the specific purpose of this subsection, the
following terms are defined:
EXISTING TWO-FAMILY AND/OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY USES —
Those duplex and multiple-family uses that meet one of the
following two criteria on the date of enactment of the ordinance
amendment initially creating this subsection of the Zoning
Ordinance:
MATERIAL MODIFICATION — A modification that results in any
one or more of the following:
An occupancy permit has been issued for the residences within
the structure, and a license has been issued for more than one
residence (and for all residential units claimed to exist) within
the structure under the City's Landlord Tenant Ordinance.
(a)
A multiple-family residential unit is registered under the State
Condominium Act,233 and an occupancy permit has been issued
for the residences in the structure, or a building permit has
been issued for such residences and substantial on-site work
pursuant to said permit had been performed.
(b)
An increase of residential density; or an increase in the floor
area of a commercial building.
(a)
A modification of the exterior appearance of the structure that
would reasonably be expected to reduce the property value of
nearby properties.
(b)
232. Editor's Note: The One-Family Residential Overlay District Map is included at the end of
this chapter.
233. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 770-57 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-58
752:948
ONE-FAMILY OVERLAY DISTRICT — The properties within the
district shown on the One-Family Overlay Map which is
incorporated as part of this subsection.234
A modification that will have some other demonstrable adverse
impact upon one or more family residential users in the
neighborhood.
(c)
(2) Existing two-family and/or multiple-family and/or commercial uses
shall be subject to the following:
(a) Existing two-family and/or multiple-family and/or commercial
uses within the One-Family Residential Overlay District shall,
by enactment of this provision, be granted the special land use
status of being uses which conform to the parking, use, setback
and density provisions of this chapter and, therefore, shall not
be burdened with customary nonconforming use status. As
such, destruction of a structure in a manner which would
otherwise not permit reconstruction shall not apply to the
extent that reconstruction of the parking, use, setback and
density existing on the property at the time of destruction shall
be permitted to the extent that building and safety codes are
met.
(b) This subsection is intended to be a special program to achieve
specific land management objectives and avert or solve specific
land use problems, as authorized in Public Act 110, as
amended, § 125.3201, and consistent with the Master Plan.
Accordingly, application for special land use approval shall be
deemed implicit in the lawful establishment and lawful
continued use of existing two-family and/or multiple-family
and/or commercial uses within the One-Family Overlay
District. Supporting materials shall include, but are not limited
to, the occupancy permit and license under the City's Tenant
Ordinance, on file with the City, or a copy of the Condominium
Act,235 together with a copy of the certificate of occupancy or
building permit, or with respect to commercial properties, an
occupancy permit, initial merchants license (where applicable)
and/or a building permit. Review and approval of the
application shall be deemed to have been made and granted as
part of the enactment of this subsection of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(c) Such grant of special land use conforming status shall be
further subject to the conditions that any and all future
additions and material modifications shall conform to
construction codes and all other ordinance requirements of the
234. Editor's Note: The One-Family Residential Overlay District Map is included at the end of
this chapter.
235. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 770-58 WATERWORKS § 770-58
752:949
City, and that conforming status shall extend only to parking,
use, setback and density.
(d) The Planning Department shall maintain the list of properties
determined eligible as a special land use under Ordinance No.
2000-21, as adopted on July 10, 2000. Upon request, the
Planning Department shall provide a special use permit for
each eligible two-family and/or multiple family and/or
commercial use approved as part of this provision, specifying,
among other things, that the special land use has been
granted, and that the use shall be conforming as to parking,
use, setback and density, and further specifying the type of
land use and/or number of units with the respective use. A copy
of each permit shall be maintained at the City.
(e) The owner of property which has received special land use
approval under this subsection who desires to materially
modify a structure and/or property shall apply for an
amendment of the special land use granted in this provision.
Such application, and the processing of the application, shall
be in accordance with the customary special land use
procedure in this chapter.
(f) The Plan Commission may authorize a modification of a
structure, use and/or site improvement if, in the sole discretion
of the Plan Commission, it is determined that the applicant has
demonstrated that the use and improvements on this property
shall have equal or less intensity and off-site impact than
existing prior to the modification.
(3) Properties not having existing two-family and/or multiple-family
and/or commercial uses shall be subject to the following:
(a) Existing properties within the One-Family Residential Overlay
District that are existing on the date of enactment of the
ordinance amendment initially creating this subsection of the
Zoning Ordinance shall not be granted the special land use
status of being uses which conform to the use and density
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Therefore, such properties
shall in all respects be subject to the One-Family Residential
use and area and bulk regulations in order to achieve the
following critical public health, safety and general welfare
objectives:
[1] To avoid authorization of the expansion of multiple-family
and commercial uses that will undermine the new viability
of the existing one-family uses within the City, as
recognized in the Master Plan, as amended, and, thus,
frustrate the reestablishment of the City as a mature
community area which has been able to make meaningful
progress toward renewal and regeneration.
§ 770-58 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-58
752:950
§ 770-59. Day-care facilities.
The intent of this section is to establish standards for day-care facilities
which will insure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the
character of the neighborhood.
[2] To avoid the destruction of the basic one-family character
and integrity of the neighborhoods in which such
properties are situated and, thus, avoid a long-term
blighting effect and corresponding reduction in property
values in and surrounding such neighborhoods.
A. Standards for group day-care homes and day-care centers. Day-care
centers shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Dropoff and pickup shall be provided for in a manner which
protects the safety of children and does not create congestion on
the site or within a public roadway.
(2) There shall be an outdoor play area of at least 500 square feet
provided on the premises. Said play area shall not be located within
the front yard setback. This requirement may be waived by the Plan
Commission if a public play area is available 500 feet from the
subject parcel.
(3) All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a fence that is designed
to discourage climbing, and is at least four feet in height, but no
higher than six feet.
(4) The hours of operation shall not exceed 16 hours within a twentyfour-
hour period. Activity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. shall be limited so that the dropoff and pickup of children is
not disruptive to neighboring residents.
(5) Applicable licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
B. Standards for adult day-care facilities shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(1) The drop-off/pick-up area shall be provided at the front entrance of
the building or as far as practicable from a One-Family Residential
Zone District. Access to all entry/exit doors and all sides of a
building shall be provided in a manner acceptable to the Plan
Commission, based on a recommendation from the Fire
Department.
(2) The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the
character of the neighborhood.
(3) In its sole discretion, the Plan Commission may determine that
landscape screening in accordance with § 770-90D, Screening
between land uses, is required to effectively screen any exterior
areas used for congregating.
§ 770-58 WATERWORKS § 770-59
752:951
§ 770-60. Adult foster care facilities (small, medium, large).
Adult foster care facilities shall be subject to the following additional
requirements:
§ 770-61. Child foster family group home; foster care facilities
(small, medium, large).
Child foster family group home facilities shall be subject to the following
additional requirements:
(4) Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be
maintained.
(5) The building shall be setback from all residentially zoned property
a minimum of 300 feet unless the Plan Commission determines the
following:
(a) Complies with the goals, objectives and policies of the Master
Plan.
(b) Is designed and constructed to be harmonious and appropriate
in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and will not change the essential character of
the area.
(c) Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing uses or uses
reasonably anticipated in the future.
A. The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for
the zone in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of
1,000 square feet per adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers.
B. The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the
character of the neighborhood.
C. In its sole discretion, the Plan Commission may determine that
landscape screening in accordance with § 770-90D, Screening between
land uses is required.
D. Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
A. The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for
the zone in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of
1,000 square feet per child, excluding employees and/or caregivers.
B. The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the
character of the neighborhood.
C. In its sole discretion, the Plan Commission may determine that
landscape screening in accordance with § 770-90D, Screening between
land uses is required.
D. Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
§ 770-59 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-62
752:952
§ 770-62. Self-storage facilities.
Self-storage facilities shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 770-63. Vehicle dealers.236
Outdoor sales, lease and rental of new and used automobiles, boats,
recreational vehicles, mobile homes, lawn care and construction machinery
and other vehicles and similar uses shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. No activity other than rental of storage units shall be allowed. No
commercial, wholesale, retail, industrial or other business activity shall
be conducted from the facility.
B. The storage of any toxic, explosive, corrosive, flammable or hazardous
materials is prohibited. Fuel tanks on any motor vehicle, boat, lawn
mower or similar property will be drained or removed prior to storage.
Batteries shall be removed from vehicles before storage.
C. All storage, including vehicles of any kind, shall be contained within a
completely enclosed building.
D. Exterior walls of the ends of all storage units shall be of masonry or
face-brick construction.
E. All storage units must be accessible by paved circular drives clearly
marked to distinguish traffic flow. A minimum twenty-four-foot drive
shall be provided between buildings. Site circulation shall be designed
to accommodate fire trucks, as well as trucks that will customarily
access the site.
F. A demonstrated means of security and management shall be provided.
A. There shall be no strings of flags, pennants or bare light bulbs
permitted.
B. All areas intended for required parking and aisles shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with § 770-109, Off-street parking lot design
and construction. The outdoor display areas for vehicles shall
accommodate pedestrian traffic and provide for the maneuvering of
vehicles on private property.
C. Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and volume of
vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner which does not
create a traffic safety or congestion problem.
D. A landscaped greenbelt measuring a minimum of 10 feet in width shall
be provided. No vehicles or merchandise shall be displayed within the
required greenbelt. At a minimum, landscaping of the front greenbelt in
accordance with the standards set forth in § 770-90F, Front yard
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 727, Vehicles, Sale of, Art. I, Vehicle Dealers.
§ 770-62 WATERWORKS § 770-63
752:953
§ 770-64. Automobile filling stations.
Automobile filling stations shall be subject to the following requirements:
landscape or greenbelts, shall be provided, unless otherwise modified
by the Plan Commission in accordance with § 770-90M, Plan
Commission modifications to requirements.
E. There shall be no broadcast of continuous music or announcements
over any loudspeaker or public address system.
F. The Plan Commission, as part of site plan review, shall determine that
the lot area and frontage is adequate to support the operation in
compliance with all chapter requirements.
G. All accessory uses shall comply with ordinance provisions for that
specific use as identified herein.
H. The location of all vehicles and machinery intended for sale, lease or
rental shall be identified on the site plan. All other outdoor storage is
explicitly prohibited.
I. The loading and unloading of merchandise (vehicles, etc.) and supplies
shall be conducted entirely within the site and shall not be permitted
within the public right-of-way.
J. Required parking shall not be used for the display of vehicles for sale or
lease.
A. The minimum lot area required shall be 12,000 square feet. However, in
its sole discretion, the Plan Commission may determine a lesser or
greater amount is required to support the proposed operation.
B. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for each 50 feet of
street frontage or major fraction thereof. No driveway or curb opening
shall be located nearer than 20 feet to any corner lot line. No driveway
shall be located nearer than 30 feet to any other driveway serving the
site. However, in its sole discretion, the Plan Commission may
determine an alternate design as determined necessary.
C. Curb openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would
create a safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in
relation to other drives, its location in relation to the traffic generated
by other buildings or uses or its location near vehicular or pedestrian
entrances or crossings, or similar concerns.
D. Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and volume of
vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner, which does not
create a traffic safety or congestion problem.
E. A landscaped greenbelt adjacent to all public rights-of-way measuring a
minimum of 10 feet in width shall be provided. At a minimum,
landscaping of the front greenbelt in accordance with the standards set
§ 770-63 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-64
752:954
forth in § 770-90F, Front yard landscape or greenbelts, shall be
provided, unless otherwise modified by the Plan Commission in
accordance with § 770-90M, Plan Commission modifications to
requirements.
F. Automobile filling stations, particularly those, which offer additional
services, shall be designed in a manner which promotes pedestrian and
vehicular safety. Buildings shall comply with the setback requirements
for the district in which the use is located. Pump islands shall be
arranged so that motor vehicles do not park upon or overhang any
public sidewalk, street or right-of-way while waiting for or receiving
fuel service.
G. Outdoor display of merchandise for sale shall be limited to those areas
approved as part of site plan review. All seasonal and transient
merchants shall comply with § 770-69, Seasonal and transient display of
product or material intended for sale. Applicable licenses with the City
shall be maintained.
H. Required off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 770-107, Table of Off-Street Parking
Requirements, and shall be computed on the basis of each separate use.
I. Access to underground tanks shall be arranged so that delivery vehicles
do not conflict with any public right-of-way, off-street parking or
pedestrian access and have sufficient maneuvering aisles to support the
maximum size vehicles used for deliveries.
J. Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the standards
set forth in § 770-110, Off-street loading requirements.
K. All canopy lighting shall be recessed and down-shielded. All site
lighting shall be directed downward and shielded to prevent light from
shining on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, in accordance
with § 770-96, Glare and exterior lighting.
L. Broadcasting of continuous music or announcements over any
loudspeaker or public address system is prohibited.
M. All exterior accessory equipment shall be identified on the site plan,
including but not limited to air pumps, public telephones, ice machines,
etc.
N. The Plan Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare from excessive noises, traffic, obnoxious and unhealthy odors
and any detrimental effects from the general operation of such filling
station.
§ 770-64 WATERWORKS § 770-65
752:955
§ 770-65. Automobile service stations.
Automobile service stations shall be subject to all of the requirements
included in § 770-64, Automobile filling stations, and the following
additional requirements:
A. The minimum lot area required for such use shall be 12,000 square feet.
However, in its sole discretion, the Plan Commission may determine a
lesser or greater amount is required to support the proposed operation.
B. Any work including repairs, servicing, greasing and/or washing motor
vehicles shall be conducted within an enclosed building. All equipment
and service bays shall be located entirely within an enclosed building.
C. Overhead doors shall be kept closed at all times except when being
used for vehicle access and shall not face property zoned for residential
use unless otherwise permitted by the Plan Commission in the course of
its review.
D. Outdoor storage or parking of vehicles, except for two private
automobiles per indoor stall or service area of the facility, shall be
prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless
otherwise revised by the Plan Commission in the course of its review.
E. All outdoor areas used for the storage of motor vehicles waiting for
service shall be effectively screened from view from abutting properties
and public streets. Such screening shall be in accordance with the
requirements of § 770-90, Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and
screening. Parking areas for employees and customers shall be
separate and apart from the storage area.
F. A landscaped greenbelt adjacent to all public rights-of-way measuring a
minimum of 10 feet in width shall be provided. At a minimum,
landscaping of the front greenbelt in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 770-90F, Front yard landscape or greenbelts, shall be
provided, unless otherwise modified by the Plan Commission in
accordance with § 770-90M, Plan Commission modifications to
requirements.
G. Partially dismantled vehicles, damaged vehicles, new and used parts
and discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
H. The Plan Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare from excessive noises, vibrations, traffic, obnoxious and
unhealthy odors and any detrimental effects from the general operation
of such service station.
I. Vehicle sales which are clearly incidental to the automobile service
station, shall comply with § 770-84, Outdoor display and sales. The
§ 770-65 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-65
752:956
§ 770-66. Automobile repair garage.
Automobile repair garages shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 770-67. Automobile washes.
Automobile washes shall be subject to the following requirements:
location of all vehicles intended for sale shall be identified on the site
plan.
A. The Plan Commission, as part of site plan review, shall determine that
the lot area and frontage is adequate to support the operation in
compliance with all ordinance requirements.
B. A landscaped greenbelt adjacent to all public rights-of-way measuring a
minimum of 10 feet in width shall be provided. At a minimum,
landscaping of the front greenbelt in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 770-90F, Front yard landscape or greenbelts, shall be
provided, unless otherwise modified by the Plan Commission in
accordance with § 770-90M, Plan Commission modifications to
requirements.
C. Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and volume of
vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner which does not
create a traffic safety or congestion problem.
D. Any work including repairs, servicing, greasing and/or washing of
motor vehicles shall be conducted within an enclosed building. The Plan
Commission as part of site plan review may determine if additional
building setback is necessary to provide sufficient area to support the
operation and mitigate the impact on adjacent properties.
E. All outdoor areas used for the storage of motor vehicles waiting for
service shall be effectively screened from view from abutting properties
and public streets. Such screening shall be in accordance with the
requirements of § 770-90D, Screening between land uses. Parking
areas for employees and customers shall be separate and apart from
the storage area.
F. The Plan Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare from excessive noises, vibrations, traffic, obnoxious and
unhealthy odors and any detrimental effects from the general operation
of such automobile repair garage.
G. Vehicle sales which are clearly incidental to the automobile service
station, shall comply with § 770-84, Outdoor display and sales. The
location of all vehicles intended for sale shall be identified on the site
plan.
§ 770-65 WATERWORKS § 770-67
752:957
A. The Plan Commission, as part of site plan review, shall determine that
the lot area and frontage is adequate to support the operation in
compliance with all ordinance requirements.
B. Sufficient space shall be provided on the lot so that vehicles do not
enter or exit the wash building directly from an adjacent street or alley.
All maneuvering areas, stacking lanes and exit aprons shall be located
on the site. Streets and alleys shall not be used for maneuvering or
parking by vehicles to be serviced by the automobile wash without City
approval.
C. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for each 50 feet of
street frontage. No driveway or curb opening shall be located nearer
than 20 feet to any corner or exterior lot line. No driveway shall be
located nearer than 30 feet to any other driveway serving the site.
However, in its sole discretion, the Plan Commission may determine an
alternate design as determined necessary.
D. Curb openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would
create a safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in
relation to other ingress and egress drives, its location in relation to the
traffic generated by other building or uses or its location near a
vehicular or pedestrian entrances or crossings, or similar concerns.
E. A landscaped greenbelt adjacent to all public rights-of-way measuring a
minimum of 10 feet in width shall be provided. At a minimum,
landscaping of the front greenbelt in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 770-90F, Front yard landscape or greenbelts, shall be
provided, unless otherwise modified by the Plan Commission in
accordance with § 770-90M, Plan Commission modifications to
requirements.
F. Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and volume of
vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner, which does not
create a traffic safety or congestion problem.
G. All washing activities shall be carried on within a building. Vacuuming
activities shall be located as far as practicable from residentially zoned
property, and in no case shall they be located closer than 50 feet from
an adjacent residential zone.
H. All car wash facilities shall provide a drainage system installed midway
from the exit door of the wash structure to the nearest exit drive at a
low point to limit water runoff.
I. The Plan Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare from excessive noises, vibrations, traffic, obnoxious and
unhealthy odors and any detrimental effects from the general operation
of such automobile washes.
§ 770-67 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-68
752:958
§ 770-68. General, building and landscape contractor's offices and
yards.
Contractor's offices and yards shall be subject to the following
requirements:
§ 770-69. Seasonal and transient display of products or materials
intended for sale.237
The sale of seasonal items such as Christmas trees, flowers and plants,
pumpkins and other such seasonal items, and the sale of any other
merchandise by persons other than the owner or occupant of the premises,
shall be subject to the following standards and conditions:
A. A contractor's office building shall be of permanent construction.
Temporary construction trailers shall not be permitted to be occupied
as the office of the contractor. Outdoor storage shall be strictly and
clearly accessory to the contractor's principal office use of the property.
Only products, materials and equipment owned and operated by the
principal use shall be permitted for storage. Storage of all motorized
equipment shall be on a paved surface.
B. A landscaped greenbelt adjacent to all public rights-of-way measuring a
minimum of 10 feet in width shall be provided, unless otherwise
modified by the Plan Commission in accordance with § 770-90M, Plan
Commission modifications to requirements.
C. Storage shall not be located within the front yard. Stored materials
shall not be located in any required parking or loading space(s).
Storage of any kind shall not interfere with ingress and egress of fire
and emergency vehicles and apparatus.
D. Storage shall be screened from the view of a public street and adjacent
properties in accordance with the requirements of § 770-90,
Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and screening.
E. The location and size of areas for storage, nature of items to be stored
therein, and details of the enclosure, including a description of
materials, height, and typical elevation of the enclosure, shall be
provided as part of the information submitted under § 770-12, Site plan
review.
F. The loading and unloading of equipment shall be conducted entirely
within the site and shall not be permitted within a public right-of-way.
A. Transient or seasonal sales may be located within any required yard,
provided a ten-foot landscaped greenbelt meeting the requirements of
§ 770-90F, Front yard landscape or greenbelts, is provided between any
outdoor display and any public road right-of-way. Where outdoor
displays abut residentially zoned property, landscape screening in
237. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 244, Christmas Trees.
§ 770-68 WATERWORKS § 770-69
752:959
§ 770-70. Outdoor cafe service.
An outdoor cafe service operated by a restaurant or other food
establishment which sells food for immediate consumption may be
permitted, on private property of the principal use, subject to the following
conditions:
accordance with § 770-90D, Screening between land uses, shall also be
provided.
B. Transient or seasonal sales shall not occupy or obstruct the use of any
fire lane, required off-street parking or landscaped area required to
meet the requirements of Article IX or Subsection A or create a traffic
or safety hazard.
C. Off-street parking and maneuvering lanes shall meet minimum
ordinance requirements for the retail use based upon the area
designated for display and storage of products as determined by the
Zoning Administrator. All loading and unloading areas and off-street
parking and maneuvering lanes shall be located within the boundaries
of the site.
D. All such sales shall be conducted in a manner so as not to create a
nuisance to neighboring properties through adequate on-site parking
and ingress and egress to the site.
E. Upon discontinuance of the seasonal use, any temporary structures
shall be removed within 48 hours.
F. Signs shall conform to the provisions of the district in which the
seasonal use is located.
A. An outdoor cafe shall be allowed only during normal operating hours of
the establishment.
B. All food preparation shall take place inside the establishment.
C. If alcoholic beverages are to be served, the current Liquor Control
Commission Rules and Regulations shall apply.
D. The gross area of the cafe shall be included in the required parking
calculation.
E. No music, intercom or other noise shall be permitted that impacts
adjacent properties.
F. Appropriate screening and/or fencing shall be provided as determined
to be necessary and advisable by the Plan Commission in the course of
its site plan review process.
G. Cafe service areas shall comply with all regulations and provisions
required for the establishment/building.
§ 770-69 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-71
752:960
§ 770-71. Senior accessory housing.
A single-family dwelling unit may be converted to allow the incorporation
(within or attached to an existing dwelling) of one additional dwelling unit
for an elderly related person in a residential district subject to the following
conditions:
§ 770-72. Senior housing, adult foster care congregate facility and
convalescent centers.
A. The dwelling shall be owner-occupied during the duration of the special
use permit. The special use permit shall be reviewed by the City every
two years from the date of occupancy to determine compliance with all
related provisions. The City shall require proof that an elderly family
member continues to occupy the additional dwelling unit. This may
include but is not limited to a state identification card and/or mail
addressed to the individual from federal, state or local agencies or a
physician's office. If it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that
the permit is in violation of any of the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance or of any other ordinances or regulations of the City, the
special land use permit may be suspended or revoked pursuant to
§ 770-11D, Duration, voiding and extensions of permit.
B. The additional dwelling unit shall not exceed 600 square feet of floor
area, unless such parts of an existing dwelling are otherwise arranged
or designed to be reasonably, conveniently and safely transformed into
a slightly larger one-bedroom unit.
C. A dedicated off-street parking space shall be provided for the senior
accessory unit.
D. All residential zoning district bulk and setback requirements shall apply
to the site.
E. The property owner shall record with the Oakland County Register of
Deeds that the property was used under the provisions of § 770-71,
Senior accessory housing, contained within the City of Royal Oak
Zoning Ordinance and may not be continued as a two-family land use.
A. Intent. These provisions are intended to permit the development of
senior housing, adult foster care congregate facility and convalescent
centers upon site plan approval by the Plan Commission. The location,
size, design, and operating characteristics of the use will be compatible
with the character of the surrounding neighborhood, with consideration
given to the scale, bulk, coverage, and density of development; to the
availability of services and utilities; to the generation of traffic and the
capacity of surrounding streets; and to any other relevant impacts of
the use.
B. Senior housing, adult foster care congregate facility and convalescent
centers shall be subject to the following conditions:
§ 770-71 WATERWORKS § 770-72
752:961
(1) Perimeter setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks from the
perimeter property boundaries shall be no less than 25 feet from
any public road right-of-way, 50 feet from any adjacent property
zoned for single-family residential, and 25 feet from all other
property lines. These requirements shall apply in all zoning
districts with the exception of the Central Business District;
however, the Plan Commission may approve modified perimeter
setbacks under the following conditions:
(a) Landscape screening is provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 770-90, Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers
and screening.
(b) The scale and size of the building is complementary to the
adjacent residentially zoned land.
(2) Internal spacing.
(a) Minimum spacing between buildings shall be in accordance
with the following requirements:
Building Orientation
Distance Between
Buildings
(feet)
Side/side orientation 20
Side/front, side/rear orientation 20
Front/front, front/rear orientation 30
(b) The Plan Commission, in its sole discretion, may reduce
building spacing requirements where enclosed, heated
walkways are provided and applicable building and fire code
requirements are met.
(3) Minimum floor area. Each unit shall comply with the following
minimum floor area requirements. In order to provide variation in
the size of units offered to prospective residents, at least 25% of the
units in each category of room offered (i.e., one- or two-person
rooms) shall be 10% larger than the minimum.
Number of Residents
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
One resident per unit 250
Each additional resident per unit 150
(4) Building design.
(a) No building shall exceed 250 feet in overall length, measured
along any continuous elevation. The Plan Commission may
permit buildings of greater length when it can be
§ 770-72 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-72
752:962
§ 770-73. Residential accessory off-street parking lots.
These provisions are intended to limit the development of an accessory
parking area within residentially zoned properties as a special land use in
accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in § 770-11, Special
land uses; permit procedures, provided the final determination of approval,
approval with conditions, or denial shall be made by the City Commission
following a recommendation from the Plan Commission. Furthermore,
residential off-street parking lots shall be subject to the following
conditions:
demonstrated that architectural design and natural and
topographic features ensure that the building is in scale with
the site and surrounding areas.
(b) Building facades of greater than 100 feet in length shall
incorporate recesses or projections to break up the expanse of
the building elevation.
(c) Architectural interest shall be provided through the use of
repeating patterns of change in color, texture and material. All
senior housing facilities shall utilize residential exterior
materials and design features.
(d) All roofs shall be sloped with a pitch of no less than 5:12. There
shall be variations in rooflines to reduce the scale of the
building and add interest.
(5) Lighting. All parking areas, building entrances, sidewalks, and
ramps shall be illuminated to ensure the security of property and
safety of persons using such areas, in accordance with the
requirements set forth in § 770-96, Glare and exterior lighting.
(6) Resident and emergency access. The dropoff/pickup of residents
shall be provided at the front entrance of the building with a
covered canopy. Access to all entry/exit doors and all sides of a
building shall be provided in a manner acceptable to the Plan
Commission, based on a recommendation from the Fire
Department.
A. No encroachment is permitted unless the City Commission determines
that additional encroachment would not be detrimental to the
neighborhood as based upon the following criteria:
(1) Complies with the goals, objectives and policies of the Master Plan.
(2) Is designed and constructed to be harmonious and appropriate in
appearance with the existing or intended character of the general
vicinity and will not change the essential character of the area.
(3) Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing uses or uses
reasonably anticipated in the future.
§ 770-72 WATERWORKS § 770-73
752:963
§ 770-74. Churches and other institutions for religious worship.
B. All applicable Article IX, Off-Street Parking and Loading, requirements
shall apply unless otherwise stated in this section.
C. No parking shall be permitted between the property line and the front
setback prevailing in the zone in which such lot is located or a lesser
setback as determined advisable by the City Commission. The resulting
open area shall be planted with grass, or otherwise landscaped in
accordance with § 770-90, Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and
screening.
D. A six-foot-high masonry wall shall be built along the mutual boundary of
the residential accessory parking area and adjacent land zoned to a
residential classification, except for the boundary included within a
required front setback.
(1) Whenever a lot located in a residential zone and used for accessory
parking purposes is located across the street from other land in any
residential zone, that portion of the lot used for parking purposes
shall be enclosed with a masonry wall. The wall shall be placed
along the property line, and the height of said wall shall be no less
than 30 inches or greater than six feet or a height as determined to
be necessary by the City Commission.
(2) The City Commission may also require additional landscaping in
accordance with § 770-90, Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and
screening.
E. Ingress and egress for vehicles to premises used for parking shall be by
private drives through the business that the parking is accessory to the
alley adjacent to the business and residential property, or by means of
streets adjacent to such parking premises where such means of ingress
and egress can be established adjacent to an alley and not adjacent to
land designated for residential use or as determined advisable by the
City Commission.
F. Parking facilities shall be considered as a necessary accessory use, and
the required parking area shall be used only for the parking of vehicles
of customers, patrons and employees.
G. Not more than two buildings for shelter of attendants shall be erected
upon any given parking area, and each such building shall be not more
than 50 square feet in area, and no more than 10 feet in height.
H. Not more than one directional sign may be erected at each point of
ingress or egress. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area
and four feet in height and may also bear the name of the enterprise
serviced thereby.
A. A church or other institution for religious worship may be permitted in
the residential zones, subject to the following conditions:
§ 770-73 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-74
752:964
§ 770-75. Materials recovery facility.
A materials recovery facility is for the receipt, temporary storage, handling,
sorting, and distribution of solid recyclable materials, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Front and side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Rear
yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 35 feet.
(2) The site shall have access from the parking lot to an urban collector
as defined in the City's Master Plan.
(3) Accessory uses shall be limited to those permitted and special land
uses identified for the zone district. Principal and accessory land
uses shall be subject to regulations and general and special
provisions outlined in this chapter.
B. A church or other institution for religious worship located in other
zones shall be subject to the requirements of the zone in which it is
located.
A. All recyclable materials shall at all times be stored within a completely
enclosed building.
B. The proposed use must be of such location, size and character that it
will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the
surrounding area. A minimum three-acre site is required.
C. The location and size of the proposed use or uses, the nature and
intensity of the principal use and all accessory uses, the site layout and
its relation to streets giving access to it shall be such that traffic to and
from the use and uses, and the assembly of persons in connection
therewith, will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the area nor unduly
conflict with the normal traffic of the area. Vehicles loading or
unloading shall be contained within the property. All driveways and
parking areas on the site shall be hard surfaced to specifications of the
Engineering Department.
D. The location and height of buildings or structures and the location,
nature, and height of doors, walls and screening devices must be such
that the proposed use will not have a detrimental effect upon the
neighboring property or the neighboring area in general, nor impair the
value of the neighboring property, nor interfere with or discourage the
appropriate development and use of adjacent land or buildings or
unreasonably affect their value. Such buildings shall be completely
enclosed.
E. The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any
such proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance
likely to emanate therefrom which might be noxious to the occupants of
any other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of dust, noise,
fumes, vibration, smoke or lights, or the presence of toxic materials.
§ 770-74 WATERWORKS § 770-75
752:965
§ 770-76. Adult-oriented commercial enterprises and specified
services.238
In the preparation and enactment of this chapter, it is recognized that
there are some uses, which, because of their very nature, have operational
characteristics that have a serious and deleterious impact upon residential,
office and commercial areas. Regulation of the locations of these uses
is necessary to ensure that the negative secondary impact that such
businesses have been documented to have will not cause or contribute
to the blighting or downgrading of the City's residential neighborhoods,
community uses which support a residential environment, and commercial
centers. The regulations in this section are for the purpose of locating
these uses in areas where the adverse impact of their operations may
F. The proposed use must comply in every respect with the special
requirements and regulations provided for such use.
G. The proposed use must provide for proper yard space, parking
facilities, loading space, setbacks, screening walls, size of buildings, lot
area and width and other requirements of this chapter.
H. The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this
chapter and not be inconsistent with or contrary to the objectives
sought to be accomplished by this chapter and the principles of sound
planning.
I. The following activities shall be prohibited, except as noted:
(1) Incineration or open burning in any building or on the site shall be
prohibited.
(2) Overnight storage of any refuse material, other than recyclable
materials, in any building shall be prohibited.
(3) Dumping or storage of material on the site outside the buildings at
any time shall be prohibited.
J. Materials such as recyclable glass, fiber, household appliances and
scrap metal temporarily stored outside the buildings must be in
transport vehicles or transportable containers.
K. The Plan Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare from excessive noises, vibrations, traffic, obnoxious and
unhealthy odors, and any detrimental effects from the general
operation of such transfer station.
L. The Plan Commission may impose additional conditions and safeguards
as it deems necessary to minimize any adverse effect of a proposed
installation on the character of the surrounding area.
238. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 213, Books, Magazines and Videos, Sale of.
§ 770-75 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-76
752:966
be minimized by the separation of such uses from one another and from
residential neighborhoods and places of public congregation. The provisions
of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
A. Uses subject to these controls are as follows (hereinafter referred to as
"regulated uses"):
(1) Adult-oriented commercial enterprises.
(2) Escort services and/or escort agencies.
(3) Massage parlors and/or massage establishments.
(4) Pawnbrokers and/or pawnshops.239
(5) Tattoo and/or body piercing and/or branding studios.
B. Location. The location of regulated uses within the City shall be subject
to the following conditions:
(1) No regulated use shall be permitted within a one-thousand-foot
radius of an existing regulated use. Measurement of the onethousand-
foot radius shall be made from the outermost boundaries
of the lot or parcel upon which the respective uses are or would be
situated.
(2) No regulated use shall be permitted within a one-thousand-foot
radius of a school, library, park, playground, licensed group daycare
home or center, or church, convent, monastery, synagogue or
similar place of worship. Measurement of the one-thousand-foot
radius shall be made from the outermost boundaries of the lot or
parcel upon which the respective uses are or would be situated.
(3) No regulated use shall be permitted within a one-hundred-fifty-foot
radius of any residential zone. Measurement of the one-hundredfifty-
foot radius shall be made from the outermost boundaries of the
lot or parcel upon which the respective uses/zones are or would be
situated.
C. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the
premises of a regulated use.
(2) An adult-oriented commercial enterprise use is in violation of this
section if:
239. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 521, Pawnbrokers.
§ 770-76 WATERWORKS § 770-76
752:967
§ 770-77. Gunshops.
§ 770-78. Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
Bed-and-breakfast facilities shall be subject to the following requirements:
(a) The merchandise or activities of the establishment are visible
from any point outside the establishment.
(b) The exterior portions of the establishment or signs have any
words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations of any specified anatomical area or
sexually explicit activity as defined in this chapter.
(3) The provision of this section regarding massage establishments
shall not apply to hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, medical
clinics or the offices of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor and
osteopath licensed to practice their respective professions in the
State of Michigan, or who are permitted to practice temporarily
under the auspices of an associate who is duly licensed in the State
of Michigan and is normally on the same premises.
A. The property upon which a gunshop is located shall have frontage upon
a primary or secondary thoroughfare, as designated in the City of Royal
Oak Master Plan.
B. All customer entrances and exits to the gunshop, and all entrances and
exits to the gunshop parking lot, shall be directly from the right-of-way
of the primary or secondary thoroughfare.
A. Each premises must be occupied and operated by its owner. Banquets,
parties and receptions shall not be permitted in bed-and-breakfast
facilities located in a residential zoning district.
B. One bathroom for every three bedrooms shall be provided. Guest rooms
may share toilet and bathing facilities; however, in no instance shall the
owner and guests have shared bathrooms.
C. The maximum number of bedrooms for guests shall not exceed six.
Each bedroom shall be no less than 100 square feet.
D. The stay for an individual guest shall be no more than 14 consecutive
days and not more than 30 days in a twelve-month period.
E. The operator shall keep a list of all guest stays. The list shall be
available for inspection by the City.
F. In addition to the parking required for the residence, one parking space
shall be provided for each guest room. The Plan Commission may, as
part of its review, modify the number of off-street parking spaces and
driveway requirements if it determines that alternate parking
requirements and safe and efficient circulation can be provided. These
parking requirements may be modified by the Plan Commission based
§ 770-76 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-78
752:968
§ 770-79. Hospitals and outpatient medical clinics. [Amended
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
§ 770-80. Heliopads.
upon site constraints, including, but not limited to, small yards,
inadequate space for parking, and the availability of on-street parking.
G. Breakfast service shall be for guests only. No separate cooking facilities
shall be allowed in guest bedrooms.
A. Hospitals shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least
five acres in area, and no such hospital is permitted on a lot of
record.
(2) The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare or collector street, as designated by the City of
Royal Oak's Master Plan, and all access to and egress from the site
shall be by such thoroughfare or collector street.
(3) The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from
adjacent lot lines or rights-of-way shall be 100 feet for front, rear
and side yards.
(4) Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all
residential view with an obscuring wall or fence along with a
landscape buffer, both in accordance with § 770-90D, Screening
between land uses.
(5) Building height shall not exceed 140 feet.
B. Outpatient medical clinics shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(1) The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare or collector street, as designated by the City of
Royal Oak's Master Plan, and all access to and egress from the site
shall be by such thoroughfare or collector street.
(2) Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all
residential view with an obscuring wall or fence along with a
landscape buffer, both in accordance with § 770-90D, Screening
between land uses.
A. No helicopter in excess of 6,000 pounds shall be permitted on a
heliopad.
B. Heliopads shall not be permitted within 600 feet of any land in a
residential zone.
§ 770-78 WATERWORKS § 770-80
752:969
§ 770-81. Miniature golf courses.
§ 770-82. Large scale retail facilities.
These provisions are intended to regulate large retail establishments,
whether located as an individual use on a single site or as part of a shopping
center with a grouping of attached and/or detached buildings. While it is
recognized that large scale retail establishments may provide goods and
services to City residents, such stores are primarily focused on attracting
consumers from a market area larger than the City. Therefore, specific
standards are required to ensure that large scale retail stores can be
adequately served by and do not create an inordinate impact upon roads,
utilities, storm drainage and police and fire services and are subject to the
following conditions:
C. Heliopads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local ordinances and licensing
requirements.
A. The Plan Commission, as part of site plan review, shall determine that
the lot area and frontage is adequate to support the operation in
compliance with all ordinance requirements. Consideration shall be
given to the arrangement of outdoor recreation areas, off-street parking
and dropoff and pickup drives.
B. The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major
thoroughfare or collector street, and all access to and egress from the
site shall be by such thoroughfare or street as designated in the City of
Royal Oak Master Plan.
C. Any and all recreation equipment shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet
and effectively screened from any residential zoned property.
D. Lights used to illuminate the miniature golf course must be so arranged
and shielded or hooded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
E. No music, intercom or other noise shall be permitted that exceeds the
noise standards in 770-94, Noise and vibrations.
F. A surety bond or cash deposit, in an amount not less than $1,000 shall
be posted guaranteeing that the premises will be cleared of the
miniature golf course should such enterprise be abandoned or
discontinued for a period of more than one year.
A. Building design standards.
(1) Facades and exterior walls:
(a) Facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally,
shall incorporate projections or recesses extending at least
20% of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any
facade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet.
§ 770-80 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-82
752:970
(b) Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have
arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings or other such
features along no less than 50% of their horizontal length.
(c) Building facades must include a repeating pattern that
includes no less than two of the following elements:
[1] Color change;
[2] Texture change; and
[3] An expression of architectural or structural bays through a
change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an
offset, reveal or projecting rib.
(2) Roofs. Roofs shall have no less than two of the following features:
(a) Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment such as
HVAC units from public view are required. Parapets shall not
exceed 1/3 of the height of the supporting wall at any point.
Such parapets shall feature three-dimensional cornice
treatment;
(b) Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet past the
supporting walls;
(c) Sloping roofs with an average slope greater than or equal to
one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal run
and less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one
foot of horizontal run; and
(d) Three or more roof slope planes.
(3) Materials and colors.
(a) Predominant exterior building materials shall be high-quality
material, including, but not limited to, brick, stone, and
integrally tinted/textured concrete masonry units.
(b) Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth
tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors,
black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
(c) Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors,
including primary colors, but neon tubing shall not be an
acceptable feature for building trim or accent areas.
(d) Exterior building materials shall provide texture to at least
50% of the facade and shall not be completely made up of
smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels or
prefabricated steel panels.
(4) Entryways. Each principal building on a site shall have clearly
defined, highly visible customer entrances.
§ 770-82 WATERWORKS § 770-82
752:971
B. Site design standards.
(1) Parking lot location. No more than 50% of the off-street parking
area devoted to the large scale retail establishment shall be located
between the front facade of the principal building and the abutting
streets.
(2) Connectivity. The site design must provide direct connections and
safe street crossings to adjacent land uses. Pavement/material
changes at drive crossings should be installed where possible to
better define pedestrian crosswalks.
(3) Pedestrian circulation.
(a) Internal pedestrian walkways, no less than six feet in width,
shall be provided connecting the public sidewalk to the
principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the
site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of
pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops,
street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall
feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs,
benches, flowerbeds, ground covers or other such materials for
no less than 50% of the length of the walkway.
(b) Sidewalks, no less than eight feet in width, shall be provided
along the full length of the building along any facade featuring
a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public
parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least 10 feet
from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for
foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades
or entryways are part of the facade.
(c) All internal pedestrian walkways which cross or are
incorporated with vehicular driving surfaces shall be
distinguished from such driving surfaces through the use of
durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers,
bricks or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and
comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. Surface
materials used for internal pedestrian walkway shall be
designed to accommodate shopping carts.
(4) Central features and community space. Each large scale retail
establishment subject to these standards shall contribute to the
establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by
providing at least two of the following: patio/seating area,
pedestrian plaza with benches, transportation center, window
shopping walkway, outdoor playground area, kiosk area, water
feature, clock tower or other such deliberately shaped area and/or
a focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the City,
adequately enhances such community and public spaces. Any such
areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network, and
§ 770-82 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-82
752:972
§ 770-83. Salvage yards.
In addition to other regulations set forth in this chapter, all salvage yards
shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 770-84. Outdoor display and sales.
such features shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior
to the principal materials of the building and landscape.
(5) Outdoor storage areas shall be prohibited.
A. All materials stored outside shall be enclosed within a solid, unpierced
fence or wall at least eight feet in height, and not less in height than the
materials. The fence or wall shall meet all setback requirements of the
district in which the salvage yard is located. All gates, doors, and
accessways through said fence or wall shall be of solid, unpierced
materials. In no event shall any stored materials be in the area between
the lines of said lot and the solid, unpierced fence or wall.
B. All ingress or egress shall be limited to one entrance to an urban
collector, as designated by the City of Royal Oak's Master Plan.
C. On the lot on which a salvage yard is to be operated, all roads,
driveways, parking lots, and loading and unloading areas shall be
paved, so as to limit the nuisance caused by wind-borne dust on
adjoining lots and public roads.
A. Outdoor sales and display areas shall be located behind the front face of
the building. Outdoor sales and display areas shall be permitted within
the required side or rear yard setbacks, provided a minimum ten-foot
setback is maintained between the sales and display area and the side
and rear lot lines abutting properties. Alternatively, the Planning
Commission during the course of its special land use permit and site
plan review may establish alternative locations for outdoor sales and
display areas as it determines necessary and advisable. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
B. Outdoor sales and display areas which abut residentially zoned
property shall be screened in accordance with § 770-90, Landscaping,
greenbelts, buffers and screening.
C. Outdoor sales and display areas shall not occupy or obstruct the use of
any fire lane, required off-street parking or landscaped area required to
meet the requirements of Article IX, Off-Street Parking and Loading, or
Subsections A and B or create a traffic or safety hazard. [Amended
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(1) Off-street parking and maneuvering lanes shall meet minimum
ordinance requirements for the retail use based upon the area
designated for display and storage of products as determined by
the Zoning Administrator. All loading and unloading areas and off-
§ 770-82 WATERWORKS § 770-84
752:973
§ 770-85. Mixed use development regulations.
Uses within the Mixed Use 1 and 2 Zones shall be subject to the following
development regulations:
street parking and maneuvering lanes shall be located within the
boundaries of the site.
(2) All areas intended for the outdoor sales and display of vehicles and
manufactured homes shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with § 770-109, Off-street parking lot design and
construction.
D. Outdoor storage of vehicle parts, parts salvage or supplies is
prohibited.
E. The applicant shall file a pollution incidence protection plan (PIPP) for
storage of any petroleum products and hazardous materials in
accordance with Rule 162 of the Michigan Water Resources
Commission Act (PA 245 of 1929, as amended).240
F. All such outdoor sales and display areas shall be conducted in a manner
so as not to create a nuisance to neighboring properties through
adequate on-site parking and ingress and egress to the site. [Added
4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
G. The Planning Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare from excessive noises, traffic, obnoxious and unhealthy odors
and any detrimental effects to the general operation of any outdoor
sales and display areas. [Added 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
A. Site access. Access to public roads shall be controlled in the interest of
public safety. Each building or group of buildings and its parking or
service area shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Provisions for circulation between adjacent parcels are encouraged
through coordinated or joint parking systems.
(2) Driveway placement must be such that loading and unloading
activities will not hinder vehicle ingress or egress.
(3) When applicable, the major access to the site shall be located
through a rear access drive to be shared by all adjoining uses,
provided said access would not result in more traffic onto a
residential neighborhood.
(4) In most cases, a maximum of one two-way driveway opening or a
pair of one-way driveway openings shall be permitted to a
240. Editor's Note: PA 245 of 1929 (MCLA § 323.1 et seq.) was repealed by PA 1994, Act No.
451. See now MCLA § 324-3101 et seq.
§ 770-84 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-85
752:974
particular site from each adjacent public road. Common driveways
shall be considered to be one driveway.
B. Pedestrian pathways and sidewalks. Such systems shall provide safe,
all-weather, efficient, and aesthetically pleasing means of on-site
movement and shall be an integral part of the overall site design
concept. Pedestrian pathway connections to parking areas, buildings,
other amenities and between on-site and perimeter pedestrian systems
shall be planned and installed wherever feasible. All paths and
sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width, and paved.
C. Landscaping/streetscape elements. It is the intent of this section to
ensure that the image of the City is promoted by the organization,
unification and character of the landscaping used. In an attempt to
unify the building sites and their architecture, landscaping as a design
element will play a key role in creating and conveying a user-friendly
environment. The landscape/streetscape requirements are as follows:
(1) Street intersections. The streetscape at intersections is to be
treated with elements of pavers, lighting, accent plants and lowgrowing
shrubs, provided the site distance requirements are
maintained. Each of the elements shall be reviewed simultaneously
with the site plan by the Plan Commission.
D. General site design/architectural guidelines. It is the intent of the
special use to provide an environment of high-quality and
complementary building architecture and site design. Special emphasis
shall be placed upon methods that tend to reduce the large-scale visual
impact of buildings, to encourage tasteful, imaginative design for
individual buildings, and to create a complex of buildings compatible
with the streetscape and neighboring residential areas in terms of
design, scale and use.
(1) Site planning design criteria.
(a) Minimum conflict shall exist between service vehicles, private
automobiles, and pedestrians within the site, as well as with
respect to the character of any neighboring residential uses.
(b) Special architectural features, such as bay windows,
decorative roofs and entry features may project up to three
feet into a required setback, provided that they are not less
than nine feet above any public sidewalk or private walkway.
Trellises, canopies and fabric awnings may project up to five
feet into front setbacks, provided that they are not less than
eight feet above any public sidewalk or private walkway. No
such improvements shall encroach into a right-of-way.
(2) Building roofs.
(a) In instances where flat roof areas can be viewed from above,
care should be taken that all roof vents, roof-mounted
§ 770-85 WATERWORKS § 770-85
752:975
§ 770-86. Utilities and communication devices.
§ 770-87. Special redevelopment projects.
mechanical equipment, pipes, etc., are grouped together and
painted to match roof color to reduce their appearance.
Location of such mechanical equipment shall be as far removed
from all neighboring residential uses as is possible.
(b) Slope roof treatments are preferred. If required to conceal
mechanical equipment, parapets at least 42 inches high or
higher, shall enclose flat roofs.
(c) There shall be variations in rooflines to reduce the massive
scale of the structure and add visual interest.
(3) Color and texture.
(a) Simple and uniform texture patterns are encouraged.
(b) Variations in color shall be kept to a minimum.
(c) Colors shall be subdued in tone and of a low reflectance.
(d) Accent colors may be used to express corporate identity.
A. All exterior on-site utilities, and communication devices, including but
not limited to drainage systems, sewers, gas lines, water lines, and
electrical, telephone, and communications wires and equipment, shall
be installed and maintained underground whenever possible.
B. On-site underground utilities, and communication devices, shall be
designed and installed to minimize disruption of off-site utilities,
communication devices, paving, and landscape during construction and
maintenance.
C. Satellite dishes and antennas shall be as far removed from all
neighboring residential uses as is possible, and otherwise comply with
the setback standards.
D. Wireless communications devices are regulated by § 770-88, Wireless
communications devices.
A. Intent.
(1) Several properties within the City were improved many years ago
for hotel and motel use. At the time such uses were approved, the
needs and specifications for them were considerably different than
they are at present. Land use regulations applicable to such uses
have been modified in order to reflect the changing needs and
realities. Consequently, the properties and structures initially
designed and constructed for hotel and motel use many years ago
§ 770-85 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-87
752:976
are now materially nonconforming and are no longer capable of
properly serving for their intended purposes.
(2) In addition to hotel and motel land uses, this section shall also
address the recent closure of several public schools. Declining
enrollment and older facilities have prompted the Royal Oak School
District to discontinue use of several schools in the few years.
These schools are located within the One-Family Residential Zone
District.
(3) The City of Royal Oak Plan Commission has also identified other
sites that are obsolete or materially nonconforming.
(4) Therefore, in the interest of promoting a productive use of such
properties, as contemplated in Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended,
MCLA § 125.3201, this section is intended to authorize redesign
and redevelopment of such older uses consistent with the
adaptability of the land on which they are situated, and compatible
with surrounding residences, properties and uses.
B. Qualification for treatment under this section.
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate compliance § 770-11C, Basis of
determinations, for a special land use permit, as well as the
following:
(a) The existing structures on the property were initially
constructed for hotel and/or motel use, public schools, or other
sites identified by the Plan Commission as possible for a special
redevelopment district.
(b) For hotels and/or motels, public schools and other sites as
identified by the Plan Commission, the applicant proposes to
redevelop the property by removing or making material
modifications, discontinuing the existing use(s) on the
property, and establishing a new use consistent with the intent
and provisions of this section.
(c) A recognizable and material benefit to the City will result from
the redevelopment.
(d) The proposed use and improvements shall not result in an
unreasonable increase in the need for or burden upon public
services, facilities, streets and utilities.
(e) The proposed use and improvements will result in an
advantageous economic impact upon surrounding properties.
(f) The current structures on the property are materially
nonconforming and/or the use is obsolete. For the purposes of
this subsection, obsolete are those hotels and motels existing
or built prior to the adoption of the chapter, those schools
identified by the Royal Oak School Board as obsolete and those
§ 770-87 WATERWORKS § 770-87
752:977
properties identified by the Plan Commission as special
redevelopment sites.
(g) The proposed use and improvements shall be consistent with
the goals and policies of the Master Plan and consistent with
the intent of this section, as set forth in Subsection A, above.
(h) The proposed use is compatible with adjacent and nearby
residential uses.
C. Procedure for review.
(1) Preapplication conference. Prior to the submission of an
application under this section, the applicant shall meet with the
Planning Director, together with any staff and consultants the
Director deems appropriate. The applicant shall present at such
conference a sketch plan of the proposed redevelopment, along
with other information and specifications to adequately inform the
City of the intended application.
(2) Preliminary plan. Following the preapplication conference, the
applicant shall submit a preliminary site plan of the proposed
redevelopment. The preliminary site plan shall be prepared and a
public hearing held in accordance with § 770-12 (intent statement),
§ 770-12C(2) and (3), site plan. In addition, a narrative report
prepared by the applicant shall accompany the site plan, providing
a description of the redevelopment, and discussing the market
concept and feasibility of the project, and discuss and describe the
manner in which each of the criteria under Subsection B, above,
have been and will be met.
(3) Plan Commission action. The preliminary plan shall be noticed for
public hearing as a special land use before the Plan Commission.
Following the hearing, the Plan Commission shall review the
preliminary plan and shall either approve, deny or approve with
conditions.
(4) Final plan. Within six months following receipt of Plan Commission
approval of a preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit a final
plan and supporting materials conforming to this subsection. If a
final plan is not submitted by the applicant within such six-month
period, the preliminary plan approval shall be null and void. The
information required as part of a final plan shall be as follows:
(a) All the information required for preliminary plan purposes.
(b) A schedule of intended development and construction details,
including phasing and timing.
(c) A specific schedule of the general improvements to constitute a
part of the redevelopment, including, without limitation,
§ 770-87 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-87
752:978
lighting, signage, and all mechanisms designed to promote the
character and adaptability of the development.
(d) A specification of the exterior building materials with respect
to the structures proposed in the project.
(5) Plan Commission action. The final plan shall be reviewed by the
Plan Commission and either approved, denied or approved with
conditions.
D. Project design standards. Subject to the qualifications for treatment
under this section, set forth in Subsection B, above, and provided that
the development and proposed uses are consistent with the intent and
provisions of this section, any land use or a combination of land uses
may be proposed for approval under this section.
(1) For proposed residential uses, the project density shall be
determined by the Plan Commission, and based on the applicant
demonstrating the following: consistency with the Master Plan;
innovative planning and design excellence; positive relationship to
adjacent land uses; adequate provision for pedestrian and
vehicular safety; promotion of aesthetic beauty; internal
compatibility on the property; adequate provisions to accommodate
the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the project. Moreover,
deviations from the applicable setbacks, parking and loading,
general provisions, and other requirements may be granted as part
of the overall approval, provided there are features or elements
demonstrated by the applicant and deemed adequate by the Plan
Commission designed into the project plan for the purpose of
achieving the promotion and protection of the users of the project,
all surrounding land uses, and the general public health, safety, and
welfare.
(2) For proposed nonresidential uses, there shall be adequate
separation and buffering from adjoining residential uses, as
determined in the discretion of the Plan Commission, and all
development design standards and regulations of the district in
which the property is situated shall be met, provided that
deviations from the applicable setbacks, parking and loading,
general provisions, and other requirements may be granted as part
of the overall approval, provided there are features or elements
demonstrated by the applicant and deemed adequate by the Plan
Commission designed into the project plan for the purpose of
achieving the promotion and protection of the users of the project,
all surrounding land uses, and the general public health, safety, and
welfare. Separation and buffering of uses may, in the discretion of
the Plan Commission, be required to achieve noise reduction and
visual screening by means of earthen and/or landscape berms and/
or decorative walls, or other mechanisms found in the discretion of
the Plan Commission to be appropriate. Signage, lighting,
landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all structures,
§ 770-87 WATERWORKS § 770-87
752:979
§ 770-88. Wireless communication facilities. [Amended 10-1-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-14]
and other features of the project, shall be designed and completed
with the objective of achieving an integrated and controlled
development, consistent with the character of the community,
surrounding development, and natural features of the area, and
shall be subject to review and approval by the Plan Commission.
E. Conditions. Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of
a special land use under this section, to the extent authorized by law, for
the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by
the proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating
increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity,
ensuring capability with adjacent land uses, and promoting the use of
land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
F. Approval initiated by City administration. In the event the City
administration determines that it would promote the intent of this
section, and otherwise be in the interest of the City, the City
administration may initiate the process of review and approval of a
special land use under this section with regard to any one or more
properties in the City. In the event of an approval of a special land use
under this section initiated by the City administration, the property
owner shall not be obligated to use or develop the property consistent
with such approval, but shall have the right to do so. In addition, a
property owner shall be authorized to seek an amendment of any
special land use granted under this section at the initiation of the City
administration, provided that the approval remains effective.
G. Effect of approval. When approved, the special land use, with all
conditions, shall constitute the land use authorization for the property,
and all improvement and use shall be in conformity with such
authorization. In connection with the approval of a final plan, the Plan
Commission shall require the preparation and execution of a
development agreement, containing the basic terms and provisions of
the approval, a clarification of the mutual understanding of the parties
with regard to the lawfulness of the development approval and any
conditions imposed. The development agreement shall be prepared by
the City Attorney and approved by the Plan Commission as part of the
final plan approval. An approval of a special land use under this section
initiated by the City Administrator shall remain valid for the period of
time specified in the approval. All other approvals under this section
shall remain valid for a period of one year.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) It is the general purpose and intent of the City to authorize
communication facilities needed to operate wireless
communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and
intent of the City to provide for such authorization in a manner
§ 770-87 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-88
752:980
which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character,
property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In
fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempt
has been made to balance these potentially competing interests.
(2) Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and
operate wireless communication services and coverage, it is the
further purpose and intent of this section to:
(a) Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless
communication facilities and ensure that wireless
communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations
and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings.
(b) Establish predetermined districts or zones of the number,
shape, and in the location, considered best for the
establishment of wireless communication facilities, subject to
applicable standards and conditions.
(c) Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system
may require the establishment of facilities in locations not
within the predetermined districts or zones.
(d) Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of
such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/
or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner.
(e) Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication
facilities on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historic
sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-ofway.
B. Authorization.
(1) Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in Subsection C,
wireless communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the
following circumstances, and in the following districts:
(a) Circumstances creating permitted use treatment.
[1] In all zoning districts, a proposal to establish a new
wireless communication facility shall be deemed a
permitted use in the following circumstances:
[a] A co-location of an attached wireless communication
facility upon an existing wireless communication
support structure or within an existing wireless
communication equipment compound.
[b] A co-location of an attached wireless communication
facility upon an existing building or structure other
than a wireless communication support structure
within a nonresidential zoning district.
§ 770-88 WATERWORKS § 770-88
752:981
[c] A co-location of an attached wireless communication
facility upon an existing wireless communication
support structure which had been preapproved for
such co-location as part of an earlier approval by the
City.
[d] A co-location of an attached wireless communication
facility upon a utility pole, transmission tower, or
water supply tower located within a right-of-way or
upon municipally owned property.
[e] Any co-location allowed under Subsection
B(1)(a)[1][a] through [d] above shall be considered a
permitted use and not subject to approval of a special
land use permit, provided the support structure,
equipment compound, building, pole, or tower are in
compliance with this chapter or have been previously
approved by the Planning Commission, and further
provided:
[i] The proposed co-location will not increase the
overall height of the support structure by more
than 20 feet or 10% of its original height,
whichever is greater;
[ii] The proposed co-location will not increase the
width of the support structure by more than the
minimum necessary to permit co-location;
[iii] The proposed co-location will not increase the
area of the existing equipment compound to
greater than 2,500 square feet; and
[iv] The proposed co-location complies with the terms
and conditions of any previous special land use
permit and/or site plan approval of the support
structure or equipment compound by the
Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Administrator.
[2] Such applications shall be reviewed administratively by
the Zoning Administrator and shall not require a special
land use permit and/or site plan review by the Planning
Commission; however, such applications shall still be
subject to the required standards and application
requirements of Subsections C and D, and all other
applicable standards of this section and chapter.
(b) Permitted use districts. Wireless communication facilities
including support structures shall be a permitted use in the
General Industrial District, or upon any municipally owned
property, regardless of zoning district. Such applications shall
§ 770-88 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-88
752:982
require, at a minimum, site plan review before the Planning
Commission according to § 770-12, Site plan review, and be
subject to all other applicable standards of this section and
chapter.
(2) If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication
facility may not be reasonably established as a permitted use and is
required to be established outside of a district identified in
Subsection B(1)(a) and (b) above in order to operate, such wireless
communication facilities may be permitted elsewhere in the City as
a special land use, subject to the requirements and standards of
§ 770-11, Special land uses; permit procedures, and the following:
(a) At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate
that a location within the areas identified in Subsection B(1)(a)
and (b) cannot reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity
needs of the applicant.
(3) If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a proposed co-location
cannot meet the criteria listed in Subsection B(1)(a)[1][e][i]
through [iv] above, such co-location may be permitted as a special
land use, subject to the requirements and standards of § 770-11,
Special land uses; permit procedures.
C. General regulations.
(1) Standards and conditions applicable to all facilities. All applications
for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following
standards and conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it
shall be constructed and maintained with any additional conditions
imposed by the Planning Commission in its discretion:
(a) Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods
or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare.
(b) Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with
the surrounding areas.
(c) Facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state
standards relative to the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions.
(d) The following additional standards shall be met:
[1] The maximum height of the new or modified support
structure and antenna shall be the minimum height
demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable
communication by the applicant and by other entities to
co-locate on the structure. Applicants shall demonstrate a
justification for the proposed height of the structures and
§ 770-88 WATERWORKS § 770-88
752:983
an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in
lower heights.
[2] The accessory building contemplated to enclose switching
equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for
accessory structures within the respective district.
[3] The setback of the support structure from any residential
district shall be no less than the height of the structure.
The setback of the support structure from any existing or
proposed rights-of-way or other publicly traveled roads
shall be no less than the height of the structure.
[4] Where the proposed new or modified support structure
abuts a parcel of land zoned for a use other than
residential, the minimum setback of the structure, and
accessory structures, shall be in accordance with the
required setbacks for principal buildings as provided in
the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which
the support structure is located, unless the Planning
Commission determines a greater setback is necessary
under Subsection D(3). The Planning Commission may
allow a lesser setback in order to reduce the visual impact
of a support structure or to meet co-location requirements.
[5] There shall be an unobstructed paved access drive to the
support structure, for operation, maintenance, repair and
inspection purposes, which may be provided through or
over an easement. This access drive shall be a minimum of
14 feet in width.
[6] The division of property for the purpose of locating a
wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all
zoning requirements and conditions are met.
[7] Where an attached wireless communication facility is
proposed on the roof of a building, any equipment
enclosure shall be designed, constructed and maintained
to be architecturally compatible with the principal
building. The equipment enclosure may be located within
the principal building or may be an accessory building. If
proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform to all
district requirements for principal buildings, including
yard setbacks.
[8] Support structures shall be of an alternative design such
as (without limitation) a statue or sculpture, steeple, bell
or clock tower, flagpole, tree, or other form which is
determined by the Planning Commission to be compatible
with the existing character of the proposed site and
surrounding neighborhood. The Planning Commission
shall review and approve the color of the support structure
§ 770-88 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-88
752:984
and all accessory buildings, so as to minimize distraction,
reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and
ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless
communication facility in a neat and orderly condition.
[9] The support system shall be constructed in accordance
with all applicable building codes. The requirements of the
Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications
Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall
be noted.
[10] A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance
agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the
site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be
designed to ensure the long-term, continuous maintenance
to a reasonably prudent standard.
(2) Standards and conditions applicable to special land use facilities.
Applications for wireless communication facilities which may be
approved as special land uses shall be reviewed and, if approved,
constructed and maintained, in accordance with the standards and
conditions in Subsection C(1) and in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed
facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of
one or more of the following factors:
[1] Proximity to an interstate or a major thoroughfare.
[2] Areas of population concentration.
[3] Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other
business centers.
[4] Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall
buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions.
[5] Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to
other facilities with which the proposed facility is to
operate.
[6] Other specifically identified reason creating facility need.
(b) The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the colocation
requirements of this section.
(c) After an application for a special land use approval is filed with
the City, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
application is administratively complete. Unless the Zoning
Administrator proceeds as provided under Subsection C(2)(d),
the application shall be considered to be administratively
§ 770-88 WATERWORKS § 770-88
752:985
complete when the Zoning Administrator makes that
determination or 14 business days after the Zoning
Administrator receives the application, whichever is first.
(d) If, before the expiration of the fourteen-day period under
Subsection C(2)(c), the Zoning Administrator notifies the
applicant that the application is not administratively complete,
specifying the information necessary to make the application
administratively complete, or notifies the applicant that a fee
required to accompany the application has not been paid,
specifying the amount due, the running of the fourteen-day
period under Subsection C(2)(c) is not tolled until the applicant
submits to the Zoning Administrator the specified information
or fee amount due. The notice shall be given in writing or by
electronic notification.
(e) The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the
application not more than 60 days after the application is
considered to be administratively complete for wireless
communication facilities described in Subsection (B)(3), and
not more than 90 days for all other facilities requiring a special
land use permit. If the Planning Commission fails to timely
approve or deny the application, the application shall be
considered approved and the Planning Commission shall be
considered to have made any determination required for
approval.
(f) Special land use approval of wireless communications facilities
described in Subsection B(3) may be made expressly
conditional only on the wireless communications facilities'
meeting the requirements of this chapter, other City codes and
ordinances, and federal and state laws before the wireless
communications facilities begin operation.
(g) The fee for an application for wireless communication facilities
which may be approved as special land uses shall be $1,000.
D. Application requirements.
(1) A site plan prepared in accordance with § 770-12, Site plan review.
(2) The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan
illustrating screening and aesthetic enhancement for the support
structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases,
there shall be shown on the plan fencing which is required for
protection of the support structure and security from children and
other persons who may otherwise access facilities.
(3) The application shall include a signed certification by a State of
Michigan licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner
in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be
utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for
§ 770-88 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-88
752:986
the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to
be required for the structure and other facilities.
(4) The application shall include a description of security to be posted
at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure
removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer
needed, as provided in Subsection F below. In this regard, the
security shall, at the election of the applicant, be in the form of
cash; surety bond; letter of credit; or an agreement in a form
approved by the City Attorney and recordable at the office of the
Register of Deeds, establishing a promise of the applicant and
owner of the property to timely remove the facility as required
under this section of this chapter, with the further provision that
the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any
costs and attorney's fees incurred by the City in securing removal.
(5) The application shall include a map showing existing and known
proposed wireless communication facilities within the City, and
further showing existing and known proposed wireless
communication facilities within areas surrounding the borders of
the City in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms
of potential co-location or in demonstrating the need for the
proposed facility. If and to the extent the information in question is
on file with the community, the applicant shall be required only to
update as needed. Any proprietary information may be submitted
with a request for confidentiality in connection with the
development of governmental policy, in accordance with MCLA
§ 15.243(1)(g). This chapter shall serve as the promise to maintain
confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request for
confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it to the
attention of the City.
(6) The name, street address, telephone number, and e-mail address of
the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other
notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated
during all times the facility is on the premises.
E. Co-location.
(1) Statement of policy. It is the policy of the City to minimize the
overall number of newly established locations for wireless
communication facilities and encourage the use of existing
structures.
(2) Feasibility of co-location. Co-location shall be deemed to be
"feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the following are
met:
(a) The wireless communication provider entity under
consideration for co-location will undertake to pay market rent
or other market compensation for co-location.
§ 770-88 WATERWORKS § 770-88
752:987
(b) The site on which co-location is being considered, taking into
consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a
facility, is able to provide structural support.
(c) The co-location being considered is technologically reasonable,
e.g., the co-location will not result in unreasonable
interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment
in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like.
(d) The height of the structure necessary for co-location will not be
increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the City,
taking into consideration the standards set forth in this
section.
(3) Requirements for co-location.
(a) Approval for the construction and use of a new wireless
communication facility shall not be granted unless and until
the applicant demonstrates that a feasible co-location is not
available for the coverage area and capacity needs.
(b) All new and modified wireless communication facilities
including support structures shall be designed and constructed
so as to accommodate co-location.
(c) If a party who owns or otherwise controls a facility shall fail or
refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed
and otherwise feasible co-location, such facility shall
thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming
structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or
extended in any respect.
F. Removal.
(1) The City reserves the right to request evidence of ongoing
operation at any time after the construction of an approved support
structure.
(2) A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility
shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility
by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the
following events:
(a) When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For
purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other
equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations
(transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be
considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
(b) Six months after new technology is available at reasonable cost
as determined by the City Commission, which permits the
operation of the communication system without the
requirement of the support structure.
§ 770-88 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-88
752:988
(3) The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth
in Subsection F(1) above, may be applied and limited to portions of
a facility.
(4) Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring
removal, specified in Subsection F(2) above, the property owner or
persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure
the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and
immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal,
restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(5) If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not
been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline,
and after at least 30 days' written notice, the City may remove or
secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with
its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or
collected from the security posted at the time application was made
for establishing the facility.
§ 770-88 WATERWORKS § 770-88
752:989

ARTICLE VI
Landscaping and Screening Design Standards
§ 770-89. Intent. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
The intent of this article is to provide for those landscaping, screening, and
tree preservation regulations which are applied to all uses requiring site
plan approval under § 770-12, Site plan review, of this chapter.
§ 770-90. Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and screening.
[Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to:
(1) Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the
community.
(2) Minimize noise, air, soil, groundwater, surface water and visual
pollution.
(3) Minimize soil erosion and runoff, provide protection from wind and
sun and promote energy conservation.
(4) Improve the overall aesthetics and appearance, divide the expanse
of pavement, and define parking areas and vehicular circulation
within off-street parking lots and other off-street parking facilities.
(5) Require buffering of residential areas from more intense land uses.
(6) Encourage an appropriate mixture of plant material, such as
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, to protect against
insect and disease infestation and produce a more aesthetic and
cohesive design.
(7) Encourage the integration of existing vegetation in landscape plans
and preservation of specimen trees.
(8) Prevent the unnecessary removal of mature trees and protect them
for their economic support of property values, natural beauty,
character, ecological importance, and historical significance, and
preserve the natural beauty and irreplaceable natural heritage of
the City's tree canopy.
B. Application of requirements. No site plan, site condominium plan or
subdivision plat shall be approved unless a landscape plan is provided
which meets the requirements set forth herein.
C. Landscape plan requirements. A separate detailed landscape/plan at a
scale of not greater than one inch equals 50 feet shall be required to be
submitted to the City as part of the site plan review or tentative
preliminary plat review. The landscape plan shall demonstrate that all
requirements of this section are met and shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following items:
§ 770-89 WATERWORKS § 770-90
752:991
(1) Location, spacing, size (height, caliper and size of root ball), root
type (shallow or deep) and descriptions for each plant type
(deciduous, evergreen, annual, or perennial) to be planted.
(2) Typical straight cross section, including slope, height, and width of
berms.
(3) Typical construction details to resolve specific site conditions, such
as landscape walls and tree wells used to preserve existing trees or
maintain natural grades.
(4) Details in either text or drawing form to ensure proper installation
and establishment of proposed plant materials as prescribed by the
American Nurseryman Standards.
(5) Identification, location and description of existing trees and
vegetative cover to be preserved, relocated or removed (including
common name, species and diameter).
(6) Identification and description of grass and other ground cover to be
planted and method of planting (sod, plugs, sprigs or seeds).
(7) Identification of landscape maintenance program in accordance
with § 770-90L, Installation, maintenance and completion.
(8) A survey of existing trees showing all deciduous trees with a
diameter at breast height of 2 1/2 inches or greater, and evergreen
trees with a height of six feet or greater, identified by common and
botanical name as well as size, height, or diameter at breast height,
and whether each tree is to remain, be transplanted, or removed.
D. Screening between land uses. Upon any situation for which a site plan
is required under § 770-12, Site plan review, of this chapter, a landscape
buffer shall be constructed to create a visual screen at least six feet in
height between the following land uses: multiple-family residential,
institutional, office, commercial, industrial, or a mixture of such land
uses, including all off-street parking areas, and single-family or twofamily
residential land uses; and institutional, office, commercial,
industrial, or a mixture of such land uses, including all off-street
parking areas, and multiple-family residential land uses that are not
part of a mixed-use building or development. The following standards
shall apply (See Figure 5.241):
(1) Landscape buffer. A landscape buffer may consist of evergreen
trees and shrubbery or a combination of evergreen plantings with
earthen berms. To achieve effective screening, landscape materials
shall be planted in a staggered manner meeting the minimum size
as set forth in § 770-90K(5), Minimum size and spacing
requirements, at the time of planting.
241. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 770-90 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-90
752:992
(2) Wall or fence. Where there is a need to provide a greater noise or
dust barrier or to screen more intense development, a solid wall or
fence or a combination of landscaping and a solid wall or fence
shall be required by the Planning Commission in accordance with
Chapter 323, Fences, as amended. Wall or fence height shall be
measured on the side of the proposed wall having the higher grade.
The Planning Commission shall approve the construction materials
of the wall or fence which may include face brick, poured-in-place
simulated face brick, pre-cast brick face panels having simulated
face brick, stone or wood.
(3) A required wall/fence shall be located on the lot line except where
underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this
chapter requires conformity with front yard setback requirements.
The location of a required wall/fence may be adjusted at the
discretion of the Planning Commission, provided that the areas
between the wall/fence and the property line are landscaped. The
Planning Commission may omit required screening along any lot
line where an existing building wall immediately abuts the lot line
and require a letter of agreement with the property owner to install
the wall if the adjacent building is removed. The letter of
agreement shall be recorded with the Oakland County Register of
Deeds.
E. Off-street parking area landscaping. Separate landscape areas shall be
provided within parking lots so as to break up the broad expanse of
pavement and guide the circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
The following standards shall apply (See Figures 4 and 10.242):
(1) Required landscaping within off-street parking areas. Separate
landscape areas shall be provided within off-street parking areas in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) There shall be a minimum of one deciduous tree for every eight
parking spaces, provided that a landscape island shall be
provided for no more than 16 continuous spaces.
(b) The ends of all parking aisles and corners shall be protected
with a landscaped island.
(c) A minimum distance of three feet from the backside of the curb
and the proposed landscape plantings shall be provided.
Where vehicles overhang a landscape island or strip, a
minimum distance of five feet from the backside of the curb
and the proposed landscape plantings shall be provided. (See
Figure 4.243)
242. Editor's Note: Figures 4 and 10 are included as attachments to this chapter.
243. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 770-90 WATERWORKS § 770-90
752:993
(d) Shrubs and/or ground covers which will not impede vehicular
visibility in accordance with this chapter may also be included
in the landscape plan.
(2) Required landscaping at the perimeter of off-street parking areas.
Separate landscape areas shall be provided at the perimeter of offstreet
parking areas when adjacent to a public street in accordance
with the following requirements:
(a) Off-street parking areas which are considered to be a
conflicting land use as defined by this section shall meet the
screening requirements set forth in § 770-90D, Screening
between land uses.
(b) All off-street parking areas shall be screened from view with a
landscaped berm, solid wall or a combination of wall/fencing
and landscaping at least 30 inches in height along the
perimeter of those sides which are visible from a public street.
Upon receipt of a letter from the City of Royal Oak Police or
Fire Department, the Planning Commission may determine
alternate screening requirements as deemed necessary and
advisable.
(3) Landscaped areas, walls, structures, and walks shall be properly
protected from vehicular encroachment or overhang through
appropriate wheel stops or curbs.
F. Front yard landscape or greenbelts. The front yard setback, where
required, shall be landscaped in accordance with the following
requirements. (See Figure 6.244)
(1) The front yard setback or greenbelt shall be landscaped with a
minimum of one tree for every 30 linear feet of frontage abutting a
public road right-of-way.
(2) If ornamental deciduous trees are substituted for either
nonornamental deciduous trees or evergreen trees, they shall be
provided at a minimum of one tree for every 20 linear feet of
frontage abutting a public road right-of-way.
(3) In addition to the required trees, the remainder of the front yard
setback or greenbelt shall be landscaped in grass, ground cover,
shrubs and other natural landscape materials.
(4) Access drives from public rights-of-way through a required front
yard setback or greenbelts shall be permitted, but such drives shall
not be subtracted from the linear dimension used to determine the
minimum number of trees required.
244. Editor's Note: Figure 6 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 770-90 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-90
752:994
G. Foundation landscaping. Foundation plantings shall be provided along
the front or sides of any buildings which face a public road and/or is
adjacent to a parking lot or other area which provides access to the
building(s) by the general public. Foundation planting areas shall be
integrated into the sidewalk system (between the front or sides of the
building and the parking area and/or associated driveways) adjacent to
the building. Foundation planting areas shall contain a minimum of one
ornamental tree and six shrubs per 30 linear feet of applicable building
frontage. Individual planting areas shall be a minimum of six feet in
width. (See Figure 11.245)
H. Site landscaping. Inclusive of any landscape greenbelt and/or off-street
parking area landscaping required by this section, at least 10% of the
site area, excluding existing public rights-of-way, shall be landscaped.
Such site area landscaping may include a combination of the
preservation of existing tree cover, planting of new trees and plant
material, landscape plazas, gardens and building foundation planting
beds. Site area landscaping shall be provided to screen potentially
objectionable site features such as, but not limited to, retention/
detention ponds, transformer pads, generators, heating, ventilation
and/or air-conditioning units, and storage and loading areas.
I. Screening of refuse and recyclable containers. (See Figure 12.246)
(1) Outside refuse disposal and recyclable containers shall be screened
on three sides with a durable six-foot or higher masonry enclosure,
and sight-obscuring decorative gate at least as high as the
container, so as not to be visible from adjacent lots or sites,
neighboring properties or streets. The enclosure shall also be
constructed so as to be compatible with the architectural styles
used in the site development. The Planning Commission may, at its
discretion, require a higher screen if deemed necessary due to the
proximity to conflicting land uses.
(2) Containers shall be consolidated with a development to minimize
the number of collection sites and located so as to reasonably
equalize the distance from the building they serve.
(3) Containers and enclosures shall be located away from public view
insofar as possible and on that side which is opposite or at the
maximum distance possible from adjacent residential uses.
(4) Containers and enclosures shall be situated so that they do not
cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby
buildings.
(5) Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be
provided for containers or groups of containers.
245. Editor's Note: Figure 11 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
246. Editor's Note: Figure 12 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 770-90 WATERWORKS § 770-90
752:995
J. Screening of exterior electrical equipment, transformers, generators,
and heating, ventilation, and/or air-conditioning units.
(1) Transformers that may be visible from any public right-of-way or
adjacent property shall be screened with either plantings or an
enclosure which is unified and harmonious with the overall
architectural theme, and meets utility provider standards for
location and maintenance.
(2) Electrical equipment shall be mounted on the interior wall of a
building wherever possible or shall be located where it is
substantially screened from residential properties and public view.
(3) Ground-mounted generators and heating, ventilation, and/or airconditioning
units shall be:
(a) Located away from public view insofar as possible and on that
side which is opposite or at the maximum distance possible
from adjacent residential uses;
(b) Situated so that they do not cause excessive nuisance or
offense to occupants of nearby buildings; and
(c) Screened with plantings or an enclosure which is unified and
harmonious with the overall architectural theme if they are
visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent residential
uses.
(4) Roof-mounted generators and heating, ventilation, and/or airconditioning
units shall be:
(a) Located away from public view insofar as possible and on that
side which is opposite or at the maximum distance possible
from the front facade(s) of the building;
(b) Situated so that they do not cause excessive nuisance or
offense to occupants of nearby buildings; and
(c) Concealed from public view by decorative fencing, a parapet,
or an alternative screening method as deemed necessary and
advisable by the Planning Commission.
K. Landscape elements. The following minimum standards shall apply:
(1) Quality. Plant materials shall be of generally acceptable varieties
and species, free from insects and diseases, hardy to Oakland
County, conform to the current minimum standard of the American
Association of Nurserymen, and shall have proof of any required
governmental regulations and/or inspections.
(2) Composition. A mixture of plant material, such as evergreens,
deciduous trees and shrubs, is recommended as a protective
measure against insect and disease infestation. A limited mixture of
§ 770-90 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-90
752:996
hardy species is recommended rather than a large quantity of
different species to produce a more aesthetic, cohesive design and
avoid a disorderly appearing arrangement.
(3) Berms. Berms shall be constructed with slopes not to exceed a 1:3
gradient. Berm slopes shall be protected with sod, seed, or other
form of natural ground cover.
(4) Existing trees. The preservation, incorporation, and replacement of
existing trees is required, including those trees within allowable
building envelopes and required off-street parking areas. The
following requirements shall apply:
(a) Paving, or other site improvements, shall not encroach upon
the dripline of the existing tree(s) to be preserved.
(b) If existing plant material is labeled "To Remain" on site and/or
landscaping plans by the petitioner or required by the City,
protective techniques such as fencing shall be installed during
construction and noted as such on the plans. No vehicle or
other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within
the dripline of any plant material intended to be saved.
(c) In the event that healthy deciduous trees of two-and-one-halfinch
diameter at breast height or greater, or evergreen trees of
six-foot height or greater, are cut down, destroyed, damaged,
or excavated at the dripline, as determined by the City, the
petitioner shall replace them with no fewer than two trees of
similar character and size. However, in the event that a similar
sized tree is not available, multiple deciduous trees of no less
than two-and-one-half-inch diameter at breast height each, or
multiple evergreen trees of no less than six-foot height each,
shall be planted. The number of multiple replacement trees to
be required shall be as deemed necessary and advisable by the
Planning Commission.
(5) Minimum size and spacing requirements. Where landscaping is
required, the following schedule sets forth minimum size and
spacing requirements for representative landscape materials:
Minimum Size Allowable
Height
Diameter at Breast
Height
Trees 6 feet
3 feet to 4
feet 2 inches 2.5 inches
The following
trees are
representative:
Evergreen
Trees:
§ 770-90 WATERWORKS § 770-90
752:997
Minimum Size Allowable
Height
Diameter at Breast
Height
Trees 6 feet
3 feet to 4
feet 2 inches 2.5 inches
Fir •
Spruce •
Pine •
Hemlock •
Douglas fir •
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees:
Red cedar •
Arborvitae •
Juniper
(selected
varieties)
•
Large
Deciduous
Canopy Trees:
Oak •
Maple •
Beech •
Linden •
Ash •
Ginko
(male only)
•
Honeylocust
(seedless,
thornless)
•
Birch •
Sycamore •
Small
Deciduous
Ornamental
Trees:
Flowering
dogwood
•
§ 770-90 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-90
752:998
Minimum Size Allowable
Height
Diameter at Breast
Height
Trees 6 feet
3 feet to 4
feet 2 inches 2.5 inches
Flower
cherry,
pear
•
Hawthorn •
Redbud •
Magnolia •
Flowering
crabapple
•
Serviceberry •
Hornbeam •
Minimum Size Allowable
Height Spread
Shrubs 6 feet
3 feet to 4
feet
24 inches
to 36
inches
18 inches
to 24
inches
The following
shrubs are
representative.
Evergreen
Shrubs:
Pyramidal
yew
•
Hicks yew •
Brown's
spruce
ward
•
Alberta
spruce
•
Chinensis
juniper
varieties
•
Sabina
juniper
•
Mugo pine •
§ 770-90 WATERWORKS § 770-90
752:999
Minimum Size Allowable
Height Spread
Shrubs 6 feet
3 feet to 4
feet
24 inches
to 36
inches
18 inches
to 24
inches
Horizontal
juniper
varieties
•
Boxwood •
Euonymus
varieties
•
Deciduous
Shrubs:
Honeysuckle •
Lilac •
Sumac •
Pyracantha •
Weigela •
Flowering
quince
•
Cotoneaster •
Dogwood •
Virburnum
varieties
•
Spiraea •
Fragrant
sumac
•
Potentilla •
(6) Prohibited species. The following species shall not be planted as
part of any landscaping plan, and shall be exempt from the
regulations set forth in § 770-90K(4) to preserve, incorporate, and
replace existing trees: poplar (populus); soft maples (acer); willows
(Salix); box elders (acer); or any other prohibited species identified
in § 710-15, Prohibited trees in public areas, of Chapter 710, Trees.
L. Installation, maintenance, and completion.
(1) All landscaping required by this chapter shall be planted before
obtaining a certificate of occupancy or the appropriate financial
guaranty, as set forth in § 770-16, Performance guaranty, the latter
§ 770-90 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-90
752:1000
of which shall be placed in escrow in the amount of the cost of
landscaping to be released only after landscaping is completed.
(2) All landscaping and landscape elements shall be planted, and
earthmoving or grading performed, in a sound workmanlike
manner, according to accepted planting and grading procedures.
Salt-tolerant species shall be used in areas that are subject to salt
spray from adjacent roadways and parking areas.
(3) All plant material shall be maintained in good condition so as to
present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be
trimmed or pruned in such a manner so as not to alter their natural
growth potential.
(4) The owner of property required to be landscaped by this chapter
shall maintain such landscaping in a strong and healthy condition,
free from physical damage or injury arising from lack of water,
chemical damage, insects, diseases, blight or other causes, and
according to the provisions of Chapter 757, Weeds, as amended.
(a) All materials used to satisfy the requirements of this chapter
which become unhealthy or dead shall be replaced within six
months of damage or death or the next appropriate planting
period, whichever comes first.
(5) All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and
acceptable water supply. Underground sprinkler systems shall be
installed, utilized and maintained in order to insure the proper
watering of all plant materials. The Planning Commission may
determine alternative irrigation systems as deemed necessary and
advisable.
M. Planning Commission modifications to requirements.
(1) Modifications to landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and screening
requirements. The Planning Commission, during the course of its
site plan review process, may determine alternate requirements as
deemed necessary and advisable. In determining the requirements,
the Planning Commission shall consider the following:
(a) That the physical features, topographic features or special
characteristics of the site create conditions so that the strict
application of the provisions of this section will result in less
effective landscaping than alternative landscape designs.
(b) That the public benefit intended to be secured by this section
will exist with the modifications as proposed.
(c) Where additional screening or buffer is desired in excess of
chapter requirements, the Planning Commission may require
additional landscaping and/or screening devices.
§ 770-90 WATERWORKS § 770-90
752:1001
§ 770-91. Fences, walls and screens.
Any person desiring to build or cause to be built a fence upon property
within the City of Royal Oak shall comply with Chapter 323, Fences, as
amended.
(d) Whether there are unique, extraordinary, or exceptional
conditions of the property that result in peculiar or exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon,
the owner of such property from the strict application of the
regulations set forth in § 770-90K(4).
(e) Should the Planning Commission determine that the strict
application of the regulations set forth in § 770-90K(4) is not
necessary and that alternative tree replacement measures are
advisable, exemptions to the requirement to preserve,
incorporate, and replace existing trees set forth in
§ 770-90K(4) may be granted, provided that the landscape plan
contains one of the following:
[1] A tree replacement plan otherwise prepared in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 770-90C(8) and K(4),
showing the location and net gain of trees on the site; or
[2] A tree replacement agreement approved by the City
Commission for the payment of a tree fee in lieu of
replacement in accordance with the standards and
procedures established by the City Commission.
§ 770-90 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-91
752:1002
ARTICLE VII
Environmental Performance Standards
§ 770-92. Intent.
Environmental standards are established in order to preserve the shortand
long-term environmental health, safety, and welfare of the City. No
parcel, lot, building or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in
any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable element or condition so as to adversely affect the surrounding
area or adjoining premises. Any use permitted by this chapter may be
undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards are
employed to limit dangerous and objectionable elements to acceptable
limits as established by the following performance standards. No use,
otherwise allowed, shall be permitted within any district which does not
conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation. These
standards are established as minimum requirements to be maintained.
§ 770-93. Airborne emissions.
§ 770-94. Noise and vibrations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the
emission of any smoke or air contaminant in violation of applicable air
quality standards adopted by the Federal Clean Air Act and the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
B. Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors
of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and
welfare of the public or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort
of the public shall be removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove the
odor. Such odors shall be prohibited when perceptible at any point
along the property line.
C. Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is injurious or
destructive, harmful to person or property, or explosive shall be
unlawful and shall be abated.
A. Noise which is objectionable as determined by the City due to intensity,
frequency, or duration shall be muffled, attenuated, or otherwise
controlled, subject to the following:
(1) Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature, or sounds
characterized by high frequencies, shall be controlled so as not to
become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
(2) Sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are
exempt from this requirement. Noise resulting from temporary
construction activity shall also be exempt from this requirement.
(3) Noise levels shall not exceed 75 decibels between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall not exceed 60 decibels between the
§ 770-92 WATERWORKS § 770-94
752:1003
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and must comply with the levels
set forth in the following table:
Sound Levels in Decibels at Property Lines
Octave Band
Cycles per Second
Adjacent to All
Residential Uses
Adjacent to All
Commercial, Office
and Industrial Uses
0 to 75 58 73
75 to 150 54 69
150 to 300 50 65
300 to 600 46 61
600 to 1,200 40 55
1,200 to 2,400 33 43
2,400 to 4,800 26 41
Over 4,800 20 35
B. No use shall generate any ground-transmitted vibration in excess of the
limits set forth below. Vibration shall be measured at the nearest
adjacent lot line. The vibration maximums set forth below are stated in
terms of particle velocity, which may be measured with suitable
instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and
frequency.
(1) When computed, the following standards shall apply:
Particle Velocity in Inches Per Second
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement
(inches)
0 to 10 0.0010
10 to 20 0.0008
20 to 30 0.0006
30 to 40 0.0004
40 and over 0.0002
(2) If requested by the Zoning Administrator, the petitioner shall
provide evidence of compliance with the above-noted vibration
calculations.
C. Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity shall be
exempt from the requirements of this section.
§ 770-94 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-95
752:1004
§ 770-95. Electrical disturbance, electromagnetic or radio
frequency interference.
No use shall create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any
operations or equipment other than those of the creator of such
disturbance, or cause, create, or contribute to the interference with
electronic signals (including television and radio broadcasting
transmission) to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned
by the creator of such disturbance is adversely affected.
§ 770-96. Glare and exterior lighting.
A. Light and glare from indirect sources.
(1) Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or
acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall
be performed in such a manner so as not to be seen from any point
beyond the property line, and so as not to create a public nuisance
or hazard along lot lines.
(2) The design and/or screening of the development shall insure that
glare from automobile and commercial or industrial vehicle
headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property,
particularly residential property.
(3) Exterior doors shall be located, operated, and maintained so as to
prevent any glare and light from creating a nuisance or safety
hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and
neighboring land uses.
B. Exterior lighting from direct sources.
(1) Subject to the provisions set forth herein, all parking areas,
walkways, driveways, building entryways, off-street parking and
loading areas, and building complexes with common areas shall be
sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and the
safety of persons using such public or common areas.
(2) Exterior lighting shall be located and maintained to prevent the
reflection and glare of light in a manner which creates a nuisance
or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and
neighboring land uses. This provision is not intended to apply to
public streetlighting.
(3) The following additional standards shall apply:
(a) All streetlighting to be installed between the sidewalk and
street along Main Street or Washington, consistent with the
plans and standards adopted by the City and the Downtown
Development Authority.
(b) Lighting, whether pole-mounted or building-mounted, shall be
placed and shielded so as to direct the light onto the site and
§ 770-95 WATERWORKS § 770-96
752:1005
§ 770-97. Use, storage and handling of hazardous substance;
storage and disposal of solid, liquid and sanitary waste.
away from adjoining properties. Lighting shall be shielded so
that it does not cause glare for motorists.
(c) Lighting for uses adjacent to residentially zoned or used
property shall be designed and maintained such that
illumination levels do not exceed 0.1 footcandle along property
lines. Lighting for uses adjacent to nonresidential properties
shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels
do not exceed 0.5 footcandle along property lines. Light
intensity shall not exceed a maximum of 10 footcandles in any
given area. The Plan Commission, at its sole discretion, may
allow for an increased level of lighting above maximum
permissible levels when it can be demonstrated that such
lighting is necessary for safety and security purposes.
(d) All lighting potentially visible from an adjacent street, except
pedestrian-oriented bollard lighting less than 42 inches, shall
be indirect or shall incorporate a full cut-off shield-type fixture.
No light slipover shall occur outside of the property
boundaries.
(e) Lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 20 feet. In
portions of a site adjacent to residential areas, lighting fixtures
shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.
(f) All lighting, including ornamental lighting, shall be shown on
site plans in sufficient detail to allow determination of the
effects of such lighting upon adjacent properties, and traffic
safety. Temporary holiday lighting and decorations are exempt
from the aforementioned provision.
(g) Building illumination and architectural lighting shall be
indirect in character, with no light source visible. Architectural
lighting, where used, shall articulate and animate the
particular building design, as well as provide the required
functional lighting for safety of pedestrian movement.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal
entity to pollute, impair or destroy the air, water, soils or other natural
resources within the City of Royal Oak through the use, storage and
handling of hazardous substances and/or waste or the storage and
disposal of solid, liquid, gaseous and/or sanitary waste.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a business
or conducting an activity which uses, stores or generates hazardous
substances shall obtain the necessary permits and/or licenses from the
appropriate federal, state or local authority having jurisdiction. The
§ 770-96 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-97
752:1006
City shall be informed of any and all inspections conducted by a federal,
state or local authority in connection with a permit and/or license.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a business
or conducting an activity which uses, stores or generates hazardous
substances shall complete and file a hazardous chemicals survey on a
form supplied by the City in conjunction with the following:
(1) Upon submission of a site plan.
(2) Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or premises.
(3) Upon any change of the manner in which such substances are used,
handled, or stored, and/or in the event of a change in the type of
substances to be used, handled, or stored.
§ 770-97 WATERWORKS § 770-97
752:1007

ARTICLE VIII
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
§ 770-98. PUD regulations.
§ 770-99. Procedure for review.
A. A PUD may be applied for in any zone district The approval of a PUD
application shall require rezoning by way of amendment of this chapter
based upon a recommendation of the Plan Commission and approval of
the City Commission.
B. Any land use authorized in this chapter may be included in a PUD,
subject to adequate public health, safety, and welfare protection
mechanisms being designed into the development to ensure the
compatibility of varied land uses both within and outside the
development.
C. The applicant for a PUD must demonstrate all of the following criteria
as a condition to being entitled to PUD treatment:
(1) Granting of the PUD will result in one of the following:
(a) A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the
project and to the community, where such benefit would
otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without
application of the PUD regulations; or
(b) A nonconforming use shall, to a material extent, be rendered
more conforming, or less offensive, to the zoning district in
which it is situated.
(2) The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an
unreasonable increase in the need for or burden upon public
services, facilities, streets and utilities.
(3) The proposed development shall be consistent with the public
health, safety and welfare of the City.
(4) The proposed development shall not result in an unreasonable
negative economic impact upon surrounding properties.
(5) The proposed development shall be under single ownership and/or
control such that there is a single entity having responsibility for
completing the project in conformity with this chapter.
(6) The proposed development shall be consistent with the goals and
policies of the City of Royal Oak Master Plan.
A. Preapplication conference. Prior to the submission of an application for
PUD approval, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator,
together with any staff and consultants the Director deems appropriate.
The applicant shall present at such conference, or conferences, a
§ 770-98 WATERWORKS § 770-99
752:1009
sketch plan of the proposed PUD, as well as the following information:
total number of acres in the project; a statement of the number of
residential units, if any; the number and type of nonresidential uses;
the number of acres to be occupied by each type of use; the known
deviations from ordinance regulations to be sought; and the number of
acres to be preserved as open or recreational space.
B. Preliminary plan. Following the preapplication conference, the
applicant shall submit a preliminary site plan of the proposed PUD. The
preliminary site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 770-12B, site plan review. A narrative report
prepared by the applicant shall accompany the site plan providing a
description of the project, discussing the market concept and feasibility
of the project, and explaining the manner in which the criteria set forth
in § 770-98 have been met.
(1) Plan Commission action. The preliminary plan shall be noticed for
public hearing before the Plan Commission. Following the hearing,
the Plan Commission shall review the preliminary site plan and
shall take one of the following actions:
(a) Approval.
[1] Upon finding that the preliminary plan meets the criteria
and standards set forth herein, the Plan Commission shall
grant preliminary approval. Approval shall constitute
approval of the uses and design concept as shown on the
preliminary plan and shall confer upon the applicant the
right to proceed to preparation of the final plan.
[2] Approval of the preliminary plan by the Plan Commission
shall not bind the City Commission to approve the final
plan.
(b) Tabling. Upon finding that the preliminary plan does not meet
the criteria and standards set forth herein but could meet such
criteria if revised, the Plan Commission may table action until a
revised preliminary plan is resubmitted.
(c) Denial. Upon finding that the preliminary plan does not meet
the criteria and standards set forth herein, the Plan
Commission shall deny preliminary approval.
C. Final plan. Within six months following receipt of the Plan Commission
approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit a final plan
to the Plan Commission with supporting materials conforming to this
section. The final plan shall be consistent with the approved preliminary
plan. If a final plan is not submitted by the applicant for final approval
within six months following receipt of Plan Commission approval, the
preliminary plan approval becomes null and void. The Plan Commission
may grant a time extension upon receipt of a written request from the
§ 770-99 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-99
752:1010
applicant provided the written request is received before the expiration
of the six months.
(1) Information required. A final site plan and application for a PUD
shall contain the following information:
(a) A site plan meeting all requirements of § 770-12B, final site
plan.
(b) A separately delineated specification of all deviations from this
chapter which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and
development proposed in the absence of the application of the
PUD article.
(c) A specific schedule of the intended development and
construction details, including phasing or timing.
(d) A specific schedule of the general improvements to constitute a
part of the development, including, without limitation, lighting,
signage, the mechanisms designed to reduce noise, utilities,
and visual screening features.
(e) A specification of the exterior building materials with respect
to the structures proposed in the project.
(f) Signatures of all parties having an interest in the property at
the time of submission.
(g) Identify the person or entity who will have control over the
project.
(2) Plan Commission action. The final plan shall be noticed for public
hearing as a rezoning before the Plan Commission, and otherwise
acted upon by the Plan Commission, and the City Commission, as
provided by law.
(a) Approval. Upon finding that the final plan meets the criteria
and standards set forth in § 770-12, the Plan Commission may
approve the plans.
(b) Tabling. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the
criteria and standards set forth in § 770-12, but could meet
such criteria if revised, the Plan Commission may table action
until a revised final plan is resubmitted.
(c) Denial.
[1] Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the criteria
and standards set forth in § 770-12, the Plan Commission
shall deny the final plans.
[2] The Plan Commission shall, to the extent it deems
appropriate, submit detailed recommendations relative to
the PUD project, including, without limitation,
§ 770-99 WATERWORKS § 770-99
752:1011
§ 770-100. Project design standards.
recommendations with respect to matters on which the
City Commission must exercise discretion.
(3) City Commission action.
(a) Upon receiving a recommendation from the Plan Commission,
the City Commission shall review the final plan. Taking into
consideration the recommendations of the Plan Commission
and the criteria and standards set forth herein, the City
Commission shall approve, table or deny the final plan.
(b) Prior to approval of a final plan, the City Commission shall
require all standards and conditions of approval to be
incorporated in a development agreement. The agreement
shall be prepared by the City Attorney, approved by the City
Commission, and signed by both the City and the applicant.
A. Residential design standards.
(1) Project density shall be based on the density permitted in the zone
district in which the property is situated immediately prior to
classification under this article. Additional density for residential
uses is permitted, subject to approval recommendation by the Plan
Commission and approval by the City Commission. The approved
density shall be based upon a demonstration by the applicant of the
following:
(a) Consistency with the Master Plan;
(b) Innovative planning and design excellence;
(c) Relationship to adjacent land uses;
(d) Pedestrian and/or vehicular safety provisions;
(e) Aesthetic beauty;
(f) Provisions for the users of the project; and
(g) Demonstration that the resulting benefits would otherwise be
unlikely to be achieved without the PUD application.
B. Nonresidential design standards.
(1) Nonresidential uses may be permitted in combination with other
nonresidential uses or as part of a common development with
residential uses.
(2) The nonresidential uses, including parking and vehicular traffic
ways, shall be separated and buffered from residential units in a
manner consistent with good land and community planning
principles.
§ 770-99 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-100
752:1012
§ 770-101. Conditions may be required.
Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of a PUD, to the
extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that public services
and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of
accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use
C. General design standards.
(1) Deviations from the applicable setbacks, parking and loading,
general provisions, and other requirements may be granted as part
of the overall approval of the PUD, provided there are features or
elements demonstrated by the applicant and deemed adequate by
the City Commission upon the recommendation of the Plan
Commission designed into the project plan for the purpose of
achieving the objectives of this article.
(2) There shall be a perimeter setback and berming, as found to be
necessary by the City, for the purpose of buffering the development
in relation to surrounding properties. Such perimeter setback shall
be established at the discretion of the Plan Commission, taking into
consideration the use or uses in and adjacent to the development.
The setback distance need not be uniform at all points on the
perimeter of the development.
(3) Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the
standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the
respective types of uses served.
(4) There shall be underground installation of utilities, including
electricity and telephone, as found necessary by the City.
(5) Pedestrian walkways shall be separated from vehicular circulation,
as found necessary by the City.
(6) Signage, lighting, landscaping, building materials for the exterior
of all structures, and other features of the project, shall be
designed and completed with the objective of achieving an
integrated and controlled development, consistent with the
character of the community, surrounding development or
developments, and natural features of the area.
(7) Where nonresidential uses adjoin off-site residentially zoned
property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as
earthen and/or landscape berms and/or decorative walls, shall be
employed. The City, in its discretion, shall review and approve the
design and location of such mechanisms.
(8) The Plan Commission shall resolve all ambiguities as to applicable
regulations using this chapter, Master Plan, and other City
standards or policies as a guide.
§ 770-100 WATERWORKS § 770-101
752:1013
or activity, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting
the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
§ 770-102. Phasing and commencement of construction.
§ 770-103. Effect of approval.
When approved, the PUD with all conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute
the land use authorization for the property, and all improvement and use
shall be in conformity with such authorization. Notice of adoption of the
final PUD plan and conditions shall be recorded by the applicant at the
Oakland County Register of Deeds.
A. Phasing. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the
planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase
shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of
services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary
components to ensure protection of the health, safety, and welfare of
the users of the PUD and the residents of the surrounding area. In
addition, in developments which include residential and nonresidential
uses, the relative mix of uses and the scheduled completion of
construction for each phase shall be disclosed and determined to be
reasonable in the discretion of the Plan Commission.
B. Commencement and completion of construction. To ensure completion
of required improvements, the City is authorized to impose
performance guaranties in accordance with § 770-16, Performance
guaranty. Substantial construction shall be commenced within one year
following final approval of a PUD and shall proceed substantially in
conformance with the schedule set forth by the applicant, as required
by § 770-12, Site plan review. If construction is not substantially
commenced and continues within such time, approval of the PUD shall
expire and be null and void. However, an extension for a specified
period may be granted by the City Commission upon good cause shown
if such request is made to the City Commission prior to the expiration of
the initial period. Moreover, in the event approval of the PUD has
expired, the City Commission shall require a new application which
shall be reviewed in light of then existing and applicable law and
ordinance provisions.
§ 770-101 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-103
752:1014
ARTICLE IX
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 770-104. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of off-street parking
facilities that are sufficient in number, adequately sized and properly
designed to meet the range of parking needs and demands that are
associated with land uses now in place in the City or with land uses allowed
by this chapter.
§ 770-105. General provisions.
A. Where required. In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for
the storage and parking of vehicles for the use of occupants, employees,
and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered, or extended
after the effective date of this chapter shall be provided as herein
prescribed.
B. Existing off-street parking at effective date of chapter. Off-street
parking existing at the effective date of this chapter which serves an
existing building or use shall not be reduced in size to less than that
required under the terms of this chapter.
C. Parking in the required greenbelt and setbacks. Off-street parking,
including maneuvering lanes, shall not be located within the required
front yard setback, except as expressly permitted by this chapter. The
Plan Commission may permit parking within the front yard setback
when it can be demonstrated that no other reasonable alternative
exists. Off-street parking shall be permitted within the required side or
rear yard setbacks, provided that when adjacent property is zoned for
residential use a minimum ten-foot setback with appropriate screening
shall be provided between off-street parking and the side and rear lot
lines adjacent to the residential zone. The Plan Commission in the
course of its site plan review process may permit off-street parking,
including maneuvering aisles, to be placed up to the lot line, provided
such parking is screened in accordance with § 770-90D, Screening
between land uses.
D. Parking duration. Except when land is used as storage space,
authorized in connection with a principal permitted or special land use,
a twenty-four-hour time limit for parking in nonresidential off-street
parking areas shall be required. It shall be unlawful to store or park a
wrecked, inoperable and/or unlicensed vehicle within any off-street
parking area contained within any zoning district. Parking areas shall
not be used for the storage of nonmotorized vehicles or trailers or
equipment.
E. Units and methods of measurement. For the purpose of determining offstreet
parking requirements, the following units of measurement shall
apply:
§ 770-104 WATERWORKS § 770-105
752:1015
(1) Floor area. Where floor area is the unit for determining the
required number of off-street parking spaces, said unit shall mean
the usable floor area, unless otherwise noted herein.
(2) Occupancy. For requirements stated in terms of occupancy, the
calculation shall be based upon the maximum permitted occupancy
determined by the City of Royal Oak Fire Marshal.
(3) Places of assembly. In stadiums, sports arenas, religious
institutions, theaters, auditoriums, and other places of assembly in
which those in attendance occupy benches, pews, or other similar
seating facilities, each 24 inches of such shall be counted as one
seat. In cases where a place of assembly has both fixed seats and
open assembly area, requirements shall be computed separately
for each type and added together.
(4) Fractional requirements. When units or measurements
determining number of required parking spaces result in
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one
parking space.
F. Location of parking.
(1) One-family and two-family dwellings. The off-street parking
facilities required for one-family and two-family dwellings shall be
located on the same lot as the dwellings that are intended to be
served but shall not be considered a parking lot under the
provisions of this article. Off-street parking shall be located within
the side or rear yards.
(a) Parking may be located within the front yard, providing a
permit is granted by the Engineering Department, based upon
the following conditions:
[1] For a horseshoe-shaped driveway on a lot with a minimum
width of 60 feet, a minimum front yard depth of 35 feet,
and a minimum front yard area of 2,100 square feet.
[2] For a T-shaped driveway on a lot with a minimum width of
50 feet, a minimum front yard depth of 30 feet, and a
minimum front yard area of 1,500 square feet. The
appendage of the T-shaped driveway which lies parallel to
the street shall be located not less than 15 feet from the
front lot line.
(b) Off-street parking areas or an area used for the storage of
vehicles shall be hard surfaced as required in Subsection A of
§ 770-109, Off-street parking lot design and construction.
[Amended 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-11]
(c) There shall be no more than one driveway per residential
dwelling. Said driveway shall be a minimum of eight feet in
§ 770-105 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-105
752:1016
§ 770-106. Off-street parking requirements.
width and constitute a contiguous area and be hard surfaced
as required in Subsection A of § 770-109, Off-street parking lot
design and construction. [Amended 10-14-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-11]
[1] A ribbon driveway consisting of two noncontiguous wheel
tracks with a reinforced turf median may be allowed for
single-family and two-family dwellings. Each wheel track
shall be hard surfaced as required in Subsection A of
§ 770-109, Off-street parking lot design and construction.
The width of each wheel track shall not be less than two
feet but shall not exceed three feet. The width as
measured from the outside edges of each wheel track shall
not be less than the minimum width identified in
Subsection F(1)(c) above but shall not exceed 10 feet. The
width of the reinforced turf median shall not exceed four
feet.
(d) Portions of the front, side and rear yards not utilized for such a
driveway shall be landscaped.
(2) Multiple-family residential. The off-street parking facilities for
multiple-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or site as
the dwellings that are intended to be served, and shall consist of a
parking lot as set forth in this article. In no event shall any parking
space be located further than 300 feet from any principal building.
(3) Other land uses. The required off-street parking facilities for other
uses shall be located on the same lot or may be serviced by a
parking lot within 300 feet of such principal use measured along
lines of public access to the property between the nearest points of
the parking facility and the principal use to be served. Parking lots
for these land uses may also provide the required spaces through
collective facilities, as provided for in § 770-106C, Collective
provisions.
G. Use of parking spaces. The use of required parking spaces for material
storage, refuse storage and containers, storage and display of vehicles
and/or other merchandise, or for vehicle or machinery repair or
maintenance is expressly prohibited.
A. The amount of required off-street parking spaces for new uses or
buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings shall be
determined in accordance with the schedule set forth in § 770-107,
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements. Parking requirements listed
in § 770-107, Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements, shall not
include off-street stacking spaces for drive-through facilities as set forth
in § 770-111, Off-street stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through
facilities.
§ 770-105 WATERWORKS § 770-106
752:1017
B. Similar uses and requirements. When a use is not specifically
mentioned in § 770-107, Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements, the
requirements of off-street parking for a similar use shall apply, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
C. Collective provisions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or
more buildings or uses, provided such facilities with two or more uses
as determined by the Zoning Administrator collectively shall not be less
than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses
computed separately in accordance with § 770-107, Table of Off-Street
Parking Requirements, unless otherwise permitted in this chapter.
However, the parking requirements may be reduced by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the following rules and standards:
(1) Uses for which the joint off-street parking facilities are to serve do
not operate during the same hours of the day or night.
(2) Not more than 50% of off-street parking facilities required for
theaters, auditoriums, religious institutions, bowling alleys, dance
halls, and similar establishments or for any restaurants and
establishments serving alcoholic beverages, may be supplied by offstreet
parking facilities provided for other buildings or uses.
(3) The required off-street parking for a particular use shall be reduced
by its proportionate share of any publicly owned parking lot for
which it has been specially assessed.
(4) A copy of the executed agreement between joint users of required
parking shall be filed with the application for site plan approval.
The agreement shall consist of a permanent property easement,
lease, or memorandums of lease. The agreement shall be recorded
with the Oakland County Register of Deeds with a copy provided to
the City of Royal Oak Planning Department before issuance of a
building permit.
D. Flexibility in application. The City recognizes that, due to the specific
requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the
parking standards set forth in § 770-107, Table of Off-Street Parking
Requirements, may result in development with inadequate parking or
parking far in excess of that which is needed. The former situation may
lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized parking on adjacent streets
or neighboring sites. The latter situation may result in excessive paving
and stormwater runoff, depreciation of aesthetic standards, and a waste
of space, which could be left as open space.
(1) Waiver based on use. The Zoning Administrator may grant a waiver
in cases where the applicant has sufficiently demonstrated that the
minimum parking requirements of § 770-107, Table of Off-Street
Parking Requirements, are excessive for their use. Such waivers
may be approved if no more than 10% of the required parking per
§ 770-107, Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements, is being
§ 770-106 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-106
752:1018
§ 770-107. Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Amended
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15; 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16;
5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings,
additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings shall be determined
in accordance with the tables on the following pages. Based upon the
submitted floor plan, the Zoning Administrator or his designee shall
determine the usable floor area where applicable for each use and the
required off-street parking provisions identified in this section.
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Residential Uses
Residential dwellings, one-,
two- and multiple-family
2 Per each dwelling unit
Dwellings within the CBD
Zone
1.5 Per each dwelling unit
Adult foster care family
homes and senior housing,
assisted living facilities
0.5 Per each dwelling unit
waived. The approved waivers shall apply only to the current site
use, and shall not be carried over to another use or occupant of the
site.
(2) Land banking. The Plan Commission may permit land banking up to
20% of the required parking spaces through the special land use
review process. Sufficient land shall be available in the case that
the Plan Commission determines the banked spaces need to be
constructed based on observed usage. After such determination,
banked parking spaces shall be constructed within six months of
written notification by the Zoning Administrator. Such land banking
requests shall require special land use approval, subject to the
requirements of § 770-11, Special land uses; permit procedures,
and the posting of an appropriate bond in an amount to be
established by the Zoning Administrator or his designee.
E. Parking within the Central Business District Zone. The provision of offstreet
parking is not required in the Central Business District Zone,
except in the case of residential dwellings, hotels and motels, religious
institutions, private and public schools and universities, hospitals,
congregate care facilities, senior housing, convalescent or nursing
homes. Parking spaces for such uses shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of § 770-107, Table of Off-Street Parking
Requirements.
§ 770-106 WATERWORKS § 770-107
752:1019
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Senior housing,
independent living
1 Per each dwelling unit
Institutional Uses
Churches and other
religious institutions
1 Per each 4 seats
based on maximum
seating capacity in the
area(s) of assembly
therein
Private service clubs, social
organizations, lodge halls,
banquet and rental halls,
and similar meeting and
assembly
1 Per each 4 individual
members allowed
within the maximum
occupancy as
established by local
code
Hospitals 1 Per each 2 beds, with
no more than 1 space
per each 1 bed
Convalescent centers and
adult foster care congregate
facilities
1.5 Per each 4 beds or 2
rooms, whichever is
greater
Day-care centers 1 Per each 350 square
feet of usable floor
area
Child and adult foster care
group home
1 Per each 4 beds or 2
rooms, whichever is
greater
Family and group day-care
homes:
1 Per dwelling unit
1 Per 6-person capacity
as licensed by the
State of Michigan
Municipal, county, state or
federal administrative or
service buildings
1 Per each 350 square
feet of usable floor
area
Libraries, museums and fine
art centers
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area, excluding area
devoted to
bookshelves
§ 770-107 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-107
752:1020
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Business and/or technical
schools:
1 Per each classroom,
plus
1 Per each 150 square
feet of classroom floor
area
Elementary and junior high
schools:
1 Per each classroom,
plus
1 Per 5 seats in an
appurtenant stadium
or gymnasium
Senior high schools: 1 Per each classroom,
plus
1 Per 5 seats in an
appurtenant stadium
or gymnasium
General Commercial Uses
Retail sales 1 Per each 250 square
feet of usable floor
area
Carry-out restaurants (no
seating)
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Convenience, grocery or
liquor stores
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Large-scale retail
establishments,
supermarkets, department
stores, garden centers or
nurseries
1 Per each 300 square
feet of usable floor
area, with no more
than 1 space per each
250 square feet of
usable floor area
§ 770-107 WATERWORKS § 770-107
752:1021
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Shopping centers 1 Per each 300 square
feet of usable floor
area, with no more
than 1 space per each
250 square feet of
usable floor area.
Standard or fast-food
restaurants and bars
or lounges shall be
required to meet offstreet
parking
provisions for that
specific use(s) as
identified in this
section.
Video rental stores 1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Transient merchant 1 Per each 250 square
feet of usable floor
area or exterior sales
area
Hotels and motels and bedand-
breakfast operations:
1 Per each sleeping or
lodging unit, plus
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area other than
sleeping or lodging
unit. Restaurants,
bars and lounges,
assembly and meeting
rooms, and similar
uses shall be required
to meet the off-street
parking provision for
that specific use(s) as
identified in this
section.
Drive-in restaurants 1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area in addition to
service stalls for
customers
§ 770-107 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-107
752:1022
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Standard and fast-food
restaurants
1 Per each 65 square
feet of usable floor
area including any
outdoor cafe
Bars and cocktail lounges 1 Per each 3 persons
based on maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Retail sales, repair and
service of furniture,
appliances, bicycles,
business machines, lawn
mowers and lawn
equipment and wholesale
stores
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area
Shops of interior
decorators, plumbers,
electricians, exterminators
and similar services and
trades
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area
Theaters, cinemas,
auditoriums, and concert
halls
1.5 Per each 4 seats or 8
feet of bench seating
based on the
maximum seating
capacity
Laundromats 1 Per every 2 washing
and/or drying
machines
Dry-cleaning outlets 1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area
Funeral homes 1 Per 4 people based on
the maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Dance halls and nightclubs 1 Per 3 people based on
the maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
§ 770-107 WATERWORKS § 770-107
752:1023
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Mechanical amusement
arcades
1 Per 60 square feet of
usable floor area
Smoking lounges and cigar
bars
1 Per each 65 square
feet of usable floor
area
Tobacconists, with or
without smoking lounges
1 Per each 250 square
feet of usable floor
area
Automotive Uses
Automobile dealer for sales
and rental
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Automobile filling station: 1 Per each fuel pump or
dispenser, plus
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Automobile repair garages: 1.5 Per each stall or
service area, plus
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area
Automobile service stations: 1 Per each stall or
service area, plus
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area
Automobile washes (selfserve)
Stacking spaces
required per
§ 770-111E
Automobile washes
(automatic):
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area, plus
2 For post-wash
detailing
Stacking spaces
required per
§ 770-111E
§ 770-107 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-107
752:1024
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Recreation vehicle sales and
rentals
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area
Office and Services Uses
Medical and dental offices,
up to 25% retail sale of
drugs and health care
products
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Outpatient medical clinics 1 Per each 400 square
feet of usable floor
area, with no more
than 1 space per each
300 square feet of
usable floor area
Business, administrative
and professional offices
1 Per each 225 square
feet of usable floor
area
Banks and other financial
institutions:
1 Per each 225 square
feet of usable floor
area
2 Per each walk-up
automated teller
machine
Barbershops, hair salons,
manicurists, tattoo parlors,
massage establishments,
tanning salons, and other
personal service
establishments
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Veterinary offices and
hospitals
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Data processing centers 1 Per each 250 square
feet of usable floor
area
Recreational Uses
Bowling alleys 5 Per bowling lane
§ 770-107 WATERWORKS § 770-107
752:1025
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Roller and ice skating rinks 1 Per 4 people based
upon maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Billiard halls 1 Per 4 people based
upon maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Gymnasiums, fitness centers
and health clubs
1 Per 4 people based
upon maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Miniature golf courses,
driving ranges or batting
cages
1 Per each hole, tee, or
cage
Golf courses 4 Per each hole
Music, dance and artistic
studios
1 Per each 200 square
feet of usable floor
area
Tennis or racquet clubs 4 Per each court
Swimming pools 1 Per 4 people based
upon maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Indoor soccer centers and
athletic fields:
10 Per each field, plus
1 Per 4 people based
upon maximum
occupancy for
spectator seating as
established by
building code
Indoor recreation centers 1 Per 4 people based
upon maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
§ 770-107 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-107
752:1026
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Stadiums and arenas 1 Per every 4 seats
based upon maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Assembly halls, convention
halls, exhibition halls, and
similar places of public
assembly
1 Per every 4 seats
based upon maximum
occupancy as
established by
building code
Industrial Uses
Manufacturing, research,
design, processing,
assembly, packaging,
fabrication, servicing,
testing and repair factories
or plants
1 Per each 400 square
feet of usable floor
area
Self-storage facilities: 3 Spaces, plus
1 Per each 50 storage
units
Warehouses and distribution
centers
1 Per each 1,000 square
feet of usable floor
area
Contractor's establishments 1 Per 400 square feet of
usable shop and
storage floor area
Metal fabrication and tool
and die shops
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable shop
floor area
Material recovery facilities: 1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable shop
floor area, plus
1 Per each 1,600 square
feet of exterior lot
area
Kennels, animal boarding,
animal shelters, and animal
training facilities
1 Per each 400 square
feet of usable floor
area
§ 770-107 WATERWORKS § 770-107
752:1027
Use
Required Number
of Parking Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure
Unit of
Measurement
Broadcast or recording
studios [Added 1-24-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-01]
1 Per each 800 square
feet of usable floor
area
Motion-picture studios
[Added 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-01]
1 Per each 1,000 square
feet of usable floor
area, including any
outdoor sets or
production facilities
§ 770-108. Barrier-free parking requirements.
On each site proposed for use, addition, and/or conversion for which a site
plan is required to be submitted by this chapter, off-street parking space
shall be designed pursuant to the State of Michigan Barrier-Free Design
Standards. Required barrier-free parking spaces shall be in addition to
those required under § 770-107, Table of Off-Street Parking Spaces.
§ 770-109. Off-street parking lot design and construction.
The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the provisions of this chapter, and such construction shall
be completed and approved by the Building Official before a certificate
of occupancy is issued. Unless incorporated in a site plan prepared and
approved in accordance with § 770-12, Site plan review, plans for the
development of any parking lot must be submitted to the Building Official,
indicating existing and proposed grades, drainage, pipe sizes, layout and
dimensions of parking, curbing, drive and aisle dimensions, lighting,
sidewalks, landscaping, and surfacing and base materials to be used.
A. All such parking lots, maneuvering aisles, driveways, and loading areas
shall be hard surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or a similar impervious
pavement; or an acceptable pervious or permeable pavement, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, such as porous asphalt,
pervious concrete, permeable interlocking pavers, or a similar material.
Loose aggregate, gravel, stone, unreinforced grass or sod, soil, and
similar materials shall be prohibited. Pervious or permeable pavement
shall be prohibited in areas where fuel or lubricants are dispensed
directly into motor vehicles or where hazardous liquids could be
absorbed into the soil through such materials. All such surfaces shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water pursuant to City
ordinances and shall be completely constructed prior to a certificate of
occupancy being issued. [Amended 10-14-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-11]
§ 770-107 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-109
752:1028
§ 770-110. Off-street loading requirements.
On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected and
occupied for any uses which involve receiving or distribution of trucks
and/or delivery vehicles, material or merchandise, except where sufficient
loading and unloading areas can be provided in the public alley as
determined by the Plan Commission, adequate space for loading and
unloading shall be provided in accordance with the following:
B. Except for one-family and two-family residential parking lots, all lots
shall be illuminated after dark throughout the hours when they are
accessible to the public. Such lighting shall comply with the
illumination standards set forth in § 770-96, Glare and exterior lighting.
C. Parking lot landscaping and buffering requirements shall meet the
standards set forth in § 770-90, Landscaping, greenbelts, buffers and
screening.
D. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot, by means of limited and
clearly defined driveways, shall be provided for all vehicles in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Additionally, all
ingress and egress points shall be located no less than 25 feet from any
street intersection, and shall be no more than 25 feet wide in a
residential zone, and 30 feet wide in all other zones measured at the
property line.
E. No portion of a parking space and/or maneuvering aisle shall obstruct
or encroach upon a public sidewalk or required pedestrian walkway.
F. The layout and striping of off-street parking facilities shall be in
accordance with the following minimum regulations [See Figure 13,
Parallel Parking, Figure 14, Parking (30° to 53°), and Figure 15, Parking
(54° to 90°).247]:
Maneuvering Lane
Width
Parking
Pattern One-Way Two-Way
Parking
Space Depth
(feet)
Parking
Space
Length
(feet)
0°
(parallel)
12 20 9 25
30°-53° 12 20 9 20
57°-74° 15 20 9 20
75°-90° N/A 20 9 20
247. Editor's Note: Figures 13, 14 and 15 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 770-109 WATERWORKS § 770-110
752:1029
§ 770-111. Off-street stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through
facilities.
All businesses which provide drive-through facilities for serving customers
within their automobile shall provide adequate off-street stacking spaces
A. Such loading and unloading space, unless completely and adequately
provided for within a building, shall be an area 12 feet by 50 feet, with
clearance of 14 feet high, and shall be provided according to the
following schedule:
Gross Floor Area of
Building
(square feet)
Required Loading and Unloading
Spaces
First 2,000 None
2,000-20,000 1
20,000-100,000 1 plus 1 for each 20,000 square feet in
excess of 20,000 square feet
100,000-500,000 5 plus 1 for each 40,000 square feet in
excess of 100,000 square feet
Over 500,000 15 plus 1 for each 80,000 square feet in
excess of 500,000 square feet
B. Required greenbelt, setbacks, and screening.
(1) Off-street loading shall not be located in a front yard; nor a side
yard of a building facing and directly visible from a street, unless
the Plan Commission determines such location is necessary due to
the building's location or placement, existing street and traffic
patterns, or other relevant factors. Off-street loading shall be
located at the maximum distance possible from adjacent residential
zones.
(2) Off-street loading which abuts residentially zoned property shall be
screened in accordance with § 770-90, Landscaping, greenbelts,
buffers and screening.
C. Double count. Off-street loading space areas shall not be counted as offstreet
parking spaces, nor shall they conflict with the maneuvering
lanes required to access off-street parking.
D. Flexibility in application. The Zoning Administrator may grant a waiver
in cases where the applicant has sufficiently demonstrated that the
minimum loading and unloading requirements of § 770-110, Off-street
loading requirements, are excessive for their use. The approved waiver
shall apply only to the current site use, and shall not be carried over to
another use or occupant of the site.
§ 770-110 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-111
752:1030
and lanes which meet the following requirements (See Figure 16, Off-Street
Stacking Spaces and Lanes for Drive-Through Facilities.248):
A. Each stacking space shall be computed on the basis of nine feet in width
and 20 feet in length. Each stacking lane shall be a minimum of 12 feet
in width.
B. No stacking space shall occupy or extend into any street, alley,
sidewalk, or right-of-way, or obstruct any required parking space,
maneuvering aisle, or loading area, and shall be sufficiently set back to
not obstruct the intersection of any driveway and a right-of-way line.
The Plan Commission may permit the use of an alley for the required
escape lane when it can be demonstrated that no other reasonable
alternative exists and minimal conflict would exist between users of the
public right-of-way. City Commission approval where necessary.
C. Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility
and parking lot shall be provided. Drive-through facilities shall be
designed in a manner which promotes pedestrian and vehicular safety.
D. All drive-through facilities shall provide an escape lane, which allows
other vehicles to pass those waiting to be serviced.
E. The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for in
accordance with the following table. When a use is not specifically
mentioned, the requirements for off-street stacking space for a similar
use shall apply as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Use
Stacking Spaces Per
Service Lane
Banks or other financial institutions 5
Photographic service, drugstores, dry-cleaning
outlets
4
Fast-food restaurants 8
Automobile service stations 2
Car washes (self-service)
Entry 3
Exit 1
Car washes (automatic)
Entry 16
Exit 2
248. Editor's Note: Figure 16 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 770-111 WATERWORKS § 770-111
752:1031

ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 770-112. Intent.
Certain existing lots, structures and uses of lots and structures were lawful
before this chapter was adopted, but have become nonconforming under
the terms of this chapter and its amendments. It is the intent of this chapter
to permit such nonconformities to remain under certain conditions until
they are discontinued or removed, but not to encourage their survival
or, where discontinuance or removal is not feasible, to gradually upgrade
such nonconformities to conforming status. Nonconformities shall not be
enlarged, expanded, or extended, except as provided herein, and shall
not be used as grounds for adding other structures and uses of lots and
structures which are prohibited. Nonconformities are declared by this
chapter to be incompatible with the structures and uses permitted in the
various zones.
§ 770-113. Nonconforming lots.
In any zone in which single-family dwellings are permitted, subject to
limitations imposed by § 770-21 and other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected
on a lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter. This provision shall apply even though a lot fails to meet the
applicable requirements for area or width, provided that setbacks and other
requirements, not involving area or width, shall conform to the regulations
for the zone in which such lot is located.
§ 770-114. Nonconforming uses of land.
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms
of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy a greater area
of a site or greater floor area of a structure than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, unless
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, unless approved by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. If such nonconforming use of land ceases operation with the intent of
abandonment for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of
such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for
the zone in which such land is located.
§ 770-112 WATERWORKS § 770-115
752:1033
§ 770-115. Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of
this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards,
or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions:
§ 770-116. Nonconforming uses of structures and land.
If a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that
would not be allowed in the zone under the terms of this chapter, the lawful
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator
through the submission of a site plan, and provided the following
remain true:
(1) The existing character of the area is maintained.
(2) Additional parking spaces are not required in order to comply with
the adopted standards of this chapter.
(3) The size is comparable to adjacent uses.
(4) The construction materials and resulting style are compatible with
the existing building.
(5) The expansion will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring
properties.
B. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in
which it is located after it is moved.
C. The Zoning Administrator may allow a nonconforming detached singlefamily
dwelling to expand, provided the expansion complies with all
Zoning Ordinance provisions.
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the zone in which it is located shall be extended to occupy a greater
number of parcels a greater area of a site, or a greater floor area of a
building than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, unless approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
B. No such use structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity, unless approved by the Zoning
§ 770-115 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-116
752:1034
§ 770-117. Repairs and maintenance.
Administrator through the submission of a site plan, and provided the
following remain true:
(1) The existing character of the area is maintained.
(2) Additional parking spaces are not required in order to comply with
the adopted standards of this chapter.
(3) The size is comparable to adjacent uses.
(4) The construction materials and resulting style are compatible with
the existing building.
C. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations pertaining to the uses permitted in the zone
in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not
thereafter by resumed. Section 770-115, Nonconforming structures,
shall apply to any nonconformity relating to the structure(s).
D. If such nonconforming use of land and structures ceases operation with
the intent of abandonment for a period of more than one year, any
subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified
by this chapter pertaining to the uses permitted in the zone in which
such land is located.
E. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
A. Ordinary repairs and/or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing to any building or structure devoted in whole or in
part to any nonconforming structure or use may be done in any period
of 12 consecutive months, provided such repairs shall not exceed 50%
of the equalized assessed valuation of the building or structure, and
that the cubic content of the building or structure as it existed at the
time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased.
B. Destruction or damage of nonconforming building or structure.
(1) Any nonconforming building or structure which has been destroyed
or damaged by fire, explosion, natural catastrophe, or by public
enemy, except when such destruction or damage is caused as a
direct result of riot or civil insurrection, to the extent of 50% or
more of its equalized assessed valuation, exclusive of the
foundation, thereafter shall be made to conform to the provisions of
this chapter.
(2) If such damage is less than 50% of its equalized assessed valuation,
exclusive of the foundation, then such building or structure may be
restored to the same size and use as existed before such damage,
§ 770-116 WATERWORKS § 770-117
752:1035
§ 770-118. Uses allowed as special land uses, not nonconforming
uses.
Any use for which special land use approval is permitted as provided in this
chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further
action be deemed a conforming use in such zone.
§ 770-119. Change of tenancy or ownership.
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any
existing nonconforming uses of land, structures, and premises, provided
there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
provided that such restoration shall be subject to the approval of
the Zoning. Administrator. The restoration must begin within one
year of the date of such partial destruction, or complete destruction
if caused as a direct result of a riot or civil insurrection, and shall
be diligently carried on to completion. Where pending insurance
claims require an extension of time, the Zoning Administrator may
grant a time extension of up to one additional year, provided that
the property owner submits a certification from the insurance
company attesting to the delay.
(3) If a nonconforming structure, or a portion of a structure containing
a nonconforming use, becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to
a lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the Building
Official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it
shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in
conformity with the regulations of this chapter for the zone in
which it is located.
§ 770-117 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-119
752:1036
ARTICLE XI
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 770-120. Authority.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals, the membership,
powers, duties of which are prescribed in the Zoning Enabling Act, Act
110 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan of 2006,249 as amended.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, in addition to the general powers and duties
conferred upon it by said Act, in specific cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, shall interpret and determine the application
of the regulations established under this chapter in harmony with their
purpose and intent as hereinafter set forth.
§ 770-121. Membership. [Amended 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05;
3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
The City Commission shall appoint a Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter
referred to as the "Board," consisting of nine regular members and no
alternate members, in accordance with Section 601 of the Zoning Enabling
Act, Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended (MCLA § 125.3601).
§ 770-122. Officers of Board; legal counsel.
The Chair and Vice Chair of the Board shall be elected annually by the
members of the Board. The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee
shall be the Secretary of the Board, and all records of the Board's action
shall be taken and recorded under his or her direction. The City Attorney
shall act as legal counsel for the Board and shall be present at all meetings
upon request by the Board.
§ 770-123. Meetings.
A. All decisions of the Board shall be made at a meeting open to the public.
All deliberations of the Board constituting a quorum of its members
shall take place at a meeting open to the public except as provided in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of 1976,250 as
amended.
B. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
purposes of transacting the business of the Board and the Open
Meetings Act, Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Each member of the Board
shall have one vote.
C. Regular meetings of the Board shall be called as needed in response to
receipt of a notice of appeal. The meeting can be called by the Zoning
Administrator, the Chair of the Board, or, in his or her absence, the Vice
Chair. Public notice of the date, time, and place of a public meeting of
249. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
250. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
§ 770-120 WATERWORKS § 770-123
752:1037
§ 770-124. Powers and duties; variances.
the Board shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings
Act, Act 267 of 1976, as amended.
D. The business of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with its
adopted bylaws.
E. The Chair or, in his or her absence, Vice Chair may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses, or subpoena and require the
production of documents, files and other evidence pertinent to matters
before the Board.
F. The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record in accordance
with the Freedom of Information Act, Act 442 of 1976, as amended.251
A. General. The Board has the power to act on matters as provided in this
chapter and the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of the Public Acts of
2006, as amended.252 The specific powers of the Board are enumerated
in the following sections of this article:
B. Voting.
(1) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse or modify an order, requirements, decision,
or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide
in favor of the applicant a matter upon which the Board is required
to pass by law or under this chapter, or to effect a variation in this
chapter except that a concurring vote of 2/3 of the members of the
Board shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land
permitted in this chapter. The decision of the Board shall not
become final until the expiration of five days from the date of entry
of such order, unless the Board shall find the immediate effect of
such order is necessary for the preservation of property or personal
rights and shall so certify on the record.
(2) The decision of the Board on any matter heard by it shall be final as
it involves discretion or the findings of facts.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine that the variance
relief granted, either as proposed, or as otherwise determined
appropriate by the Zoning Board of Appeals based upon the record,
is the minimum relief necessary in order to achieve substantial
justice, that is, the variance would give substantial relief to the
owner of the property involved and be consistent with justice to
other property owners in the surrounding area.
251. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
252. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 770-123 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-124
752:1038
(4) A member shall be disqualified from a vote in which there is a
conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disclose a conflict of
interest and be disqualified from a vote shall constitute misconduct
in office.
C. Administrative review. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order,
requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the Zoning
Administrator or other duly authorized enforcing agent, in enforcing
any provision of this chapter.
D. Interpretation.
(1) The Board shall hear and decide requests for interpretation of this
chapter or the Zoning Map, taking into consideration the intent and
purpose of this chapter and the Master Plan.
(2) A record shall be kept by the Board of all decisions for
interpretation of this chapter or Zoning Map and land uses which
are approved under the terms of this section. The Board shall
request the Plan Commission to review any amendment to this
chapter it deems necessary.
(3) The Board shall not have the power to alter or change the zone
classification of any property, or to amend the language of this
chapter, which power is reserved to the City Commission in the
manner provided by the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as
amended.253
E. Variances. Upon an appeal, the Board is authorized to grant a variance
from the strict provisions of this chapter, whereby unique,
extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict
application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon
the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In
granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto such conditions
regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed
uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this
chapter. Further, in granting a variance, the Board shall state the
grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance as outlined
below. When granting any variance, the Board must ensure that the
spirit of this chapter is observed, public safety secured, and natural
resources protected. The Board shall determine that the variance
approval, either as proposed by the applicant or as otherwise
determined by the Board based upon the record, is the minimum relief
necessary in order to achieve substantial justice. The Board shall not
have the power to consider an appeal of any decision concerning a
253. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 770-124 WATERWORKS § 770-124
752:1039
special land use or a planned unit development, unless specifically
authorized to do so by the Plan Commission.
(1) Use variances. The applicant must present evidence to show that if
this chapter is applied strictly, unnecessary hardship to the
applicant will result, and that all five of the following requirements
are met:
(a) That the property could not be reasonably used for the
purposes permitted in that zone;
(b) That the appeal results from unique circumstances peculiar to
the property and not from general neighborhood conditions;
(c) That the use requested by the variance would not alter the
essential character of the area;
(d) That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person
presently having an interest in the property; and
(e) That the use will preserve a substantial property right
possessed by other property owners in the same zone.
(2) Nonuse variances. The applicant must present evidence to show
that if this chapter is applied strictly, practical difficulties will result
to the applicant and that all four of the following requirements are
met:
(a) That this chapter's restrictions unreasonably prevent the
owner from using the property for a permitted purpose;
(b) That the variance would do substantial justice to the applicant
as well as to other property owners in the district, and a lesser
relaxation than that requested would not give substantial relief
to the owner of the property or be more consistent with justice
to other property owners;
(c) That the plight of the landowner is due to the unique
circumstances of the property;
(d) That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person
presently having an interest in the property;
(3) Additional criteria for land divisions. In addition to the criteria
outlined in Subsection E(2), Nonuse variances, the Board shall
consider the following for any appeals and/or variance request for a
land division in their decision:
(a) The width, size and general character of the lots in the
neighborhood and area;
(b) Whether the width and shape of the lot leaves adequate
buildable area to allow the construction of a dwelling which is
§ 770-124 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-124
752:1040
§ 770-125. Procedure for appeal.
in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and/or
area; and
(c) The extent to which other developed lots in the neighborhood
and/or area have maintained required yards, lot area and
width.
A. An applicant requesting any action by the Board shall commence such
request by filing an application on the form supplied by the City,
accompanied by an appeal fee as determined by the City Commission,
and all plans, studies and any other information and data as applicable,
all of which shall be made a part of the record. The application shall
specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based, the section
number(s) of this chapter containing the standards from which a
variance is sought and the nature and extent of such variance, and
contain a notarized signature of the property owner or owner's agent.
B. Every appeal from a determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
duly authorized enforcing agent shall be made by the applicant within
30 days of the date of the order issuance or refusal to issue a permit,
requirement, or refusal. Such an appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning
Administrator or other duly authorized enforcing agent shall certify
that, by reason of the facts stated in the appeal, a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the circuit
court.
C. The Zoning Administrator, pursuant to § 770-10, Duties, of this chapter,
shall fix a time for a public hearing on each appeal. Notice of the public
hearing shall be provided pursuant to § 770-13, Public hearings, of this
chapter and in accordance with Section 103 of the Zoning Enabling Act,
Act 110 of 2006, as amended.254
D. Any person may appear in person at the public hearing, or be
represented by an agent or attorney, and present any evidence in
support of his or her appeal. The Board shall have the power to require
the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and
otherwise cause the production of books, papers, files, and other
evidence pertaining to matters properly coming before the Board.
E. The Board shall not decide an appeal until after a public hearing.
F. The Board may reverse, affirm, vary, or modify any order, requirement,
or determination, as to which it has the power to consider, and shall
have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal was
taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
254. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3103.
§ 770-124 WATERWORKS § 770-125
752:1041
G. The Board may impose conditions with any decision. Such conditions
imposed shall meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Be designed to protect natural resources, public health, safety, and
welfare and the social and economic well-being of those who will
use the land or activity under consideration, residents and
landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or
activity, and the community as a whole.
(2) Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes
which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
(3) Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter, be
related to the standards established in this chapter for the land use
or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure
compliance with those standards. Violations of any of these
conditions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, enforceable
as such, and/or may be grounds for revocation or reversal of such
decision.
H. All decisions of the Board shall be in writing and, so far as it is
practicable, in the form of a general statement or resolution reciting the
conditions, facts, and findings of the Board. The applicant shall be
advised of the decision after the public hearing unless the Board moves
for a continuation of such hearing.
I. Any decision of the Board favorable to the applicant shall remain valid
only as long as the information or data relating thereto are found to be
correct, and the conditions upon which the decision was based are
maintained.
J. The Board may reconsider an earlier decision if, in the opinion of the
Board, circumstances justify taking such action.
K. No order of the Board permitting the erection or alteration of a building
shall be valid for a period of longer than one year, unless a building
permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period,
and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in
accordance with the terms of such permit. No order of the Board
permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period
longer than one year, unless such use is established within such period;
provided, however, that such order shall continue in force and effect if a
building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such
period, and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to
completion in accordance with such permit.
L. Any person or persons or any board or department of the City having an
interest affected by a decision of the Board shall have the right to
appeal to the circuit court on questions of law and fact. Such appeal
must be taken within 21 days after the date of the Board's decision. A
request for reconsideration under Subsection J above shall not toll the
time for taking such appeal. In the event a request for reconsideration
§ 770-125 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-125
752:1042
is granted, the time period for appeal shall commence from the
approval of the minutes of the meeting where the appeal was
reconsidered. In any event, only one request for reconsideration on
each appeal shall be allowed.
§ 770-125 WATERWORKS § 770-125
752:1043

ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 770-126. Procedure.
Zoning regulations and the boundaries of land use zones may be amended,
supplemented or changed in the manner prescribed in the Zoning Enabling
Act, Act No. 110, Public Acts of Michigan for 2006, as amended,255 and in
accordance with the following:
§ 770-127. Application requirements.
Applications to amend this chapter or the official Zoning Map shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a form provided by the Planning
Department and include all required fees. In the case of an amendment to
A. Any such amendment, supplement or change to the regulations of this
chapter may be initiated by the City Commission, the Plan Commission,
the Zoning Administrator, or by petition from the general public. Any
such amendment, supplement or change to the boundaries of land use
zones of the official Zoning Map may be initiated by the City
Commission, the Plan Commission, the Zoning Administrator, or by
petition from the owner or owners of the subject property or legal
representative. In the case of applications initiated by petition, a filing
fee as established by resolution of the City Commission shall be paid to
the City Treasurer by the petitioner at the time when such petition is
submitted. An application for an amendment to the regulations of this
chapter or the official Zoning Map shall also be submitted to the
Planning Department for processing. In all cases, a public hearing shall
be conducted by the Plan Commission in accordance with § 770-13,
Public hearings, of this chapter. Following the public hearing, the Plan
Commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to an
amendment and shall report its findings and recommendation to the
City Commission. The Plan Commission shall consider the criteria
contained herein this article and the Master Plan in making its finding
and recommendation. A summary of the comments submitted at the
public hearing shall be transmitted with the Plan Commission's findings
and recommendation.
B. After receipt of the Plan Commission's findings and recommendation,
the City Commission may adopt a proposed amendment, supplement or
change with or without modifications, or refer same again to the Plan
Commission for further study and report; provided, however, that if the
City Commission proposes to adopt any such amendment with any
modification enlarging its scope, then such amendment shall be
referred again to the Plan Commission for further public hearing, study
and report on such amendment as enlarging in scope, and final action
thereon shall not be taken prior to the receipt of such report from the
Plan Commission.
255. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 770-126 WATERWORKS § 770-127
752:1045
regulations of this chapter, the exact language of the proposed amendment
and a justification for its adoption shall accompany the application form.
In the case of an amendment to the official Zoning Map, the following
information shall accompany the application form:
§ 770-128. Public hearing and notice.
The Zoning Administrator, pursuant to § 770-10, Duties, of this chapter,
shall fix a time for a public hearing on each application to amend this
chapter or the official Zoning Map. Notice of the public hearing shall be
provided in accordance with Section 103 of the Zoning Enabling Act, Act
110 of 2006, as amended.256
§ 770-129. Criteria for amendment to official Zoning Map.
In considering any application for an amendment to the official Zoning
Map, the Plan Commission and City Commission shall consider the following
criteria, among other factors they may deem appropriate, in making their
findings, recommendations and decision:
A. A legal description and street address of the subject property, together
with a map or survey identifying the subject property in relation to
surrounding properties.
B. The name and address of the owner of the subject property, and a
statement of the applicant's interest in the subject property if not the
owner in fee simple title.
C. The existing and proposed zone designations of the subject property.
D. A written description of how the requested amendment meets the
criteria stated in this article and the Master Plan.
E. A traffic, environmental, or public service impact study if required by
the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission or City Commission.
F. Additional information may be requested as deemed necessary by the
Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission or City Commission.
A. The requested zone should be consistent with the goals, policies and
future land use map of the Master Plan, including any location-specific
or corridor studies. If conditions have changed since the Master Plan
was adopted, as determined by the Plan Commission or City
Commission, the consistency with recent development trends in the
site's area shall be considered.
B. The site's physical, geological, hydrological and other environmental
features should be compatible with the host of principal permitted and
special land uses in the proposed zone.
256. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3103 et seq.
§ 770-127 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-129
752:1046
§ 770-130. Criteria for amendment to regulations of chapter.
In considering any application for an amendment to the regulations of
this chapter, the Plan Commission and City Commission shall consider the
following criteria in making its findings, recommendations and decision:
C. Evidence should document the applicant cannot receive a reasonable
return on investment through developing the property with one or more
of the principal permitted and special land uses under the current
zoning.
D. The potential uses allowed in the proposed zone should be compatible
with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts
on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic volumes, aesthetics,
infrastructure, and potential influence on property values.
E. The street system should be capable of safely and efficiently
accommodating expected traffic volumes generated by potential uses in
the requested zone.
F. The capacity of public utilities and services should be sufficient to
accommodate the potential uses in the requested zone without
compromising the City's health, safety and welfare.
G. There should be an apparent demand in the City for the types of
potential uses in the requested zone in relation to the amount of land in
the City currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand.
H. The requested zone shall not create an isolated and unplanned spot
zone.
I. Other criteria as determined by the Plan Commission or City
Commission which would protect the public health, safety and welfare,
protect public and private investment in the City, promote
implementation of the goals, objectives and policies of the Master Plan
and any amendments thereto, and enhance the overall quality of life in
the City.
A. The proposed amendment would correct an error or clarify the intent of
this chapter.
B. Documentation has been provided from the Zoning Administrator or
Zoning Board of Appeals indicating problems and conflicts in
implementation or interpretation of specific sections of this chapter.
C. The proposed amendment would address potential legal issues or
administrative problems with this chapter based on recent case law or
opinions rendered by state or federal courts or attorneys general of
competent jurisdiction.
D. The proposed amendment would address and promote compliance with
changes in other City ordinances and county, state or federal legislation
and regulations.
§ 770-129 WATERWORKS § 770-130
752:1047
§ 770-131. Notice of amendment.
Following adoption of an amendment to the regulations of this chapter or
the official Zoning Map by the City Commission, one notice of adoption shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation as provided by the City
of Royal Oak Charter and in accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act, Act
110 of 2006, as amended.257
§ 770-132. Protests; petition.
Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements of this
section, an amendment to the official Zoning Map which is the object of the
petition shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the City Commission.
The protest petition shall be presented to the City Commission prior to final
action on the amendment and shall be signed by one of the following:
§ 770-133. (Reserved)
§ 770-134. (Reserved)
E. The proposed amendment is supported by the findings, reports, studies,
or other documentation on functional requirements, contemporary
building practices, environmental requirements and similar technical
issues.
F. Other criteria as determined by the Plan Commission or City
Commission which would protect the public health, safety and welfare,
protect public and private investment in the City, promote
implementation of the goals, objectives and policies of the Master Plan
and any amendments thereto, and enhance the overall quality of life in
the City.
A. The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included in the proposed
amendment. Publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the
twenty-percent land area requirement.
B. The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included within an area
extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land
included in the proposed change. Publicly owned land shall be excluded
in calculating the twenty-percent land area requirement.
257. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 770-130 ROYAL OAK CODE § 770-134
752:1048
ARTICLE XIII
Repeals
§ 770-135. Repeal of prior zoning regulations.
The existing zoning regulations of the City of Royal Oak, being the City of
Royal Oak Zoning Ordinance Volume 11, No. C-2, are hereby repealed. The
adoption of this chapter, however, shall not affect or prevent any pending
or future prosecution of, or action to abate, any existing violation of the
aforementioned ordinance, as amended, if the use so in violation is in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 770-136. Impact on business licenses and permits.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to repeal or amend any ordinance requiring
a permit or license, or both, to cover any business.
§ 770-135 WATERWORKS § 770-136
752:1049